




THE HISTORIE OF THE CHVRCH SINCE THE DAYES OF Our Saviour IESVS CHRIST, vntill this present Age.
Devided into foure Bookes.

1. The first containeth the whole proceedings and practises of the Empe|rours, both of the West and East for, or against the Church; as also the wonderfull loue of God towards it, by whom it was so preserved, that nei|ther by Tyranny it could be subdued, nor by policie circumvented.
2. The second containeth a breefe Catalogue of the beginnings, and procee|dings; of all the Bishops, Popes, Patriarchs, Doctors, Pastors, and other learned men; in Europe, Asia and Affrica, with or against the Church, together with their deaths.
3. The third containeth a short summe of all the Heretiques, which haue beene in the Church; the time when, and the place where they lived; as also the persons by whom they were subdued.
4. The fourth containeth a short compend of all the Councels Generall, Nationall, and Provinciall; together with their severall Canons, which haue beene established, either with, or against the Church.

Devided into 16. Centuries.
By all which is clearely shevved and proved, the Antiquitie, Visibilitie, and Perpetu|itie, of our Church; euer since Christs dayes, vntill this present Age.
Collected out of sundry Authors both ancient and moderne; by the famous and worthy Preacher of Gods vvord, Master PATRICK SYMSON, late Mini|ster at Striueling in Scotland.
LONDON
Printed by I.D. for Iohn Bellamie, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the three Golden Lions in Corne-hill neere the Royall Exchange: and for William Sheffard, at the entering in of Popes-head Alley, out of Lumbard streete. 1624.




TO THE RIGHT GRATIOVS PRINCE: LODOWICK Duke of Richmond, and Lenox; Baron of Settrington, Darnley, Tebanten, and Methuen; Lord great Cham|berlane, and Admirall, of Scotland; Lord Steward of the Kings household; Knight of the most noble order of the Garter; and one of his Maiesties most honorable privie Councell.
_ALthough it may seeme both to your Grace and others, great presump|tion in me, a stranger, to trouble your Grace, either with the view of these vnpolished lines, or this ensuing Historie; yet I hope the lat|ter shal be a sufficient excuse for the former. For having received it from your Noble

Sister the Countesse of Marre: at her Ladi|ships commaundement, and especiall di|rection, I revised it, put it to the Presse, hastened the Printing, and now also craue your Graces Patronage thereto: not so much respecting the greatnesse of your au|thoritie as the goodnes of your nature and disposition, whereof much might be sayd, but that I hold it needlesse to shew the Sunne with a candle. Thus humbly com|mending it to your Graces favourable ac|ceptation, and heartily committing you to the Almighties gracious protection, I hum|bly take my leaue, resting
Your Graces humble servant: A. Symson.



TO THE RIGHT NOBLE, VERTVOVS, and elect Ladie; Marie, Coun|tesse of Marre: P.S. wisheth, grace, mercie, and eternall felicitie.
_THE estate of the Church of Christ (NOBLE LADIE) whereof wee reioyce to be accounted feeling mem|bers, hath beene subject vnto manifold afflictions, even from the beginning of the world: (not like vn|to the estate of Moab setled vpon her dregs;Iere. 48.11. and not poured out from vessell to vessell) yet the more afflicted, the more beloved of God; whose face, watred with teares, is faire; and whose mourning voyce, is pleasant in the sight of God:Cant. 2.14. and as doing of good willingly, hath a great recompence of reward from God: even so patient suffering of evill, for righteousnesse sake, as it is high|ly commended in Scripture, so it shall be richly re|warded in heaven: yea the very heathnick Philoso|pher

Plato (to whom the glory of the sufferings for Christ was vnknowne) affirmeth that men who suf|fer,Plato in repub. scourging, binding, tormenting, boring out of eyes, and finally, strangling of their breath for righte|ousnesse sake, are exceeding happy, are (as the word  importeth) thrice happy: although the su|perlatiue degree of suffering, which can be found a|mongst the heathnicks, could never equall the glo|rie of the sufferings of Christians. They who were initiated in the mysteries of Mittera (which word in the Persian language signifieth the Sunne) could not bee admitted to that honour, before they had beene tried by suffering fourscore divers sorts of pu|nishments; such as long abstinence from meate and drinke, solitarie living in the wildernes a long time, tryall of suffering the fervent heate of fire, and the coldnes of water, and many other torments, vntill the number of fourescore had beene completed. These voluntarie sufferings, like as in the beginning they wanted the warrant of Gods calling, so likewise in the end they wanted the hope of Gods reward, but the mouth of God himselfe pronounceth: Christians to be blessed who die in the Lord,Apoc. 14.13. for they rest from their labours, and their works follow them.
The manifold persecutions of the Church, may be devided into three rankes;Three rankes of the persecu|tion of the Church. some were fierce and bloodie, some were craftie, the third was and is, both craftie and cruell. The ten heathnicke Emperours, Nero, Domitian, Traian, c. were so prodigall of the blood of the Lords Saints, that they poured it out like water vpon the ground: The Arrian Emperors were subdolous and craftie; but the persecution of

Antichrist which is the third, goeth beyond the rest both in crueltie and craft: yea the experience which we haue had in our owne dayes of the cruelty of An|tichrists supposts, and their craftie convey of their malicious enterprises intended against our Sove|raigne Lord, His Royall race, and Noble Counsel|lers, doth cleerely proue that the malice and craft of Antichrist, goeth as farre beyond the craft and malice of all Emperours, as the flood of Noah, exceedeth the inundation of Nilus.
In the first,The estate of the Church in the 1, 2, and 3 Centuries. second, and third, Centuries, the faith and patience of Christians was tried by the yoake of ten bloody persecutions. For first the Apostles, (who had heard with their eares the words of the great she|pheard of our soules, and seene with their eyes God manifested in the flesh) were chosen to be faithfull to the world, of the doings, sufferings, and doctrine, of Iesus Christ: and next to the Apostles their Disciples and true successours, sealed vp with rivers of blood that faith, which they receiued from the Apostles.
The fire wherewith they were burnt; the water wherein they were drowned; the ayre wherein their bodies were hanged; the mountaines and wilder|nesses through which they wandered; the darke pri|sons wherein they were enclosed (as people vnwor|thy of libertie); yea all the elements  the very light of heauen, from whence by most vnrighteous vio|lence they (the righteous heires thereof) were exclu|ded; all these (I say) were witnesses of their glori|ous sufferings.
In the fourth,The estate of the Church in the 4. 5. and 6. Centuries. fift, and sixt, Centuries, the know|ledge of the Church was tryed by Heretiques, who

by the mistie clowds of error, endeavoured to blind|fold the eyes of men, and to leade them captiue from the simplicity of the truth of God; at which time also, the power of the light of God was mani|fested, in discipating the darknesse of errours, as the Sun-rising doth the darknesse of the night.
The estate of e Church in  7. 8. and  Centuries.In the seventh, eighth, and ninth, Centuries; the Romane Church (resembling the Harlots of Heliopo|lis in Phoenitia, who having liberty to prostitute themselues to the lust of strangers, teach their chil|dren procreated by this libidinous copulation, to depend only vpon them whom they know, not vpon their fathers, whom they know not) disadvantageth her children with the voyce of God sounding in ho|ly Scripture; teaching, that it is sufficient to beleeue as the Church of Rome (the mother of al Churches) beleeveth, which in matters of faith cannot erre. But wee must depend vpon the voyce of God, our heavenly Father, Pet. 1.23. and 2.2. Ier. 8.22. Psal. 46.5. Who hath begotten vs by the incorrup|tible seed of his Word, fed vs with the sincere milke of the same, and anoynted vs with the balme of Gilead, making glad his owne Citie, even with the waters of his owne Sancturay. The lowd sounding trumpets of vaine and idle words, we leaue to the adversaries of the truth, for that is their armour wherewith they fight against the Gospell of Iesus Christ.
The estate of the Church in the 10. 11. and 12. Centuries.In the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth, Centuries; the tyranny of Antichrist was accompanied with a won|derfull growth of lyes, falshood, and ridiculous fa|bles, of which the absurdity of one, striving with the absurditie of anothe, derogateth, in the end, cre|dite from them all, and (as the souldiers of Cadmus,

who were bred of Dragons teeth) kill one another. Vincentius is not ashamed to write,Vincen. in spe|culo. an. 1012. that they who re|garded more their play  game,  dancing, then they did the reverend hearing of the masse; were plagued with a continuance in dancing without intermissi|on, for the space of a twelue-moneth thereafter. If penne could blush, if hand could tremble, if paper could bee ashamed, such ridiculous fables had not beene written. At this time learning was not to bee found in Pastors, sincerity in Councels, humility in Prelates, and true religion in the multitude of peo|ple and Nations: For in stead of these, there was a|bundance of Liturgies, Processions, and Pilgrima|ges, Masses, superstitious vowes, multiplication of vnprofitable ceremonies, confidence in externall ser|vice, as if it could saue, ex opere operato, Fastings, tyed to dayes and moneths, not vnlike to the fasts of the Donatists.Deut. 32.32. At this time the vines of Sodome and Go|morrah abounded with grapes of gall, and bitter clusters. At this time the key of the kingdome of God, seemed almost lost; the preaching of the kin|dome of Christ, ceased for the most part: The au|thority and preheminence of the Pope over Princes, and all men in spirituall offices (like the axes and hammers of the Assyrians, cutting downe the car|ved worke of the house of the Lord) sounded so lowd in all Churches,Psal. 74.16. that the sound of the Gospell could, scarcely be heard. And although at this time there were some Romane Bishops who spoke against the kingdome of the Divell, yet their hearts were so filled by him, with ambition, avarice, vncleannesse, contempt of the lawfull authority of Princes, super|stition,

and horrible idolatry, that hee led them head-long to hell,Simile. as men may leade dogs (though barking aloud) whither they please.
The estate of the Church in the 13. 14. 15. and 16. Cen|turies.In the thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, and six|teenth, Centuries; even to these our times, there is nothing to bee expected, but a discoverie of Anti|christs hypocrisie, a decay of his vsurped authority, an abrogation of his tyrannous lawes; and finally, an vtter ruine and destruction of his kingdome, not|withstanding of all the maintainers and vpholders of the same. And surely, it is a great encouragement to vs, when we see false teachers dayly renuing their forces to fight against the truth, as the Philistims did, who fought against David in the valley of Rephaim, after they had beene often discomfited by him. The last period of their reluctation against the Lords an|noynted, was losse and hurt to themselues, and dis|honour to their gods,1 Chron. 14.11. whom they were forced to leaue behinde them, which David tooke and burnt with fire, calling the place Baalperatzim (that is) the rupture of Baal. The adversaries of the Gospell in Christendom, by renuing their forces againe, are pro|curing a new name vnto their Idols: They cannot bee content with the name of Baal-peor, Baal-meon, Baal-thamar, Baal-chatsor, Baal-gad; but they will spread out their banners in the valley of Rephaim a|gainst the Lord, longing for the last name, Baal-pe|peratzim, confusion to themselves.
That this hath beene the estate of the Church, e|uer since the dayes of Christ vntill this present, doth evidently appeare out of the ensuing History, where|in besides the antiquity and visibility of this our

Church, your Ladiship may also (as in a mirrour) behold her wonderful constancie opposed to her e|nemies cruelty. Let the Papists to cover the turpi|tude of their new found doctrine, pretend antiquity as much as they will, yet they will never bee able to proue it. So did the Hagarens boldly vsurp the name of Saracens, although they were only the brood that sprang from the wombe of Hagar, the hand-maide of Sarah. And the Priests boy in the dayes of Eli came to the Caldron, while the flesh of the peace-of|fering was seething,1 Sam. 2.14. and thrust in his flesh-hooke, all that the flesh-hooke brought vp, the Priest tooke for himselfe, which thing was done by violence, the Priest having no right thereto. The Roman Church in our dayes having borrowed the flesh-hooke of the Priests boy, and violently arrogated vnto themselues, the faithfull keeping of ancient Apostolique traditi|ons; when wee demand where the Charter contai|ning their title and right, wee see nothing but the flesh-hooke, with these three teeth in their hand: 1. The Church cannot erre. 2. Wee are the true Church. 3. Cursed be hee that saith in matters of faith, our generall Councels can erre.
Madam, accept vnder your Ladiships favourable protection, these my travailes in weaknesse, not vn|like the writer (whose life it hath pleased the Lord to prolong these many yeeres by-past, vnder many in|firmities of a dayly decaying tabernacle) containing a faithfull testimony of my humble endeavour, to confirme the branches of your noble houshould in the true faith of Christ. Though there be many that forsake Christ, and are as reprobate silver from whom

the drosse cannot bee separated; yet let the Noble house of Marre follow Christ. And as Helene, Queen of Adiabani,Euseb l. 2. c. 12. Ioseph. l. 20. c. . Simile. when she left her Countrey, and came to dwell at Ierusalem, filled the bellies of the poore with the corne of Egypt, and the fruites of Cy|prus (for it was a yeere of vniversall famine) and spared for no cost, to doe good to the Saints who were at Ierusalem; so I beseech the Lord to raise vp many honourable Ladies (such as your Ladiship is) to refresh the barren soules of ignorant people in this Land, with examples of humilitie, modestie, godlinesse, and all other vertues.
Now the mercies of the Lord Iesus, The Author and finisher of our faith, attend vpon my Lord your hus|band, vpon your Ladiship, and all your Noble house: and The great Mediator of the covenant of God, stablish all your hearts in the certainty of his vndoubted truth, vnto the end, and in the end. Amen.
Your Ladiships humble servant: P. Symson.



The Authors Epistle to the Reader.
_IT was admired of old,Theod, l. 4. c. 26. that Aphraates, who lived in the Cottages of the wilder|nesse all his time, yet once was found in the streets of Antiochia, in the dayes of the Emperour Valens: He excused the change of his former behaviour, by the similitude of a modest Virgin, lurking quietly in the se|cret corners of her fathers house, so long as it is in safety, but if it be set on fire, it is a hurtfull modestie to lurke any longer; necessity forceth her to runne abroad, that shee may giue warning of the imminent danger. This exam|ple of Aphraates might sufficiently excuse mine vnaccu|stomed boldnesse, to set forth my head, which hath beene lapped vp so long in hurtfull silence. For now the power of darkness increaseth, and (as the Prophet sayth): Woe vnto vs,Ier, 6.4. for the day declineth, and the shadowes of the evening are stretched out, yea the shadowe of Mount Athos reacheth to the Isle Lemnos, a sure fore-running token, of the going downe of the Sun. And therefore now it is time to creepe out of our subterra|neall caues, that wee may giue notice to quence the fire in time, before it spread further, and bring greater desolati|on to the house of our God. Papists are become insolent of late dayes (like vnto Serpents in summer weather, taking courage, and byting the heeles of horses that the riders may

fall) not sparing both in word and writ, to reproch our re|ligion, as not countenanced by An iquity; and our Mini|strie as altogether naked and voyd of the knowledge of an|cient learning: Shall wee now stand still (as idle men in the market-places) one looking vpon another? I had ra|ther (then wee should sustaine such apparent damage and hurt, through vntimely silence) step forth with the Lace|demonian souldier, impotent of his legs, and neither apt to fight, nor able to flie; having this comfort (as he had) that happily I may blunt the edge of the enemies sword, and make others ashamed, who are more fit for fighting then I am. And although those who haue vndertaken to write Compends, haue found therein great difficulty, being so invironed with straits, that they finde it very hard, either to satisfie themselues or others (for if the Compends bee short, they seeme obscure; if written at length, they seeme to haue need of other Compends, to a|bridge their prolixity) yet notwithstanding of all these difficulties, it is better to set forward by doing some good, either to our selues or others, then to spend our time in idle|nesse, left our cogitations (like vnto the vpper and lower mill-stones,Simile. which lacking good graine to grinde vpon, rub violently one vpon another, vntill both be broken) not be|ing well exercised, but spent vpon vaine things, become hurtfull to both our soules, and bodies.
In the 1. 2. and 3. Centuries; I haue made no menti|on of Councels, either Provinciall, or Nationall; for du|ring that time, as they were few in number, by reason of the rage of persecuting Emperours; so most part of those which were gathered, were obscure, and the lesse regarded in respect of their contradiction one to another. There was a Councell gathered at Rome, another in Caesarea

Palestinae,Euseb. l. 5 c. 23. another in France, the fourth in Pontus, and one in Asia; all for one, and to the selfe same purpose: viz. to deliberate concerning the keeping of Easter. In Rome, Victor was of one opinion; Polycrates in Asia held ano|ther; Iraeneus in France, was wiser then the rest, and was more carefull to keepe vnity in the Church of Christ,Euseb. l. 6. c. 37. then to dispute conentiously about the keeping of dayes: A National Councel of Philadelp. in Arabia, was gathered against Artemon Beryllus, wherein Origen was pre|sent. Another at Rome, by Cornelius, for the suppressing of the error of Novatus.Cypr. epist. lib. 1. epist. 2. Euseb. l. 5. c. 29. Another at Antiochia, against Paulus Samo
satenus, a pernicious Heretique. Others were gathered by Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, for re|baptizing of those who were baptized by Heretiques: which weaknes both in Cyprian, and in other Bishops of Africk, was after corrected by the Church.
Take in good part the Goats-haire, and Rammes-skins, which I present to cover the Tabernacle of our God. I re|ferre the ornaments of gold, silver, and precious-stones, for beautifying the inner parts of the Tabernacle, to others, vp|on whom God hath vouchsafed greater gifts. The house of God is large and ample, and as it hath neede of bright-shi|ning torches, for the Hauls, Parlors, and Chambers; so it hath need of smaller lights, for Cellers, and office-houses: if my farthing candle giue light in the lowes Celler of the house of God, my heart is fully content. Farewell.
Thine in the Lord: P. Symson.






THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE HISTORY of the Church: whereinto the whole proceedings and practises of the Emperours both of the West and East, for or against the Church, are briefly expressed: as also the wonderfull loue of God towards her, who so preserved her, that neither by Tyranny she was subdued, nor by Policie circumvented.

CENTVRIE I.

Augustus Caesar.
_OVR Lord Iesus the true Prince of peace, was borne in Bethlehem Iuda of a maid,Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 1. cap. 5. in a very peaceable time, in the 42. yeare of the raigne of Augustus Caesar. At what time the Tem|ple of Ianus was closed and locked vp,Funct. Chron. which in time of warres was continually patent and open. At the time of this blessed Natiuity the Angels of God reioyced,Luk. 1. the divels trembled. Some affirme that all the

Oracles of Iupiter, Apollo and Hecate were silent, and gaue no answers: alwayes it is certaine that many yeares before the Lords blessed Nativity, the Lord permitted the world to be wonderfully blinded with the delutions of the diuell. The top of Iupiters Oake in Dodona was shaken, the caldron was smitten with the rod that was in the hand of Iupiters image: The Prophetesses forewarned by these fore-running tokens of inspiration were ready to vtter Iupiters Oracles, and the de|ceived people were humbly kneeling and attending vpon the answer that should be giuen.Nazianz. in Iulian. annot. nouni. The tripode in Delphis, the lau|rll and fountaine in Daphne, Apollo his deceitfull ensignes, the ram-faced image of Iupiter, Ammonius in Gyrenia, with many moe places whereinto the sound of the diuels trumpet was heard, to these places (I say) did people bewitched by Satan resort in frequent numbers to be taught by the mouth of him who was a lyer from the beginning, and who re|maineth a lyer, albeit hee spake at some time the truth, be|cause hee speaketh it animo fallendi vpon a purpose to de|ceiue. It is very credible, that the blessed Seed, who came to breake the head of the Serpent, did stopp his mouth also in the time of his blessed Nativity. The countrey of Iudea at this time was subiect to the Romanes,Luk. 2. and payed tribute to Caesar. The deputies of Augustus in Iudea and Syria, were Cy|renius, Coponius,Ioseph. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 3. Ambibuchus, and Annius Rufus, one succee|ding to another. Herod the sonne of Antipater by favour of Antonius obtained this honour to be Gouernour of the Nati|on of the Iewes, but the honourable name of a King he recei|ved from Augustus Caesar: this was ratified for his further as|surance by the Senate of Rome,Ioseph. antiq. lib. 25 cap. 10. for which cause Herod to testi|fie his thankefull minde towards Antonius, builded a Castle in Ierusalem very neere to the Temple called Arx Antonia: And to the honour of Augustus, he builded Caesarea Palestinae, sometime called the tower of Straton. Now a forreiner and stranger,Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 1. Christ was borne when the Scopter vvas apparan|ly sliding from Iuda. Gen 46.10. of his fathers side an Idumean, of his mothers side an Arabian, and an aliant both from the stock of David, and also from the Common-wealth of Israell was raigning in Iu|dea, and the Sceper was sliding from Iuda, now I say, was it

time that Shiloch should come, according to Iacobs prophecie, to whom the people should be gathered. Now was it time that the promised Mssias should come  sit in the Throne of his father David, and of his Kingdome there should be none end. And indeed how can the Kingdome of Christ haue an end, who acquireth a new title and right of gouernment by death, which is the last period of other Kings governments, and in death they leaue a vacant roome to a successour:Christs King|dome is ever|lasting. Rom. 14.9 Hos. 13.14. but Christ Iesus by dying, and rising againe, hath a right to rule both over dead and quicke. Yea in the very death it selfe hee was practising his kingly office in most effectuall manner, and and trampling Satan vnder feet, and vndoing the power of death,
In Augustus time also, Ioseph was admonished in a dreame to take the babe and his mother,Mat. 2.13. The vncer|tainty of tra|dition. and to flee into Egypt. So|zomen not content with the certainty of Scripture, addeth a particular nomination of the towne Hermopolis in Thebaida, whereinto Christ soiourned vntill the death of Herod the great. This hee had by the vncertainty of tradition. The mi|racle of the huge and high tree Prestis, that bowed the toppe lowly to the ground and worshipped her Maker Christ, and afterward had a medicinable vertue in fruit, leafe, and barke, to cure diseases, rather derogareth credit to that Egyptian tradition,Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 2. then assureth vs of the verity of that report. Herod before his departure from this life; had put to death three of his sonnes, Aristobulus, Alexander, and Antipater, and by te|stamentall legacy had divided his dominions amongst his re|manent sonnes, Archelaus, Herod, Antipas, and Philip: which testament being ratified by Augustus, Iudea, Samaria, and I|dumea were alloted to Archelaus,Ioseph antiq. lib 17. cap. 13. the Tetrarchie of Galilee to Antipas, and Iturea and Trachonitis to Philip. Ioseph be|ing returned from Egypt, when he heard that Archelaus did reigne in Iudea in stead of his father Herod, feared to dwell in Iudea, but beeing warned of God in a dreame, went to the parts of Galilee,Mat. 2.22.2. and dwelt in a Citty called Nazaret. All this was done in the dayes of Augustus. After hee had reigned 56. yeares, or as Iosephus writeth, 57. yeares, viz. with An|tonius

14. yeares, and after hee overcame Antonius and Cle|patra Queene of Egypt in sea-warfare over against Epirus, hee had the Imperiall soveraignty himselfe alone all his dayes,Ioseph. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 3. and died in the 77. yeare of his age.


Tiberius.
Romane De|puties in Iu|da 1. Bucole Index.AFter Augustus raigned Tiberius Nero 22. yeares, seven moneths, seuen dayes. The Romane Deputies that were sent to Iudea in the time of his raigne, were Valerius Gratus, Pontius Pilat, and Vitellius. Valerius Gratus for loue of gaine remooued the Priests of the Iewes from their offices, at his owne pleasure. Ananus, Ismael, Eleazarus, Simon the sonne of Camithus, all these were denuded of their priestly dignity, when as two of them, viz. Eleazarus and Simon had conti|nued scarce one yeare in office. In end Iosphus Caiphas is advanced to the Priesthood. This is the cause wherefore the Evangelist Iohn calleth Caiphas the high Priest of that same yeare.Ioh. 18.13. Matters of religion were now come to an horrible a|buse, and were not ordered according to Gods holy ordi|nance, but according to the appetite of the Roman Deput
ies.Ioseph. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 3. After Gratus, Pontius Pilate was sent to be Deputy in Iudea, a man vigilant and actiue in all civill affaires, as the blood of the Galileans mixed with their sacrifices clearely proueth,Luk. 13.1. but in the cause of Christ remisse, negligent and slacke. After the issue of ten yeares, Vitellius is appointed Deputie in Iudea, and Pontius Pilate addresseth toward Rome. By gratifying of the Iewes of a matter of small importance he obtained great fauour.The Priestly arments. The priestly garments were wont to bee kept in the Castle called Antonia, but Vitellius gaue commandement to the Captaine of the Castle, to let the high Priest haue the vse of them when hee pleased, and to chuse what place he liked best for the custodie of the priestly garments. Hee disautho|rized Caiphas, following (as appeareth) the example of Vale|rius Gratus, and gaue his office to Ionathan the sonne of Ana|nus,

sometime high Priest.Ioseph. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 6. Euseb, hist. eccl. lib. 1. cap 10. Mat. 3.  4. Christ cruci|fied in the 18. yeare of Tibe|rius. Heb. 7. In the 15. yeare of the raigne of Tiberius, Christ our Lord and Saviour was baptized by Iohn in Iordan, was led to the wildernesse, fasted forty dayes, was tempted of the divell and began to preach.
In the 18. yeare of Tiberius, the Lord was crucified, and offered a sacrifice for our sinnes, which hath a perpetuall ver|tue to saue such as beleeue. Hee arose againe the third day from death. The high Priests and Rulers of the people gaue money to the souldiers, to obscure the glory of his resurrec|tion, yet it was sufficiently knowne, not onely to Christs Disciples, by his frequent apparitions to them, but also to Pontius Pilate the Romane Deputy himselfe, who had given out a sentence of death against Christ. Pilate by letters sig|nified to Tiberius the miracles of Christ, his resurrection, and that hee was supposed of many to be God:The Senate of Rome refuseth to acknow|ledge the diui|nity of Christ. Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 2. cap. 2. Rom. 1.21, 22. But the Senate of Rome refused to acknowledge the divinity of Christ, be|cause hee was worshipped as God, before his Godhead was approved by the Senate of Rome. The words of the Apo|stle Paul had performance in the Romane Senate, , they became vaine in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was full of darknes, when they professed them|selues to be wise, they became fooles. The very smoke that riseth from the furnace seemeth to be somewhat at the first, but when it mounteth vp into the aire, the higher it ascen|deth, the more it scatereth, and the sudden dispartion of it declareth it is but a vaine thing. Such was the wisedome of the Romane Senate, when they mounted vp so high as to iudge of diuine things farre surpassing the reach of the natu|rall vnderstanding of man, they prooued starke fooles, and people destitute of true vnderstanding: and Pilate himselfe ouerladen with many heauy calamities in the dayes of Caius,Pilate killeh himselfe. put hands into himselfe, and so ended his wretched life. Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 7.



Caius Caligula.
CAius Caligula, successour to Tiberius, raigned three years and nine months.Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 8. Hee was a proud Tyrant, enemy to all righteousnesse, the very childe of the diuell. I insist on|ly vpon Church matters. Hee was an hatefull enemy to the Iewes dwelling at Ierusalem, and at Alexandria. For one and the selfe-same cause were they both despised and hated of Caius,Caius would be counted a god. because they would not giue vnto him diuine honors by building Temples, and Altars, and offering sacrifice to new Iupiter Caius, and swearing by his name. First concer|ning Ierusalem,Euseb. eccles. hist. lib. 2. cap. 6 Ioseph. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 11 hee had sent Petronius to be Deputy in Iu|dea, with commandement to dedicate the Temple of Ieru|salem to Iupiter Caius, and to set vp his image in the Tem|ple. The Iewes were more willing to die, then to see the Temple of their God polluted. Petronius advertised the Emperour of the grievance of the Iewes,The Ievves abhorted the vpsetting of the image of Caius in their Temple. Act. 12. but before his let|ters came into the hands of Caius somewhat interveened that both disappointed the purpose of Caius, and also incen|sed his heart with fury and rage against his Deputy Petr|nius. At what time Herod Agrippa was at Rome, whom af|terward the Angell of God smote at Caesarea, so that hee was consumed with wormes, hee was exceedingly beloved of Caius, because in the dayes of Tiberius hee had beene cast in prison, and bound with bands for the loue hee carryed to Caius, in so farre that Caius invited Agrippa vpon a certaine time to a banquet, and bade him aske what hee pleased, and it should be granted.The petition of Agrippa. Agrippaes petition was this, that Caius would suffer the Nation of the Iewes to liue according to their owne lavve. Caius was moued somewhat with this vnexpected petition, yet partly for his excessiue loue toward Agrippa: also, left hee should seeme to them which fate at table to be a promise-breaker, the petition is granted. But the venome of his indignation against the Iewes hee poured

out against Petronius, because that by lingring in executing his commandement occasion was offered to Agrippa to pre|sent this foresayd petition.The bloody letter of Caius written to Pe|tronius his Deputy Ioseph antiq. lib. 18. cap. 11. The letter of Caius sent to his Deputy was cruell and bloody, the like whereof was seldom heard: because hee fulfilled not the Emperours desire, he is commanded to giue out sentence of death against his owne life, and to be both iudge and burrio to himselfe. Such mer|cy was in this new Iupiter Caius. Before I write any thing of his cruelty against the Iewes that dwelt in Alexandria, it is a meet place to admonish the Reader of the hypocrisie and counterfait holinesse of Herod Agrippa, who seemed both in the dayes of Caius, and also in the dayes of the Emperour Claudius, to bee a patterne of godlinesse, preferring at the banquet of Caius the liberty of the people of God, and the inviolable observation of the Law of God, to all the riches that the liberality of an affectioned Emperour could be able to afford.The hypocri|sie of Agrippa. In Claudius dayes hee sayled from Italy to Iudea, hee acknowledged God to be the author of his deliverance from prison and bands, and offered a chaine of gold to bee hung vp in the Temple of Ierusalem,Ioseph. antiq. lib. 19 cap. 5. in testimony that hee receiued that benefit with a thankfull mind out of the Lords hands. In outward things hee was a builder of the wals of Ierusalem, vntill the emulous envie of Marsus, or envious emulation,Ioseph. antiq. lib. 19 cap. 7. the hinderer of all good workes, compelled him to desist and to leaue the worke imperfited. For all this out|ward shew of holinesse, the lessons of Caius whom he loued beyond all things, never left him till his last breath. Caius desired to be counted a god, so did Agrippa in Caesarea de|light when his Oration was called the voyce of God and not of man. Caius persecuted the Iewes without a cause, so did Herod Agrippa the Christians.Acts 12. Caius the higher hee advan|ced himselfe, the greater was his fall, the like also happened to Agrippa. So pernitious a thing is vngodly company, bur|ning their associats with their fire,Contention betweene the Iewes  Gre|cians who dwelt at Alex|andria. or else blacking them with their smoke, and hurtfull every manner of way. In the towne of Alexandria the Grecians contended against the Iewes, both parties sent Ambassadors to Rome, the Grecians

sent Appion, the Iewes sent Philo a very prudent and learned man. Appion with flattering words insinuated himself in the fauour of the Emperor Caius,  accused the Iewes that they neither builded temples,Ioseph. antiq. lb. 18. cap. 10. Euseb. eccl hist. lib. 2. cap. 5. nor offered sacrifice to the honor of Caius, as the Grecians did. Philo was ready to answer, but Cai|us ruled with affection rather then with reason, caused Philo to be thrust out of his palace, and would not hearken vnto him. In these two mirrors, we may see the cruell disposition of this Emperor, whose dependers were persecuters of Chri|stians, like as he himself was a persecuter of the Iewes. If any good turne fell into his hand, it was rather by accident then of purpose to glorifie God, or to punish sin: he banished He|rod Antipas,Euseb. hist. lib. 2 cap. 4. Ioseph. antiq. lib. 18 cap. 9. who beheaded Iohn the Baptist,  his wife Hero|dias that incestuous harlot, who ended their liues in penury and misery in Lyons of France. But all this was done for the fauor of Agrippa, but not for detestation of murther  incest. In end Caius was slaine by his owne servants, Chereas Lu|pus, whom the Emperour Claudius afterward punished vnto death.Ioseph. antiq. lib. 19. cap. 3. New Iupiter in worse case then old Iu|piter. This new Iupiter I count him to haue been in worse case then old Iupiter the son of Saturne, albeit both of them died, yet the one after his death, was counted a god, but the other after his death was counted a diuell.


Claudius.
Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 19.CLaudius raigned thirteene yeares, eight months. Hee ratified the gift of the kingdome of Iudea, bestowed by his predecessor Caius vpon Herod Agrippa, and added thereto all the dominions of Herod Antipas,Ioseph. antiq. lib. 19. cap. 4. whom Caius had bani|shed. This Herod Agrippa when hee returned from Italy to Iudea, builded the walles of Ierusalem, sparing for no cost, so high and strong, that if the worke had not been hindered by the procurement of Marsus Governour of Syria, he had made them impregnable. Hee was not so carefull to build the walles of the spirituall Ierusalem, for hee beheaded the holy Apostle S. Iames, the brother of Iohn, and did cast Pe|ter

into prison, whom the Lord miraculously deliuered.Acts. 12. This Herod and the Iewes made hauocke of the glory of God,Acts 12. and blood of his Saints. For he gratified them by shed|ding the blood of the Apostles of Christ, and againe they gratified him by giuing him the glorie that appertained to God alone.The famine foretold by Agabus Acts 11. For which cause he was stricken by the Angel of God  consumed with wormes, In this Emperour Claudius dayes, the famine foretolde by the Prophet Agabus afflicted the world. One of the causes of this plague doubtlesse was the manifold abuses of the creatures of God, in the middes of the aboundance of bread, the contempt of the poore, which faultes were so vniuersally ouerspread in the world, that some of the Emperours themselues were not free of the foule spot of intemperancie:Funct. Chon. as the scoffing speeches of the people did witnesse in stead of Claudius Tiberius Nero cal|ling the Emperour Caldius Biberius Mero. This is referred to the successour of Augustus.
In the yeere of our Lord 48. and in the sixt yeere of the reigne of Claudius,The Counci of Ierusalem, Anno. 48. Acts 15. as Chytraeus reckoneth, was gathered that famous Councill of Ierusalem described viuely by the Euan|gelist Luke whereat were present the Apostles, Peter and Paul, and Iames, and Barnabas a reuerent man of God in whom Apostolike giftes were not lacking, with other wor|thie men, Iudas surnamed Barsabas and Silas notable Pro|phets and fellow-labourers of the Apostles: likewise the Commissioners of Antiochia, and Elders of Ierusalem with many others who were beleeuers. What was concluded in this Councell,Acts 15. I remit to the faithfull narration of the Euan|gelist Luke. Alwayes if votes be pondered rather then num|bred, this is the Councell of Councels more worthie to bee called O Ecomenicke then the Councels
 of Nice, of Constanti|nople, of Ephesus, and Chalcedon. In the Councell of Nice were worthy Bishops, who came from all quarters, of the world, but in this Councill were holy Apostles, who could not erre in matters of faith, O Ecomenicke Bishops indeede, and any one of the holy Apostles was illuminated with more aboundance of cleare light in things pertaining to the wor|ship

of God then al the 300  18. bishops co~ueened at Nice in Bithynea.Romane de|puties. Many Romaine Deputies were sent in the dayes of Claudius to keepe Syria and Iudea in subjection to the Ro|maines, such as Marsus, Longinus, Cuspius Phadus, Tiberius A|lexander, Cumanus and Felix. I leaue Marsus and Longinus for desire to open vp in what Deputies time things mentio|ned in holy Scripture came to passe. When Cuspius Phadus was deputie, there arose a deceitfull man named Theudas, to whom resorted a number of men aboue 400. who were slaine,Acts 5.36. and all who followed him were scattered, Iosephus writeth that Phadus sent forth a trope of horsemen, who sud|denly charged the people that followed Theudas, and slew them,seph antiq. lib 20 cap 2. Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 11. Acts 5 37. and tooke Theudas aliue, and cut off his head, and brought it to Ierusalem, After this man arose one Iudas of Galile in the dayes of the tribute, and drew away much peo|ple after him: he also perished, and all that obeyed him were scattered. If Gamaliel in that narration keepe the order of time, as these words (After him) would import, of necessitie the words of the history of the Actes must be vnderstood of another Theudas then that man of whom Iosephus writeth in the place aboue mentioned. For Iudas of Galile liued in the dayes of Augustus and when Cyrenius was Deputie of Syria and Iudea,Iosephus lib 18. cap. 3. lib 20.  cap. 3. But I am not certaine whether or no the words  doe absolutely import that Iudas of Galile was posterior in time to Theudas. When Cumanus was
Deputie, who succeded to Tiberius Alexander the insolencie of one Romaine souldier was the destruction of twentie thousand innocent people, he discouered the secret parts of his body vpon a solemne feast day, neere vnto the Temple, and in the sight of the Iewes, they counted this a contempt done to God in the porch of his owne house: Cumanus drew the Romane souldiers to the Castle called Antonia verie neere the temple, and set them in order, and the people of the Iewes fearing the inuasion of the souldiers, sled, and in the narrow passages ouertrode one another, and a great multitude of people were slaine,Ioseph antiq. lib. 20. cap. 4. After this the people of the Iewes came to Caesarea where Cumanus was for the time, and complained

of a Romane souldier, who had cast a booke of holy Scrip|ture into the fire, whom Cumanus beheaded, and so pacified the Iewes.Ioseph antiq. b 20. cap. 4. In end, Cumanus through his euill gouerne|ment procured to himselfe the indignation of the Empe|rour Claudius, he fauoured the wicked cause of the Samari|tanes, who had stopped the passages of the Galileans, and slaine a great number of them. They were accustomed yeerely to goe vp to Ierusalem to holy feates, and their way was through the townes and villages of the Samaritanes. Cumanus rather fauoured then punished this wicked fact of the Samaritanes, therefore he was remoued from his place, and Felix was sent to be Deputie of Iudea.Ioseph antiq. lib. 20. cap. 5. Whether Clau|dius was impoisoned by Agrippina his wife to prepare an easie passage to Nero her sonne to be Emperour or not, I leaue that to be read in authors, who haue entreated the liues of Emperours politikly. It contenteth me to write of the estate of the Church in their time.


Nero.
DOmitius Nero, succeeded to Claudius: he reigned thir|teene yeeres and eight months,Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 5. His mother Agrippina after the death of Cneus Domitius Aenobarbus was joyned in mariage with the Emperour Claudius. In the first fiue yeeres of his gouernement he abandoned the insolencie of his wicked disposition, so that it was a prouerbe in the mouthes of men, Neronis quinquennium, in regard of his good cariage for the space of fiue yeeres. But a fire long couered, in end breaketh out into a mightie flame, that no water can slake it His cruelitie against his mother, his wifes Octaia and Poppea, his master Seneca, the Poet Lucan, and the vile abuse of his body with persons of his neerest consanguinitie, I remit to the reading of learned authors, who haue written exactly the historie of the Romane Emperours, and I hast to

that which is the principall purpose of this compend, how wicked Nero kindled the first great Fornace of horrible per|secution against the Christians. It cannot be denyed but in the dayes of Tiberius our Lord Christ Iesus was crucified: in the dayes of Caligula and Claudius the hands of that cruell persecuter Herod was mightily strengthened by the fauour, countenance and bountifulnesse of both these Emperours, so that he layd hands vpon the pillars of the house of God: and so I deny not but the Church of God before the dayes of Nero was in the fornace of trouble, but now 'come the dayes whereinto the Roman Emperours like vnto Nebuchad|nezar were full of rage,Daniel. 3.19. and the forme of their visage was changed against the Christians,  they commanded that the fornace should be hoate seuen times more then it was wont to be.
The ten perse|cuting Empe|rours wrestled against God. Gen. 32.This historie henceforth conteineth on the one part, the great wrestling of persecuting Emperours against God, not like to the wrestling of Iacob with God. The place of Iacobs wrestling was Penel, where he saw God, the forme of wre|stling was with many teares and strong supplications, the end was,Hos. 12. that the Angel should not hastly depart from him leauing him comfortlesse, the successe was the obtaining of a blessing, which was the armour of God to saue him against the hatefull malice of Esau: but by the contrary, Nero, Do|mitian, Traian, Antonius, and the rest set their faces against the heauen, commanded the holy One of Israel to depart out of the world, endeuoured to quench the sauing light of his Gospell, and by so doing, brought downe vpon them|selues, in stead of a blessing, that wrath that is reueiled from heauen vpon all them who detaine the truth of God into vnrighteousnes,Rom. 1.18. On the other part is set downe the constant faith and patient suffering of the Saints who hated not the burning bush, because it was set on fire, but they loued it, because in it they were refreshed with the comfortable pre|sence of the great Angel of God,Exod. 3. who would not for gaining of their liues once fashion themselues according to the simi|litude of Idolaters in outward and externall things. Tertuli|an

in his booke de corona militis declareth that true Christian souldiers abhorred from setting a garland of flowers vpon their heads, when they received wages for their painfull ser|uice in warfare, because it was the habit of Idolaters who sa|crificed to Iupiter. O happy men of God, whose vertues the dead colours of Painters cannot represent, and the festered manners of this corrupt age cannot imitate! When shall the fresh oyle of the grace of God bee powred into our lampes, that the light of our faith, patience, and constant perseve|rance may shine clearely to the world as theirs did?
The occasion of this great persecution of Nero,The first per|secution. Anno. Cler. 65. Bucole Index chron. Funct. chron. Chytr. chron. was his owne barbarous and cruell fact: hee caused the towne of Rome to be set on fire, which wasted the buildings of the towne for the space of sixe dayes, and to eschew the vile in|famy of this barbarous fact, hee layde the blaine vpon the Christians, and gaue forth edicts and commandements to to persecute them to the death. Nero was so hatefull an ad|uersary to all righteousnesse, that Eusebius following the ex|ample and words of Tertullian, affirmeth that if the Gospell had not beene an excellent good thing,Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 25. The martyr|dome of Peter and Paul. Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 25. it had not been con|demned by Nero. It is supposed that Peter was crucified, and Paul was beheaded at Rome, in the time of this persecu|tion. If this be true, the very dead bones of Peter and Paul are witnesses against the Romane Church, if they continue not in the same faith, that Peter and Paul sealed vp with their blood. The estate of the Iewes vnder Nero was very hard in respect of the oft change of the Romane Deputies.Romane Deputies. For in Neroes time continued Felix for a space, whom the Em|perour Claudius had sent to Iudea, and after him Festus, Al|binus, and Florus. This last Deputy was fashioned according to the similitude of the manners of Nero his Master, and the Proverb holdeth true in Nero and Florns, Such man, such master. In the time that Felix was Deputy, a certaine Egyptian man pretending to be a Prophet, and promising great things, perswaded foure thousand of the Iewes to fol|low after him,Act. 25. but Felix sent forth companies of horsemen and footmen, who slew foure hundreth of the people that

followed the Egyptian,Ioseph antiq. lib. 20. cap. 6. and tooke two hundreth of them aliue, the rest were scattered, but the seducing Prophet es|caped, and could not be found. When Festus was Deputy, King Agrippa heard the Apology of Paul, and sayd that in a part Paul perswaded him to be a Christian.Acts. 25. Acts 12. This Agrippa (I say) the sonne of Herod, whom the Angell of God slewe, was advanced to great honours by the Emperour Claudius, as his father had beene before him by the fauour of Caius, and he possessed not onely his fathers dominions, but also the Tetrarchy of Iturea and Trachonitis, sometime belong|ing to Philip the sonne of Herod the great. His might and riches procured trouble to the Nation of the Iewes. He had a palace situate vpon the West-side of the Temple of Ierusa|lem, and in regard it was builded vpon a mountaine, he had a delectable prospect of the towne of Ierusalem: yet not content with this, hee mounted vp the walles of the Palace by a new building, so high, that they who were in the Pa|lace might haue seene the Altar, and sacrifices of the Iewes offered in the inner court, which at that time was called A|trium Iudaorum. This doing grieved the hearts of the Iewes. They on the other part, to cut off the sight of those who dwelt in the Palace, from beholding their sacrifices, raysed vp the wall of the inner court on the West-side to such emi|nency, that no man could behold the sacrifices of the Iewes from the Palace.Contention. betweene A|grippa and the Ievves. King Agrippa and Festus with authority commanded the Iewes to demolish their new builded wall. In end this matter was referred to the Emperour Nero, who being solicited by his wife Poppea, gratified the Iewes in this poynt,Ioseph. antiq. lib. 20. cap. 7. and compelled them not to cast downe their wall. Festus died in Iudea, and Albinus was sent to be Deputie in Iudea. Ananus was the high Priest of the Iewes in those dayes, and finding opportunity of time, to practice the ma|lice of his heart against Iames the sonne of Alpheus, furna|named Iustus,The martyr|dome of Iames furnamed Iustus. an holy Apostle and kinsman of our Lord Ie|sus. When Albinus was vpon his iourney, and had not as yet arriued neither to the coasts of Egypt, nor of Iudea, this Ananus (I say) caused Iames furnamed Iustus, and the bro|ther

of our Lord,Ioseph antiq. lib 20 cap 8. Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 23. to bee stoned to death. Eusebius writeth that he was throwne down from the pinacle of the Temple. This cruelty of Ananus, albeit it displeased both King A|grippa, and Albinus the Deputy of the Romans, and the peo|ple of Ierusalem, yet wicked men are wiser in their owne generation, then the children of light: and Ananus sawe that if hee had lingred vntill the Romane Deputy had arri|ued, hee could not haue procured the death of a man coun|ted so inst, and so welbeloved of the people, as the Apostle Iames was. It is to be marked that Eusebius in the foremen|tioned place describeth the Martyrdome of Iames furnamed Iustus, before the edict of the persecution of Nero, after which folloshed the martyrdome of Peter and Paul, in the 12. yeere of Nero his raigne,Epiphan. contr. heres. neuerthelesse, the Romane Church had forged Epistles decretall, whereinto Clemens Bishop of Rome, writeth to Iames furnamed Iustus, after the death of Peter. What credit these decretall Epistles deserue, it shall be declared hereafter, God willing. But Florus who succeded to Albinus, was an avaritious and cruell man: hee exhausted the treasure that was in the Temple, and tooke out of it sixteene talents of siluer. And when the Iewes at Ierusalem murmured against him, hee came to the towne in great wrath, and permitted the souldiers to slay, and to spoyle the Citizens of Ierusalem at their pleasure. Likewise he afflicted with vnaccustomed cruelty,Ioseph. de bello Iuduco lib. 2. cap. 15. The ground of the warre betweene the Iewes and the Romanes. Mat. 24. men of noble birth, by scourging and crucifying them. This was the ground of the warre betweene the Romanes and the Iewes, wherein Ierusalem came to that lamentable ruine foretold by our Sa|viour Christ. Now to returne to the Emperour himselfe, and forme of his death. After he had raigned 13. yeares and eight moneths, the Senate of Rome proclaimed him to bee an enemy to mankind, and condemned him to be whipped with wands to the death, and to be harled through the City. For feare of which punishment he was forced to flie, and by slaying of himselfe, made an end of his most wretched life. Iustin.



Vespatian.
AFter Nero, Otto, Vitellius, and Galba contended for the Empire, and were all hastily cut off, and made out of the way,Bucole Index. chron. and Flavianus Vespatian was chosen Emperour by the Roman Arny, he reigned ten yeares. The Nation of the Iewes at this time, for the most part was given ouer into a re|probate minde, according as it was foretold by the Prophet Zacharie:Zach. 11.9. Then sayd I, I will not feed you: that that dieth, let it die, and that that perisheth, let it perish, and let the remnant every one eate the flesh of his neighbour. Like as the intollerable cruelty of Flerus had irritat the Nation of the Iewes: even so on the other side, the vnsupportable obstinacy of the Iewes had incensed the wrath of the Romanes against them. They were now become so head-strong,Ioseph. de bello Iud lib. 2. c. 30 that they reiected the sacrifice that was wont to be offered for Caesar. The cala|mity of the Iewes who dwelt in Alexandria, and in Damas|cus, was but the beginning of sorrowes: fifty thousand Iewes were slaine in Alexandria,Ioseph. de bello Iud. lib. 2. cap. 36. and 41. ten thousand in Damascus. Besides this, many signes and wonders both in heauen and earth, did proclaime their future desolation and destruction. A Comet was seene in heauen,Forerunning tokens of the destruction of Ierusalem. hanging ouer the towne of Ierusalem for the space of a yeare, and having the similitude of a sword: in the Temple at the mid time of the night, a cleare light was seene shining round about the Altar, in brightnes not vnlike vnto the light of the day: and the great brasen port of the Temple opened of it owne accord, a|bout the sixt houre of the night: chariots of fire were seene compassing townes, and a voyce was heard in the Sanctuary warning to flit,Ioseph. de bello Ind. lib. 6. c. 31. and to transport, with many other fearfull signes and wonders. But a people senslesse, whose eyes were dimme, whose eares were dull of hearing, whose heart was fatte, and locked vp by Satan in infidelity, they could take no warning of the wrath to come, because the Lord was

minded to destroy them. Flavius Vespatian, and his sonne Titus Vespatian leading an army of threescore thousand ar|med men from Ptolemaida, besieged the townes of Galilee and Trachonitis: so many as would not willingly bee sub|iect to the Romanes, the townes of Gadara, Tiberias, Ioto|pata, Tarithea, Gamala, all these were brought vnder the re|verence of Vespatian, and Iosephus, who had beene lurking in a caue (after the towne of Iotopata was conquered) was taken aliue, and kept in bands by the Romans: hee foretold that Vespatian should be Emperour, and saluted him Caesar, and ,De bello Iud. lib. 3. cap 27. while Nero was yet aliue. When this pro|phecie came to passe indeed, and hee was chosen to bee Em|perour, hee sent for Iosephus, and commanded that he should be loosed from bands, but Titus his sonne, thought more ex|pedient that his bands should bee cut off from him, rather then loosed,De bello Iud. lib. 4. cap 39. to the end he might be counted a worthy man, who never deserved captivity nor bands. Flavius Vespatian returned to Rome, and left behinde him his sonne Titus to subdue the Iewes, and to besiege the towne of Ierusalem, but the Christians who dwelt at Ierusalem, were warned by God to depart out of the towne of Ierusalem,Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 5. so they left it, and dwelt beyond Iordan in a towne of Decapolis, called Pela. Separation of the corne from the chaffe, goeth before the vnquenchable fire wherewith the chaffe shall bee burnt. Titus beganne to besiege Ierusalem in the first yeare of the reigne of his father,The destructi|on of Ierusa|lem. Anno Chr. 71. Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 7. at the time when the people were gathe|red to celebrate the feast of the Passeouer. The terror of the sword of the Romanes without, the feare of mercilesse bri|gands within the bowels of the towne prevailing, the shewer of the dead (wanting the honour of buriall) infecting the aire, and devouring the living with contagious sicknesse, the violent plague of famine breaking assunder the bands of nature, and constraining women to eate the birth of their owne bellies.De bello Iud. lib. 6. cap. 21. All these calamities seased vpon them at once, in the iust iudgement of God. They despised the Father of eternity, and the Prince of peace, and sayd to Pilate, Wee haue no King but Caesar.Ioh. 19.15. Now they finde that the mercies

of Caesar were cruell, and his sonne Titus, who was commen|ded in all mens mouthes, as meeke, mercifull, liberall, and eloquent, and was called Amor  delitiae humani generis: that is, The loue and most dainty thing of all mankinde, yet God made him a terrible scourge to the Nation of the Iewes, who forsooke the Lord Iesus, and preferred Caesar vnto him. In Scripture wee reade of many great viols of the wrath of God powred downe vpon vnrighteous men, but these are greatest that resemble by most liuely representation the great condemnation of the wicked at the last day, such as the flood of Noe, the ouerthrow of Sodome, and destruction of Ie|rusalem. The flood of Noe was vniuersall and sudden, so shall be the condemnation of vngodly men at the last day. The overthrow of Sodome and Gomorrha,Mat. 24.37. 38.39. was a destructi|on vnsupportable, and the more meet to bee an example of the vengeance of eternall fire.Iude ver. 7. The flood of Noe, the over|throw of So|dome, and de|struction of Ierusalem, types of the great iudge|ment to come. Mat. 24. The destruction of Ierusa|lem, and the forerunning tokens thereof, are so mixed with the tokens preceeding the condemnation of the great day, that it may bee clearely perceiued, that God hath appointed the one to be a type and figure of the other. So oft as we call to remembrance the flood of Noe, the overthrow of Sodom, and the destruction of Ierusalem, let vs feare  stand in awe to fall into the condemnation of vngodly men, because all the terrors of these iudgements concurre and are massed to|gether in the iudgement of the last day. What are the deepe wells of water, what are the shoures of fire and brimstone, what is famine, pest, and sword, both intestine and forraine, in comparison of that worme that never dieth, and that fire that shall never be quenched, and the blacknesse of darknes, with weeping and gnashing of teeth, c? It is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Concerning the number of them that were slaine in Galilee, Trachoni|tis, Samaria, and Iudea, chiefly in the Metropolitane towne Ierusalem, over and besides those that were sold to be slaues, and those that were deuoured by wild beasts, in the triumph of Flavius and Titus at Rome, reade Iosephus de bello Iud. lib. 6. cap. 45.



Titus.
AFter Flavius, raigned Titus Vespatian his sonne, two yeares, two months, twenty dayes.Bucole Index chron. The Nation of the Iewes being now subdued, there was great peace in all parts of the Romane dominions, both by sea and land, and the Temple of Ianus in Rome,Bucole. was closed and locked vp againe.


Domitian.
FFlavius Domitian was associate to his brother Titus in government,The second persecution. Anno Chr. 96. Chytr. Chron. during his life time; and after his death was his successor. Hee raigned 15. yeares. Hee was proud like Nero, and persecuted innocent Christians as hee did, so prone and bent is our corrupt nature to sinne, and to follow evill examples. Now againe the Church of Christ militant vpon the earth, must learne obedience by suffering, and must giue a proofe before the world, that the Covenant of God is written in the tables of her heart, and so deeply in|graved by the finger of God, that no tribulation, anguish, persecution, famine, nakednesse, nor death itselfe can sepa|rate her from the loue of Christ. The members of the Church were the good Merchants,Mat. 13. of whom Christ spea|keth, who having found a pearle of vnspeakeable value, were content to sell all they had for loue of gaining it: they had tasted of the Well of water springing vp into eternall life, and thirsted not againe for the water that cannot satisfie the heart of man with ful contentment.Ioh. 4.14. The banish|ment of the Apostle Iohn. Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 18. Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 19. In this second great per|secution, the beloved disciple of Christ, the Apostle Iohn was banished to the Isle of Patmos, for the word of God. Flavia Domicilla, a woman of noble birth in Rome, was banished to Pontia, an Isle lying ouer against Caieta in Italy. Prota|sius

and Gervasius were martyred at Millain:Chytr. chron. concerning the miracle wrought at their sepulchres, God willing, wee shall speake in the third Century, and in the Treatise of Reliques. Chytraus writeth, that Timothie was stoned to death at Ephe|sus, by the worshippers of Diana, and that Dionysius Areopa|gita,Domitian a|fraid by ru|mors of the Kingdom of Christ. was slaine by the sword at Pareis. Domitian had heard some rumors of the Kingdome of Christ, and was afraid as Herod the great had beene, after the Nativity of our Lord: but when two of Christ kinsmen, according to the flesh, the Nephewes of the Apostle Iude were presented before him, and hee perceived them to be poore men, who gained their living by handy labour, and when hee had heard of them, that Christs Kingdome was not of this world, but it was spi|rituall, and that hee would come at the latter day to iudge the quick and the dead, he despised them as simple and con|temptible persons,Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 20. and did them no harme. In the end, as the life of Domitian was like vnto the life of Nero, so was he not vnlike vnto him in his death: for his owne wife and friends conspired against him, and slew him: his body was carried to the graue by porters, and buried without honour. The Senate of Rome also decreed, that his name should bee rased, and all his acts should bee rescinded. Sueton. in Dom. Ierom. catal. script. eccles.


Nerva.
Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 21COccius Nerua after Domitian, raigned one yeare, foure moneths. And hitherto all the Emperours that ruled, were borne in Italy: from henceforth strangers doe rule: for Traian the adoptiue sonne of Nerva, his successor was borne in Spaine. Nerva redressed many things, that were done amisse by Domitian, and in his time the Apostle Iohn was relieued from banishment, and returned againe to Ephe|sus,Euseb. lib. 3 cap. 21 where he died.




CENTVRIE II.

Traianus.
_TRaian the adopted sonne of Nerva, was the first stranger who obtained that ho|nour to bee King of the Romanes.Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 3. Hee raigned 19. yeares, 6. moneths. A man so exceeding well beloved of the Senate and of the people of Rome, that after his dayes, whensoever a new Emperour was elected, they wished vnto him the good successe of Augu|stus, and the vprightnesse of Traianus. Notwithstanding of this,The third persecution. Anno. Chr. 108. hee was a cruell persecuter of Christians. And this third persecution is iustly counted greater then the two pre|ceeding persecutions. To other afflictions now is added contempt and shame. It was no great dishonour to bee ha|ted of Nero and Domitian, wicked men and haters of righte|ousnes, but to bee hated and persecuted by Traian, a man counted a patterne of vpright dealing, this was a great re|buke. Notwithstanding Christians looked to Iesus, the author and finisher of their faith, who for the ioy that was set before him, endured the crosse, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. Many haue more patiently endured paine in their flesh, then shame and contempt in the world,Heb. 12,2 but Christs true Disciples must re|solue to be a gazing stocke to all the world, and to bee coun|ted the off-scourings of the earth, as the holy men of God did in the dayes of the Emperour Traian. These were Ci|tizens of heauen, liuing in earthly tabernacles, liuing vpon the earth,Rom. 12. but not fashioned according to the similitude of this world. In doing great things by faith, they surpassed mighty Monarches: In patient suffering of evill, they over|went

admired Plilosophers. In this persecution Simon the sonne of Cleopas,The martyr|dome of Simon the sonne of Cleopas. Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 3 cap. 23. an holy Apostle suffered martyrdome, be|ing now an hundreth and twenty yeares old: hee was first scourged, and then crucified: but all this rebuke hee most patiently suffered for the name of Christ. Of Ignatius mar|tyrdome wee haue spoke in the first Century, the time of his suffering,The letter of Pliny 2. vvrit|ten to Traian. was in the time of Traianus. Plinie the second De|puty in Bithynia, breathing threatnings against innocent Christians, persecuted great numbers of them to death. In the end he was commoued and troubled in his owne mind, cosidering both the number  patient suffring of christians that were put to death, he wrote to the Emperour, declaring that Christians were men of good conversation, and detested murther, adultery, and such other vngodlinesse: onely they had conventions earely in the morning, and they sang Psalmes to the honour of Christ, whom they worshipped as God, but they would not worship images (here marke the portrait of the Ancient Apostolike Church, and what con|formity the Romane Church in our dayes hath with it, the Lord knoweth.) This letter of Plinius mitigated the Empe|rours wrath in a part, yet gaue hee no absolute commande|ment to stay the persecution, but onely that the Iudges should not search them out narrowly,Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 23. but if any happened to bee presented before them, then let them bee punished. What confusion was in this edict, it is well marked by Ter|tullian:Tertul. Apol. the one part of it repugneth to the other. In forbid|ding to search them out narrowly, hee declareth their inno|cency, but in commanding to punish them when they were presented, hee pronounceth them to bee guilty. This is that Emperour for whose soule Gregory the first made sup|plications to God 400. yeares after his death, and was heard of God as Damacen writeth.Damas. Serm. de defunct. Gregory 1. prayed for the soule of Traian This superstitious Monke, of the descent of Saracens blood, if he supposed Gregory to be so full of charity, that hee prayed for the soule of one perse|cuting Emperour, why would he not bring him in praying also for all the ten persecuting Emperours, to the end that they being all delivered from the condemnation of hell,

heaven might be counted a mansion both for Christs true Disciples, and also for Christs hatefull and impenitent e|nemies?


Adrianus.
AFter Traian, AElius Adrianus raigned 21. yeares. In his time Aristides and Quadratus,Chytr. chron. the one a Bishoppe, the other an Orator at Athens, wrote learned apologies in defence of Christian Religion,Euseb. eccles. hist. lib 4. cap. 3 Ierom. catalog. script. eccles. Barcochebas a false Prophet, seduced the Nation of the Ievves. and did so mitigate the Em|perours minde, that in his time no new commandement was set forth to persecute Christians. Barcochebas at this time perverted the Nation of the Iewes, and called himselfe the promised Messias: whom the foolish Iewes followed to their owne overthrow and destruction. Tynius Rufus, De|puty in Iudea, besieged this man in Bethera, a towne not farre distant from Ierusalem, and destroyed him with all his adherents. Also the whole Nation of the Iewes was bani|shed from their natiue soyle: and the towne of Ierusalem was taken from the Iewes, and delivered to other Nations to bee inhabitants of it, and was called by the Emperours name AElia.Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 6. Thus we see that the Iewes who would not re|ceiue Christ, who came in his Fathers name, yet they recei|ved another who came in his owne name, and like vnto babes, who are easily deceived with trifles, they were bewit|ched with the splendor of a glorious name: for Barcochebas signifieth the sonne of a starre: and hee said to the Iewes, that hee was sent as a light from heaven to succour their di|stressed estate: but hee might haue beene called more iustly Barchosba, the sonne of a lie. Here I giue warning againe, that we take heed to our selues,Note. left wee bee circumvented with the deceitfull snares of the diuell: for it is an easie thing to fall, but a difficult thing to rise againe. The Christians who lived in the dayes of Adrian, were glad to bee refreshed with the crums of outward comfort, which are denyed to no

accused person in the whole world, viz. that Christians shall not be condemned to death for the importunate cla|mours and cryes of a raging people accusing them, except it be prooved that they haue transgressed the Law, and haue committed some fact worthy of death. Reade the Epistle of Adrian written to Minutius Fundanus,Euseb. ecel. hist. lib. 4 cap. 9. Adrianus his intention to build a church for the honor of Christ. Bucole. Note. Deputy in Asia. The good intention of Adrian in building a Church for the ho|nour of Christ, voyd of Images, (because such was the custome of Christians) was hindered by some of his fami|liar friends, who sayd, that if hee so did, all men would for|sake the temples of the gods of the Gentiles, and become Christians. In this point good Reader marke what Church is like vnto the ancient Primitiue and Apostolike Church, whether the Church decked with Images, or the Church voyd of Images.


Antoninus Pius.
TO Adrian succeeded Antoninus Pius, his adopted son, and raigned 23. yeares.Carion lib. 3. Monarch. 4. Hee was so carefull to preserue the liues of his Subjects, that hee counted it greater honour to saue the life of one Subiect, then to destroy the liues of a thousand enemies. In this Emperours time Iustinus Martyr wrote notable bookes of Apologie for the Christians, which were presented and read in the Senate of Rome, and molli|fied the Emperours minde toward Christians, as clearely ap|peareth by his edict,Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 13. proclaimed at Ephesus, in time of most solemne conventions of all Asia.



Antoninus Philosophus, and L. Verus.
AFter Antoninus Pius succeeded his sonne in law Anto|ninus Philosophus, otherwise called Marcus Aurelius, with his brother L. Aurelius Verus. This is the first time wherein the Romane Empire was governed by two Augu|sties. Albeit Titus had associated his brother Domitian, to be a fellow labourer with him in the worke of government, yet was not Domitian counted or called Augustus, vntill the death of his brother Titus. But now at one and the selfe same time, two Emperours do raigne. Antoninus Philosophus raigned nineteene yeares, Lucius Verus his brother nine yeares.Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 5 cap. 9. Bucole. And so after the death of Verus, the whole gouern|ment returned to Antoninus Philosophus onely. Hee was cal|led a Philosopher not onely in regard of his knowledge, but also in respect of the practise of Philosophie. He was nei|ther greatly pust vp by prosperity, nor cast downe by aduer|sity: yet he was a cruell persecuter of innocent Christians.
Now is the fuell added to the furnace the fourth time,The fourth persecution. Anno Chr. 168. and the flame is great, and the arme of wicked men who hated the name of Christians, is strengthened by the Emperours com|mandement. The trumpets of the Monarches of the world found the alarme against him who made them Kings  ru|lers on the earth. The poore innocent lambs of the sheepfold of Christ appointed for the shambles, strengthened their hearts in God, and in the power of his might,  chose rather to suffer adversity with their brethren, then to enjoy the plea|sures of sin for a season, they were content to be racked,Heb. 11.25 and would not be delivered, that they might bee partakers of a better resurrection,Heb. 11.35 whose bodies torne with stripes vntill their very inward bowels were patent to the outward sight, witnessed the vnrent firmenesse and stability of their faith.

They were so supported with the power of that grace that commeth from aboue, that they were not terrified with the multiplied numbers of cruell torments, newly devised for dashing that invincible courage of faith which was seene in Christians. Yea further then this. When the persecuting enemies were compelled to change the high tuned accent of their menacing speeches, and to craue but a little conformi|tie to the Emperours desire in swearing by his fortune, the holy men of God would not once seeme to fall away from their profession, by answering with timerous and doubtfull words: but glorified God with a cleare and constant con|fession of their Christian faith. Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, and Iustinus Martyr,The martyr|dome of Poly|carpus and Iustinus. a man of singular erudition, were both martyred in the fervent heat of this persecution. But aboue all other places, the consuming flame of the furnace brast out most vehemently, in France that happy Nation, wherein, both of old, and late time, so many were found worthy to giue their blood for the name of Christ. Vetius Epagathus, Maturus, Prothenus, Attalus, Sanctus, and Pho|tinus Bishoppe of Lyons, all suffered for the testimony of Christ in France. And Blandina a worthy woman suffered many torments,Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 5. cap. 1. Bucole Index. Slanderous speeches a|gainst Chri|stians. Euseb. ibid. and renewed her spirituall courage by con|tinuall iteration of these words, Christiana sum, that is, I am a Christian. In like manner Christians were persecuted with the slanderous speeches of Pagans, obiecting vnto them the banquets of Thyestes, and the chambering of Oedipus, that is, the eating of mens flesh, and incestuous coppulations. But men who are giuen to the momentaneall delights of sin are not willing to die, because that by death they are separa|ted from all bodily pleasures. The Christians by patient and willing suffering of death for Christs sake, clearely witnessed vnto the world, that they were not addicted to the deceitfull pleasures of sinne.Iustin. Martyr. Apol. Neverthelesse, these slanderous speeches were credited by the pagans, and tooke such deepe roote in their hearts, that those who seemed before to be more meek and moderate then others, now they became full of madnesse and rage, against Christians: and that which was foretolde

by our master Christ, it was fulfilled at this time, to wit, The time shall come, that whosoever killeth you,Iohn. 16.2. shall thinke hee doth God good service. The huge number of Martyrs that were slaine in the fury of this persecution, are both accurratly and at great length set downe by that worthy instrument of Gods glory, who lately wrote the Booke of Martyrs: I onely point out shortly the estate of the Church at this time. In this Emperours time good men were not wanting, who admonished him to appease his wrath against Christians: such as Claudius Apolinaris, Bishop of Hierapolis, and Me|lito Bishop of Sardis. But nothing could asswage his cruell heart, vntill hee was cast into the furnace of grievous trou|bles himselfe: for his army that fought against the Ger|manes and Samaritanes, fell into great distresse for want of water,The Romane Army suppor|ted by the prayers of the Christians. but was supported by the prayers of the Christian legion that was in his army. For they bowed their knees to Christ, and prayed for helpe, and the Lord Iesus sent raine in aboundance to refresh the army of the Romans,  dashed the Barbarians with thunder and fire. In remembrance whereof, the Christian legion was after that time called , or Fulminatrix.Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 5. After this victory hee asswaged his anger, and wrote to the Senate of Rome to deale gent|ly with Christians, by whose prayer hee acknowledged both himselfe and his Army to haue received deliverance from God.


Commodus.
COmmodus the sonne of Antoninus,Euseb. ecel. hist. lib. 5. cap. 27. raigned 13. yeares. Many of the Romanes not without cause, called him Incommodus. He presumed to do great things, and to change the names of moneths, and would haue the moneth of De|cember to be called Commodus, like as the two names of two moneths, Quintilis and Sextilis had beene changed in time

past, and called Iulius and Augustus, for honour of these two welbeloved Emperours. But hee was not so well fa|voured of the people, that this ordinance could haue place any longer, then during his owne life time. The Church in his dayes was not altogether free of persecution: for Apol|lonius a man of noble birth in Rome, and a man of great learning suffered death, because hee would not forsake the Christian religion.Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 23. Contrary Ievves. His accuser also was punished to the death. Such advantages Iudges might easily haue taken, finding so many discrepant lawes, some made in favour, and some conceived in disliking of Christians.


Pertinax and Iulianus.
AeLius Pertinax Emperour sixe moneths. Didius Iu|lianus two moneths. Eusebius maketh no mention of D. Iulianus, but of Pertinax onely, to whom suc|ceeded Severus. Eseb. lib. 5. cap. 27.




CENTVRIE III.

Severus.
_AFter Pertinax and Iulian, Severus governed seventeene yeares,The fift per|secution. Anno. Chr. 205. Euseb. lib. 6 cap. 12. and eight months. Eu|sebius reckoneth onely twelue yeares. He stirred vp the fift persecution against the Christians. The crimes obiected against the Christians besides those that were ob|iected in the former persecution, were these: Rebellion against the Emperour, sacriledge, mur|thering of Infants, worshipping of the Sunne, and worship|ping the head of an Asse: which last calumny was forged a|gainst them by the malice of the Iewes. This persecution raged most severely in the townes of Alexandria and Car|thage,Euseb. lib. 6 cap. 1 Leonides the fa|ther of Origen. like as the former persecutions had done in Lyons and Vienne in France. Leonides the father of Origen was be|headed: his sonne being but young in yeares; exhorted his father to persevere in the faith of Christ constantly vnto the death. Potamiae a young beautiful virgin in Alexandria, was by the Iudge condemned to death, and delivered to a Cap|taine called Basilides, who stayed the insolency of the peo|ple that followed her to the place of execution, with outrage of slanderous and rayling wordes,The conversi|on of Basilides. crying out against her: for this cause shee prayed to God for the conversion of Basilides to the true faith, and was heard of God, in so much, that hee was not onely converted to the faith of Christ,Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 5. Alexander fel|low labourer with Narcissus Euseb. l. 6. c. 39. but also sealed it vp with his blood, and had the honour of mar|tyrdome. Alexander who was a fellow labourer with Nar|cissus in Ierusalem, escaped many dangers, yet was he marty|red in the dayes of Decius the 7. great persecuter. Of this Emp
erour the Senate of Rome sayd, Aut non nasti, aut non

mori debuisse, that is, Either he should never haue been born, or else should never haue tasted of death. So it pleased the Lord by his wife dispensation to suffer the dayes of Traian, Antoninus Philosophus, and Severus, Emperours renowned in the world to be more cruell against their owne people, then the dayes of Nero, Domitian, Caligula, or Commodus,Note. to the end of the poor Church might learne to be content to be spoi|led of all outward comfort, and to leane vpon the staffe of the consolations of God onely. Many that were brought vp in the Schooles of Origen, suffered martyrdome, such as Plu|tarchus, Serenus, Heraclides, Heron, and another having the name of Serenus also.Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 4. Rhais a Martyr burnt before she was bap|tized. Euseb. ibid. Among women Rhais was burned with fire for Christs sake, before shee was baptized with wa|ter
in Christs name. Innumerable moe Martyrs were slaine for the faith of Christ, whose names in perticular no Ecclesi|asticall writer ever was able to comprehend, therefore it shal suffice to heare the names of a few. The rest whose names are not expressed, enioy the crownes of incorruptible glory, as well as those doe, whose names are in all mens mouthes. It is the comfort of our hearts to remember that the Apostles  Evangelists sealed vp with their blood the doctrine which they naught and committed to writ, and no other doctrine: and the holy Martyrs immediately after the Apostles dayes, sealed vp with the glorious testimony of their blood, that same faith which we now professe, and which they received from the hands of the Apostles, but they were not so prodi|gall of their liues to giue their blood for the doctrine of worshipping of Images, invocation of Saints, plurality of Mediators, of intercession, the sacrifice of the Masse, both propitiatory and vnbloody, expresly against the wordes of the Apost
le, Heb. 9. ver. 22. and such other heads of doctrine vnknowne to antiquity. The Romane Church in our dayes is a persecuting and not a persecuted Church, fruitfull in murthers, and not in martyrdomes, glorying of antiquity, and following the forgery of new invented religion.The death of Sevetus. This Emperour Severus was slaine at Yorke by the Northerne men and Scots.



Bassianus and Geta.
SEverus who was slaine at Yorke, left behinde him two sonnes, Bassianus and Geta. Bassianus flew his brother, and raigned himselfe alone six yeeres, so that the whole time of his government both with his brother and alone, was 7. yeeres 6. moneths.Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 21. Hee put to death also Papinianus a wor|thie Lawyer, because hee would not plead his cause concer|ning the slaughter of his brother, before the people, but said that sinne might be more easily committed then it could be defended.Note. Bucole. He tooke to wife his owne mother in law Iulia, a woman more beautifull then chaste. In all his time (as hee confessed with his owne mouth) hee never learned to doe good,The death of Bassinus. and was slaine by Macrinus.


Macrinus with his son Diadumenus.
MAcrinus and his sonne raigned onely one yeere. Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 21.


Antoninus Heliogabalus.
ANtoninus Heliogabalus,Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 21. Funct. chron. raigned after Macrinus 4. yeeres. He was a prodigious belly-god, a libidinous beast, an enemy to all honesty and good order. So many villanous things are written of him, that scarcely (if the Reader can giue credit to the history) ever such a monster was fashioned in the belly of a woman. At his remouing in his progresse, oft-times followed him 600. chariots laden only with bauds and common harlots. His gluttony, filchinesse, and exces|siue riotousnes,The death of Heliogabalus. are in all mens mouthes. He was slaine of the souldiers, drawne through the Citie, and cast into Tiber.



Alexander Severus.
Euseb. lib. 6. cap 28. Chrons. Funct.ALexander Severus the adopted sonne of Heliogabalus, raigned thirteene yeares. Hee delighted to haue about him wife and learned Counsellers, such as Fabius, Sabinus, Domitius, Vlpianus, c. This renowned Lawyer Vlpianus was not a friend to Christians,Vlpianus an enemy to Christians. but by collecting together a number of lawes made against Christians in times past, hee animated the hearts of Iudges against them. And this is a piece of the rebuke of Christ, that Christians haue borne continually to be hated of the wise men of the world.Hist Magdeb. cent. 3. Here|of it came to passe, that in this Emperours time, albeit hee was not so bloody as many others had beene before him, (and therefore his Empire was called , that is, vn|bloody) yet not a few suffered martyrdom even in the daies of Alexander, such as Agapetus, a young man of fifteene yeares old,The martyr|dome of Aga|petus. at Praeneste a towne of Italie: hee was assayed with many torments, and finally with the sword he was be|headed. The Iudge who gaue out sentence of death against him, fell out of his iudiciall seat, and suddenly dyed. The martyrdome of Cecilia, if by her trauells Valerian her espou|sed husband, and Tiburtius his brother, and 400. moe had beene converted to Christ, and secretly baptized by Vrbanus Bishop of Rome, immediatly before her death: I marvell that no mention should bee made by Eusebius of such a rare and miraculous worke. Senators and noble men at Rome, such as Pammachius, Simplicius, and Quiritius,Hist. Mag. cent. 3. with their wiues and children died for the faith of Christ, with many others. The favour that this Emperour shewed to Christi|ans, against whom the very stubbering cookes did contend, challenging vnto themselues the right of a place wherein Christians were accustomed to conveene for exercise of di|vine seruice, this favour, I say, seemeth to haue proceeded from the councell of Mammea his Christian mother, rather

then from the counsell of Vlpianus that renowned lawyer an hatefull aduersarie to Christians.Mammea the Emperors mo|ther is in|structed by Origen in the faith. But Mammea his mother hearing the report of the learning of Origen sent for him and by him was instructed in the groundes of Christian faith. The learned doctour who wrote the booke of the martyrs, very judiciously obserueth the iniquitie of this time, where|into no Christian Churches were erected,Note. when as yet (not|withstanding of the fauour of the Emperour at some times) no publicke house could quietly be obtained for the Chri|stians: so that by reason hereof may appeare the decretall epistle of Pope Hyginus concerning the dedication of Churches is forged and fained, because the raigne of Alex|ander is a long time posterior to the dayes of Hyginus (who liued vnder the raigne of Antoninus Pius) and in the raigne of A
lexander as yet there was great difficultie to obteine a place whereinto Christians might assemble together. The just deserued punishment of Turinus, whom the Emperour caused to bee fastened to a stake in the open market place,Turinus killed with smoke. Seuerus his death. and thereto be killed with smoke, the Herald standing by and crying to the people, Smoke he sold and with smoke hee is punished. This punishment I say declareth that this Empe|rour counted flatterers worthy of great punishment.Bucole. Index. chron. Alex|ander and his mother Mammea were both slaine by his owne souldiers.


Maximinus.
Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 28.AFter Alexander Seuerus Maximinus was Emperour and raigned 3. yeeres: A man of base parentage, of an huge stature, promoted to honours by Alexander, who nou|rished a serpent in his owne bosome (as the prouerbe spea|keth) when he aduanced Maximinus an ingrate foster to great dignities and honours. For by his meanes the armie killed Alexander, and his mother Mammea, and saluted him

and his sonne Emperours without aduise of the Romane Senate:Eucole, Index. chron. The 6. perse|cution. Ann. Christi. 237. Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 8. a man hated of all good men, beloued of euill men, more grieuous to the citizens of Rome then to their ene|mies, who for hatred of the house of Alexander (as Eusebius recordeth) raised vp the sixt persecution against Christians, specially against the teachers and leaders of the Church, thinking the sooner to vanquish the rest if the Captaines and guiders of them were made out of the way.
Origen wrote a booke de martyrie. Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 28.Origen at this time wrote a booke de martyrie, and dedi|cated it to Ambrosius and Protectetus, pastors of the Church of Caesarca: because these two vnder this persecution had susteined great afflictions, and constantly perseuered in the true faith. No persecution was more violent, no persecu|tion endured shorter time. In no persecution are the names of suffering martyrs so obscured and couered with silence, possibly because the booke of Origen de martyrio through injurie of time is not to be found, therefore some learned men doe referre the martyrdome of such as we haue spoken of in the dayes of Alexander to this time, or to the persecu|tion of Decius. I will not dispute of such doubtsome things. Three other things that are more necessarie to the edificati|on of the Church I will touch.1 The malice of Satan a|gainst true Pastors. First the malice of the deuill, who hateth the welfare of the sheepfold of Christ, and la|boureth either to spoyle it of true Pastors, or to send in among them poore sheepe hyrelings, and men not regarding the wellfare of the flock, but their own gaine: or else, if they haue true Pastors, to mooue the flocke to be disobedient to faithfull and vigilant Pastors. The stocke that can eschew all these three snares of the deuill, and all these three wofull calamities, so oft seasing vpon the poore sheepefolde, they are in good estate. Reade Chrysostome writing vpon the 13. chap. Heb. ver. 17.2 Another thing is worthie to be marked, that in three great persecutions, in the fift, sixt, and seuenth, Origen a man more renowmed in his life time then after his death, God vouchsafed vpon him two great honours, but not the third, whereof he was most of all desirous. He en|couraged his father Leonides,Not and his disciples, Plutarchus,

two Sreni, Heron and Heraclides patiently to suffer martyr|dome in the dayes of Seuerus. Next hee wrote a booke de martyrio in the daies of Maximinus the sixt persecuter,Origen got not the honor of martyr|dome. whereby doubtlesse many were incouraged patiently to suffer euill for Christs sake. What remaineth now but the third and principall honour of martyrdome it selfe, where|vnto he had a bent desire in the dayes of Decius the 7. per|secuter, but then he fainted, as shall be declared hereafter God willing? When we call to minde this weakenes of Origen,Note. let all the cogitations of our heartes stoope, and thinke that we are not meete for great things, but if the Lord call vs to suffer great things for his Names sake, the Lord perfite his strength in our infirmitie and weakenesse. Third|ly let vs marke the great difference that is betweene the vo|lume of the booke of holy canonicke and sacred Scripture, and all other bookes whatsoeuer. In Scripture the ouer|passing of matters of great importance and moment is not for ignorance, misknowledge or doubting of those things that are ouerslidden,difference betwixt holy scripture and other bookes. but for mysterie and representation of things more necessarie to be knowne: as namely when Moses a most accurat writer of the life, death, and genealogies, of ho|ly Patriarches: ouerpasseth the description of the genealogie, death,  beginning, of the life of Melchisedecke: this was done of purpose to bring in Melchssedeck, as a type and figure of the true king of peace Christ Iesus, as the Apostle declareth, Heb. 7. but among ecclesiasticall writers I finde a preterition of the names of these worthy Pastors who were martyred for the cause of Christ in the sixt persecution, and this ouerpassing with silence so weigh|tie a matter, is a secret confession of ignorance in this part of the historie, together with a doubting, whether Vrbanus the first, Valerianus, Tiburtius, Cecilia, and Martina suffered vnder Alexander, or vnder Maximinus, or vnder Decius. Yea Platina writeth it was the opinion of some men that Vrbanus 1. was martyred in the persecution of Dioclesian. I haue insisted at greater length in this purpose to the end that euery man may giue vnto sacred scripture that reue|rence

that is due vnto it, but other writings let vs reade them with judgement, for assuredly there is palpable weak|nes in them.The death of Maximinus and his sonne. Func, chron. In the ende this wicked persecuter Maximinus and his sonne were slaine by his owne souldiers at the siege of Aquileia.


Gordianus.
THe tyrannie of Maximinus enforced both the Senate of Rome and likewise their oppressed confederates in A|fricke to aduise by what meanes the distressed estate of the Commonweale might be supported. And first Gordianus a man of noble birth in Rome, and at that time Praconsul in Africke, with his sonne bearing the name of Gordianus with his father, these two were declared to be Emperours to resist the tyrannie of Maximinus, but they were both cut off by Capellianus, Captaine of the Mauritanians. Within a short time the senate of Rome chused Maximus Pupienus and Balbinus to be Emperours, and to resist the tyrannie of Maximinus. But this election displeased the people of Rome, therefore they were compelled to associat Gordianus a yong man of 13. yeeres olde in conjunct authoritie with them. This Gordianus was the nephew of him who was Proconsull in Africke: and the souldiers made out of the way, Max. Pupienus and Balbinus. So Gordianus raigned himselfe alone without associats sixe yeeres.Chron. unt.


Philippus.
PHilippus a man borne in Arabia and his sonne raigned fiue yeeres, Eusebius saith 7. yeeres. He was the first Emperour who became a Christian,Chron. Funt. cole. and was baptized by Fabianus B. of Rome. He was content to stand among the

number of the penitents who made confession of their sinnes,Euseb. lib. 6 cap. 34. for his life was reprooueable in somethings before his conuersion, especially in slaying of Gordianus an Empe|rour inclined to peace. Decius one of the Captaines of his armie conspired against him,Philippus his death. and slew him, and his sonne raigned in his stead.


Decius.
DEcius and his sonne obteined the Empire.Chron Fun. The 7 perse|cution. Ann. Ch. 250. 2. yeeres: Whether for hatred of Philip his master, whom he had slaine, or for detestation of Christians, or for couetous desire of the treasures of Philip left in the custodie of Fabian B. of Rome, or for some other cause, it is not certaine. Alwayes he mooued a terrible persecution against the Christians. The martyrs who suffered death in the time of this persecution were innumerable. Some few of the principall martyres I shall rehearse,Alexander and Babylas both died in prison. Alexander Bishop of Ierusalem died in prison at Caesarea. Babylas Bishop of Antiochia died likewise in pri|son. Fabian Bishop of Rome suffered martyrdome. Dionisius Alexandrinus by a wonderfull prouidence of God escaped the handes of persecuting enemies. Ciprian Bishop of Car|thage was banished and reserued to the honour of martyr|dome vntill the dayes of Valerian the eight persecuter.Origen at Ie|rusalem clo|seth the booke and weepeth. Origen who from his childhood was desirous of the honour of martyrdome, in this persecution of Decius he fainted, and his heart was so ouerset with feare to haue his chaste body defiled with an vgly Ethiopian, that he choosed rather to of|fer incense to the Idol, then to be so filthily abused. For this cause he was excommunicated by the Church of Alex|andria, and for very shame fled to Iudea, where he was not only gladly receiued, but also requested publickly to preach at Ierusalem. Neuerthelesse in stead of teaching he watred his face with teares, when he reade these words of scripture. To the wicked man saith God, What hast thou to doe to declare

mine ordinances, that thou shouldest take my couenant in thy mouth? Ps. 50. ver. 16. These words so deepely wounded his heart with griefe, that he closed the booke and fate downe and wept,Hist. Mag. cent. 3. cap. 10. and all the congregation wept with him. No pitie nor compassion was had neither of sexe or age. In this persecution,The teeth of the holy mar|tyr Apollo|nia. Apollonia, a virgine of good yeeres, after they had dashed her face with battons till all her teeth were stricken out of her jawes, they burned her quicke at the port of Alexandria. This is that holy martyr whose teeth the Romane Church in our dayes say that they haue them as holy monuments kept in the treasures of their reliques vn|till this time. But the tryall that was taken of late dayes by Henry the eight king of England, seeking for the teeth of Apollonia as a remedy of the toothach clearly prooueth that many teeth are supposed to be the t
eeth of Apollonia that were neuer fastened in her jaw bones.Chemnisius de|reli quiis. The death of Quinia, Ammonarion, Mercuria, Dionisia, clearely declareth what pitie was had of the weakenesses of women. Iulianus. an olde and gowtie man burned with fire testifieth what regard was had to the gray haires of ancient men.Note. Dioscorus a yong man not exceeding 15. yeeres of age, albeit they were ashamed to condemne him to death, yet he escaped not many painfull torments, and was a glorious Confessor with pa|tient expectation awaiting vntill the Lord should call him to the honour of martyrdome.The Martyr|dome of Ne|mesion. Nemesion was accused in Alexandria as a companion of brigants, and was punished with stripes and fire vnto the death with greater seueritie then any brigant, albeit his innocencie was sufficiently knowne. Ammon, Zenon, Ptolemeus, Ingenuus, Theophilus, warri
ours and knights standing by the tribunall seate becke|ned with their hands to a certaine weake Christian, who for feare was readie to incline and fall, that he should continue constant, and stepped to the bench, and professed themselues to be Christians. This dayly increasing cou|rage of Christians, who were emboldened by the multi|tude of sufferings, astonished  terrified the Iudges: Ischirion was slaine by his owne master.Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 41. The number of martyres

in Alexandria and Egypt, (of whom Dionysius in this Epistle written to Fabius Bishop of Antiochia maketh men|tion) clearely testifieth that if the names of all those who suffered martyrdome in the townes of Rome, Carthage, An|tiochia, Ephesus and Babilon, were particularly set downe, together with the names of others who suffered in other townes of Asia, Africke and Europe: subject to the domini|of the Roman Emperour, it were not possible in the vo|lume of a litle booke to comprehend them all. For mine owne part I presume not to doe it, but I reuerence the pain|full trauelles of learned men who haue dipped deepely into such a fruitfull subject, specially the writer of the booke of martyres. Onely I find somethings in this seuenth per|secution, which the principall purpose wherefore I haue collected this compend will not permit me to passe ouer with silence.The veritie hath no neede to be vnder|propped with lies. Note. Namely these: first, let no ma
n thinke that the veritie is weake, and hath neede to be strengthened by a lie, as Nicephorus is accustomed to doe. The seuen mar|tyres of Ephesus, whose names were Maximianus, Malchus, Martinianus, Dionysius, Ioannes, Serapion, and Constantinus, were lurking in a caue, the entrie whereof Decius comman|ded to be closed with great heapes of stones, to the end that the forenamed Christians might be killed with famine, which came to passe indeede: Yet famine could not sepa|rate these holy Martyres from Christ. But Nicephorus the father of many other fables also saith, that they fell on sleepe, which they continued till the time of Theodosius, that is, from the 250. vntill the 379. yeere of our Lord, and then they did awake out of their sleepe,Nicphorus. lib. 5. cap. 27. saith Nicephorus: But he who will giue hastie credite to Nicephorus fables, writing of the 7. martyres, who lurked in a caue of mount
Caelius and to Euagrius description of Barsanuphius an Egyptian monke, who enclosed himselfe in a cottage beside Gaza for the space of 50. yeares, and vsed no kinde of bodi|ly refreshment to sustaine his earthly tabernacle, he may be easily led to all kinde of errour.Note. The second thing worthy to be marked, is, that many persecuted preachers had wiues

and children, as the historie recordeth. Cheremon Bishop of a citie in Egypt called Nilus fled to the mountaines of Ara|bia, accompanied with his wife, and returned not againe to Egypt, neither was he seene of those who sought him in the wildernesse,Euseb lib. 6. cap. 42. Married Bi|shops. Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, who mira|culously escaped the crueltie of persecuters, maketh expresse mention of his children, Deo mihi vt migrarem praecipiente, vimque mirabiliter aperiente, ego  liberi,  multi fratres egressisumus; that is, after that God had commanded me to remooue, and had miraculously opened a passage vnto me,Euseb lib. 6. cap. 40. I and my children, and brethren went forth: If antiqui|tie be regarded, Bishops who doe marrie, are not Nicolatian Heretiques, but rather such as forbid to marrie teach a doctrine of deuils.1 Tim. 4.3. Note. Thirdly
 it is to be marked, that in time of this vehement persecution, many fainted and fell backe from the open profession of Christian faith.The rigour of Novatus. Others to prouide timous remedie against such defections, gaue out a rigorous sentence against such as had fallen of infirmitie, that they should not be receiued againe into the fellowship of the church. In this opinion was Nouatus, and his complices. And by their example we should learne to be|ware of such men as vnder pretence of zeale perturbe the vnitie of the Church, and inuent remedies to cure the mala|dies of the diseased Church, which are worse then the sick|nes it selfe, as the Novatians did: Weakenes at some time is to be pitied,Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 43. but deuilish rigour pitying no man, who fal|leth of infirmitie, is a lesson that hath no allowance in the booke of God.Gal 6.1. This cruell tyrant, after he had raigned two yeeres, made warre against the
 Scythians (some call them the Gothes) by whom hee was vanquished in battell, and fearing to be ouertaken, and to come vnder the tyrannie of barbarous people, he cast himselfe into a deepe pit, where he ended his life,Bucole Index. Chron. chron. Funct. and his body could not be found. The great desolations that were made in the world about this time by the plague of pestilence the Ethnickes imputed the cause of them to the Christians. But Cyprian, whose pen the Lord guided better, declared that the cause of all these calamities

was the worshipping of Idols, the contempt of Gods true seruice,Cypry. ad Deme|trianum. and the persecuting of innocent Christians.


Gallus and Volusian.
AFter Decius, Gallus and Volusian his sonne raigned two yeeres.Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 1. Hee walked in the footsteps of Decius. Hee was slaine by Emilian, who presumed to raigne, but he was so hastily made out of the way, that Eusebius and many o|ther Historians misknow his name in the Catalogue o Emperours.


Valerianus and Gallienus.
VAlerianus and Gallienus his sonne, raigned 15. yeeres. viz. Gallienus with his father in coniunct authoritie 7. yeeres, after his fathers captivity and death, hee raigned a|lone eight yeeres. In the first three or foure yeeres of the Empire of Valerian, hee was favourable and friendly to Christians, and great numbers of them were found in the Emperours Court: But afterward hee was seduced by an Egyptian Sorcerer, who hated Christians, because that by them he was hindred from practicing his magicall charms. So the eight persecution began vnder Valerian.The 8. Perse|cution. Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 10. Anno Chr. 259. The martyr|dome of Lau|rence. In this per|secution suffered three Bishops of Rome, Lucius, Stephanus, and Sixtus; and a Deacon, Laurence who was layd vpon an hot broyling iron, and patiently, endured the torment of fire. This is that Deacon who called the poore the treasure of the Church: for then is the Church rich, when it is rich in good workes, and feedeth, clotheth, and visiteth Christ in his hungry, naked, and diseased members. Dionysius Bi|shop of Alexandria, was banished to Cephro, a place in the wildernesse of Libya.Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 11. Priscus, Malbus, and Alexander were

devoured by beasts in Caesarea,Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 12. The martyr|dome of Cy|prian. Naz. in Ieudem Cypriani. Theosecnus B. of Caesarea, encourageth Marinus. Palestina. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage was beheaded. Marinus a Roman Captaine in Caesarea, was envied for the dignity and honour he was ad|vanced vnto, and hee was accused to bee a Christian, and consequently to bee vncapable of great preferments and dignities: he was encouraged by Theotecnus Bishop of Cae|sarea, patiently to suffer death for the cause of Christ, by ta|king him into a secret chamber and laying before him a drawne sword and the booke of the Gospell, and bidding him take his choice of one of these two which he liked best: Marinus liked better the booke of the Gospell then of the sword; and was martyred for the faith contained in that sa|cred booke of holy Scripture.Euseb. lib. 7.
cap. 15. Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 16. The miserable captivity of Valerian. Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 13. Bucol. Index. chron. Astyrius a noble Senatour, caryed the body of this holy Martyr Marinus vpon his own shoulders, and buried it hounourably. In the end the Lord delivered this persecuting Tyrant into the hand of Sapor, King of Persia, who not onely detained him in strait capti|vity, but also abused him most filthily, and made his bodie a footstoole, and trampled vpon his necke at such times as he was about to mount on horsebacke.
This fearfull captivity of Valerian had vnto it a notable testimony of the wrath of God against persecuters. For like as hee trampled vnder his feet the Church of Christ: so in like manner the Lord gaue his necke and backe to be tram|pled vpon by the feet of his enemies.Note. This example of Gods heavie indignation somewhat terrified Galienus his sonne, and he gaue out an edict, for the safe returning of such as were banished,Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 13. to their own dwelling places, and for staying the rage of persecution. Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, ha|ving liberty granted by the Emperors edict to returne from banishment, came back againe to Alexandria, wherein hee found such terrible desolation by famine and pestilence, that there remained not of men, women, and children so many aliue as there were wont to be of ancient hoare-headed men, walking vpon their streets: the Lord was so highly displeased with the vnthankfull world, that hee was deter|mined to consume them who had consumed his people.
The good carriage of Christians at this time is worthie to be marked,Christians full of pitty. who were full of charitie and loue, and visited the sicke, and did all offices of humanity to those who were diseased, or dead: whereas the Pagans by the contrary for|sooke their dearest friends, left them comfortlesse, and thrust out such as were halfe dead into the streets, and left them there vnburied, and to be eaten with dogs. This is written in the letter of Dionysius inserted in the history of Eusebius.Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 21.22. So great difference is betweene Christians trained vp in the schoole of Christ, and others, who haue not beene fed with the sincere milke of the Word. Christians in time of sicknesse were more dutifull to their enemies, then others were vnto their friends.
If any man would defend worshipping of images to bee an ancient custome in the Church,The history of Eusebius con|cerning the tvvo brasen images in Cae|sarea Philippi Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 18. by the two brasen ima|ges, which were set vp in Caesarea Philippi, for a memoriall of the miracle that Christ wrought in curing of the woman who had a bloody issue, this place of Eusebius will make nothing for him. For these images were not made for ado|ration, neither were they set vp in temples, nor worshipping places, but in the very street, before the doore of the wo|man who had beene cured. The places whereunto Christi|ans were gathered together for divine service, at this time are called in the mandate of the Emperour Gallienus, Caemiteria. In these places no man readeth that images were set vp.Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 13. Be|sides this, these images were graven or molten by the hands of Pagans, and not of Christians: and this fact was done by imitation of the Gentiles, , that is, accor|ding to the custome of the Gentiles; hee saith not , according to the custome of her owne kind|red, but , as is said. Yet may wee take warning by this place,Note. Similitude. to beware of the small beginnings of errour. I|mages haue beene like vnto a base borne fellow, who at the first can haue no credit to set his head into the Kings palace, but afterward hee getteth accesse into the outer court, and in the end, his credit daily increasing by degrees, he getteth favour to lie in the Kings bed-chamber: even so in the first

300. yeere of our Lord, images were not brought in, into places of holy conventions: afterward they were brought in, into Churches, but not worshipped, as the Epistle of Gregorius the first, written to Severus Bishop of Marsil, cleer|ly testifieth. But in the end adoration of images was in so frequent vse, as if it had beene the principall point of the worship of God.


Claudius and Quintilius.
Eusib. lib. 7. cap. 20.CLaudius, after Gallienus raigned two yeeres. And his brother Quintilius seuenteene dayes. Hee is not recko|ned by Eusebius in the roll of Emperours.


Aurelianus.
AFter Quintilius, Aurelianus possessed the crowne sixe yeeres.Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 30. The 9. Per|secution. Anno Chr. 278. In the beginning of his raigne hee was not a great disturber of Christians. Notwithstanding in continu|ance of time, his nature somewhat inclinable to severitie, was altered to plaine tyranny, which tyranny first hee shewed be|ginning with the murther of his owne sisters sonne, as wit|nesseth Eutropius. After that, hee proceedeth to moove the ninth persecution against Christians: albeit the mercifull working of God did soone overthrowe all the wicked pur|poses of the Emperour. For as the edict and proclamation should haue beene denounced, for the persecuting of Chri|stians,Note. the mighty hand of God from aboue did suddenly stop his purpose: cleerly declaring to all men, that there is no power to worke any violence against the servants of God,Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 30. Funct. chron. vnlesse his permission doe suffer them, and giue them leaue. Here I see that D. Iohn Fox, writer of the booke of Martyrs, taketh leaue of Vincentius Martyrologie. If others

had done the like, they had not heaped vp so many Martyrs in the dayes of Claudius Quintilius, and Aurelian as they haue done. For Eusebius had assuredly made mention of it, if the number had beene so great as Vincentius recordeth. Before the Emperours minde was altered and inclined to tyranny against Christians, hee assisted with his authority the Bishops convened at Antiochia, for the deposition and excommunication of the heretique Samosatenus,Aurelian vvith ciuill authority assisteth the Church a|gainst Samo|satenus. Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 3. and so the Emperours authority being interposed, this proud Heretike was compelled to stoope and to giue place, and with great ignominy was driven from the towne of Antiochia. In his place Domnus was elected to be Bishop of Antiochia, a man endued with good graces, the sonne of Demetrian, who im|mediatly before Samosatenus governed the Church of An|tiochia. And here againe it is to be marked, that the Bishops at this time (albeit it was a time of persecution) yet did they not abhorre from marriage:Note. for Demetrianus Bishop of An|tiochia, was a married man and had children, and Domnus his sonne, so that the prohibition of mariage to men in spi|rituall offices is not an ancient doctrine.


Annius Tacitus and Florianus.
AFter Aurelian was slaine betweene Bizans and Heraclea, the Imperiall chaire was vacant six moneths. The Se|nate of Rome elected Annius Tacitus to be Emperour. Hee continued but six moneths in his government. Eusebius o|verpasseth his name with silence,Funct. chron. as likewise the name of his brother Florianus, who aspired to the Imperiall dignity.



Aurelius Probus.
AVrelius Probus a gentle and peaceable Emperour, raig|ned six yeeres,Euseb. Func. chron. three moneths. Hee was envied by his Captaines and Souldiers, because hee appointed them to plant vineyards, and said there was no great need of souldi|ers,His death. Func. chron. Bucol. where no enemy was to be feared. He was slaine by his souldiers.


Carus, Carinus, Numerianus.
CArus with his two sonnes, Carinus and Numerianus raigned after Probus.Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 30. All these three continued not a|boue the space of three yeeres. And Numerianus was slaine by his owne father in law,Func. chron. called Aper. Carus was slaine by thunder: and Carinus was ouercome in battell, and slaine by Dioclesian,Bucol. Index. chron. whom the Romane army had declared to be Emperour, while Carinus was yet aliue.


Dioclesianus and Maximinianus.
LIke as Dioclesian overcame Carinus the sonne of Carus in battell, even so likewise hee slew Aper, the father in law of Numerianus,Func. chron. with his owne hands. Whether this was done for detestation of sinne, or for desire of government, it is vncertaine. Alwayes some affirme that his concubine Druas had sayd vnto him, that hee should kill a wilde Boare before hee should bee Emperour. And after the killing of Aper (which name by interpretation signifieth a wilde Boare) hee became Emperour. In the beginning of his

raigne hee chused for his colleague Maximianus surnamed Hercules, father to Maxentius. And these two chused other two, viz. Galerius and Constantius Chlorus, the father of Con|stantine, whom they called Caesars: but the honourable title of Augustus Dioclesian Maximian retained to themselues. These two Augusties raigned 20. yeeres. Constantius Chlorus Caesar continued fifteene: Galerius Caesar 21. yeeres. Diocle|sian and Maximianus Herculeus, abstained from persecuting of Christians vntill the nineteene yeere of their raigne. Be|fore I touch the History of the tenth persecution, three things are to be premitted. First, that after the persecution  of Valerian the eight Persecuter, the Church enioyed great peace, which albeit it was like to bee cut off by the altered minde of Aurelian, yet the wise dispensation of the wisdome of God, provided that all his cruell enterprises were disap|pointed.Psal. 129.4. The righteous Lord cutted the cords of the wicked. Secondly, Christians were in great favour and credit with  Emperours, and to them was committed the gouernment of Provinces and Nations, as cleerly appeared in the prefer|ment of Dorotheus and Gorgonius. Thirdly, they had liber|tie to build Oratories and Temples, large and ample in e|very  Citie.Temples were built by Chri|stians after the death of Vale|rian. Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 1.
All this came to passe in the forty yeeres peace, that inter|vened betweene the raigne of Valerian, and the nineteenth yeere of the raigne of Dioclesian. Yet the Church of Christ in this short time began to be festred with the corrupt manners of carnall and fleshly people, so that contentions abounded, but charity waxed cold in the Church of God. What wonder was it then that the Lord permitted this tenth and most horrible persecution of Dioclesian to stirre and to waken drowsie Christians, who were beginning to be fa|shioned according to the likenesse of the world?
In the nineteenth yeere of his Imperiall authority, and in the moneth of March,The 10. Per|secution. Anno Ch. 308. this horrible persecution began to arise: Dioclesian in the East, and Maximianus in the West, bending all their forces to roote out the profession of Chri|stians, out of the world, Dioclesian was pufft vp in pride for

his manifold victories and triumphes, and would bee coun|ted a God, and adorned his shooes with gold and precious stones, and commanded the people to kisse his feete. This Persecution continued ten yeeres, even vntill the seventh yeere of the raigne of Constantine the great. So that what|soever cruelty was practised by Maximinianus, Maximinus, Maxentius, and Licinius, all goeth vnder the name of Dio|clesian, the author of this tenth persecution. Cruell edicts and proclamations were set forth in the beginning of this persecution, co~manding to overthrow  cast to the ground the Temples of Christians, to burne the bookes of holy Scripture, to displace all such as were magistrates and were in office, and to cast Christian Bishops into prison, and to compell them with sundry kinds of punishments, to offer vnto Idols. Also common people, who would not re|nounce the profession of Christianity to be spoyled of their liberty.Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 3. The great cru|elty vsed in this 10. perse|cution.
These edicts were hastily put in execution. Many Chri|stians were scourged, racked, and cruciated with intolerable torments. Some were violently drawne to impure sacrifice, and as though they had sacrificed, when indeede they did not, were let goe: some were downe vpon the ground, and drawne by the legges a great space, and the people was made to beleeue that they had sacrificed: some stoutly withstood them, and denyed with a lowd voyce, that they had not bin, or ever would be partakers of Idolatry. Notwithstanding, of the weake sort, many for feare and infirmity gaue over even at the first assault. When the foresaid edicts were pro|claimed,Iohn a noble man borne, rent in peeces, the Emperors Proclamation. Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 5. both the Emperours happened to be in the towne of Nicomedia: notwithstanding a certaine Christian being a noble man borne, whose name was Iohn, ranne and tooke downe the proclamation, and openly tare and rent it peeces. For which fact he was put to a most bitter death, which hee patiently endured vntill his last gaspe. The generall Cap|taine of the army of Dioclesian, gaue choyce to the souldiers, whether they would obey the Emperours commandement in offering sacrifices, and keeps still their offices, or else lay

away their armour, and be depriued of their offices: but the Christian souldiers were not onely content to lay away their armour, bu also to offer themselues vnto the death, rather then to obey such vnlawfull commandements.
In Nicomedia the Emperour refraind not from the slaugh|ter and death of the children of Emperours,Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 4. neither yet from the slaughter of the chiefest princes of his court, such as Peter,Note. whose body, being beaten with whips and torne that a man might see the bare bones, and after they had mingled vineger and salt, they powred it vpon the most tender partes of his body, and lastly rosted him at a soft fire as a man would rost flesh to eare, and so this victorious martyr ended his life. Dorotheus and Gorgonius being in great authoritie and office vnder the Emperour after diuerse torments were strangled with an halter.The martyr|dome of Pter Doorbeus and Gorgonius. Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 6. The torments that Peter suffered, encouraged them to giue a worthy confession that they were of that same faith and religion that Peter was of. This persecution raged most vehemently in Nicomedia, where the Emperours palace through some occasion being set on fire, the Christians were blamed as authors of that fact: Therefore so many as could be found out, were burned with fire, or drowned in water, or beheaded with the sword, amongst whom was Anthimus Bishop of Antiochia, who was beheaded. The bodies of the sonnes of Emperours that were buried, they digged out of their graues, and sent them in boates to bee buried in the bottome of the sea, lest Christians should haue worshipped them as gods, if their sepulchres had beene knowne, such opinion they had of Christians.Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 6. The number of twentie thousand burned in one temple of Nicomedia by Maximinus smelleth of the libertie that Nicephorus taketh in adding many things to the veritie of the historie. The martyrdome of Serena the Emperour Dioclesians wife is rejected by learned men as a fable, albeit recorded by Hermannus Gigas. The number of Christians cast into prison and appointed for death was so great, that scarcely a voide place could be found in a prison to thrust in a murtherer, or an opener of graues, such

heapes of Christians were inclosed in darke prisons.Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 6. The martyrs of Palestina, of Tyrus in Phenicia, of Tarsus, of Antiochia, of Alexandria, of Miletina in Armenia, and of Pontus, Cappadocia and Arabia, they could not easily bee numbred.Horrible cru|eltie against Christian wo|mn. In Thebaida, horrible and vnnaturall crueltie was vsed against christian women, whom they hanged vpon gibbets with their heades down-ward toward the ground, and fastened one of their legges onely to the gibbet, the other being free: thus their naked bodies hanging vpon trees in maner aforesaid,Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 9. presenced to the beholders a specta|cle of most vile and horrible inhumanitie. In like maner the branches of trees were artificially bowed downe to the earth, and the feete and legges of Christians tied to them, so that by their hastie returning againe vnto their naturall places the bodies of Christians were rent in pieces. This was not a crueltie finished in a short space of time, but of long continuance, some dayes 20. some dayes 60. and at sometimes an hundred were with sundrie kindes of tor|ments excruciated vnto the death. And these torments they suffered with joy and gladnesse, and singing of Psalmes vntill the last breath.Euseb ibid. A towne in Phrygiaset on fire, and all the inhabitants burnt with fire. Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 11. In Phrygia a towne was set on fire by the Emperours commandement (the name whereof Eusebius passeth ouer with silence) and the whole inha|bitants being Christians, men, women, and children, were burned with fire. Tirannion Bishop of Tyrus, Zenobius Presoyter of Sidon, Siluanu's Bishop of Gaza, and Pamphi|lus a worthy Presbyter in Caesarea, whose life and death Eusebius hath described in a seuerall treatise,Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 13. all these (I say) were crowned with martyrdome. Maximinus Emperour of the West, whose persecution Eusebius describeth not at such length as tho persecution of Dioclesian in the East,Mauritius with a whole legion of Christian souldiers martyred. Hist. Mag. cent. 4. hee was like vnto a wilde Boare trampling vnder his feete the vine-yarde of God. He slew Maximinus a noble Cap|taine with a legion of Christian and Thebane souldiers, because they would not consent to offer sacrifice vnto idoles. This was done beside the riuer of Rhonne. The martyres of France, Italy and Germanie, specially at

Colen and Triers, where the blood of Christians was shed in such abundance, that it ranne like small brookes, and it coloured great and mightie riuers. the multitude (I say) of these holy martyrs, and the diuersitie of torments dayly excogitated against them, what memorie is able to comprehend, or what tongue is able sufficient|ly to expresse? In the ende, when these two Emperours were drunken with the blood of the Saints of God, and saw that the numbers of Christians daily increased, they beganne to relent their furie and madnesse a little, beeing at last content that the punishment of Christians should be the thrusting out of their right eyes, and the mai|ming of their left legges with condemning them to the mines of Mettalles.Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 12. Pro. 12. vers. 10 The mercies of the wicked are cruell, saith Salomon. Before two yeeres were fully compleate af|ter the beginning of this tenth persecution, these two fu|rious persecuters (for what cause God knoweth) gaue ouer their imperiall function, and remained not Emperours any more, but as priuate persons, Dioclesian after hee had denuded himselfe of the imperiall dignitie,Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 13. Diocletian and Maximian giue ouer their imperiall function Bucol. liued almost 9. yeeres. Maximian within foure yeeres after, was slaine by the commandement of Constantine. The imperiall do|minion then remained with Constantius Chlorus and Ga|lerius Maximinus. these two diuided the whole monar|chie betweene them. Constantius contented himselfe with France, Spaine and Brittaine: Galerius Maximinus had the rest. Constantius tooke Constantinus his sonne to bee Caesar vnder him, and Galerius Maximinus chused his two sonnes, Maximinus and Sonerus to be Caesars vnder him. The Romane souldiers also set vp Maxentius the son of Maximianus Herculeus to be their Emperour: against whom Galerius sent his sonne Seuerus, who being slaine, he chu|sed Licinius in his stoad. Of these fiue, who raigned at one time (the like whereof came not to passe at any time be|fore) two Emperours and three Caesars, three of them viz. Galerius and Maximinus his sonne, and Licinius prosecuted the persecution, begun by Dioclesian, neere the space of 7.

or 8.Note. yeares, which was to the yeere of our Lord 318. The other two, Constantius and his sonne Constantine were fa|uourable to Christians.


Constantius and Galerius Maximinus.
COnstantius Chlorus raigned as Emperour 13. yeeres. Others say 16. some say 11. yeeres. He ended his life in peace at Yorke.Hist. Magd. Constantius tried his Cap|taines whether they were Christians, or not. Hee was not onely friendly to Christians, but also hee counted them the onely faithfull subjects to Emperours. And such, as he perceiued that for loue of honour, gaine, or any worldly commoditie would make shipwracke of a good conscience and sacrifice to idoles (albeit they had allowance by his owne fained commandement, giuen out for exploration of the religion of his Captaines and souldiers, rather then seriouslly and from his heart, allowing the worshipping of idoles) these (I say) who made no conscience to worship idoles for con|quessing fauour at the Emperours hands, he disauthori|zed them,Euseb. lib. 2. de vita Constantius lib. 1. remoued them from offices and counted them men who were false to God, and would neuer be true to him.
Maximinus elder and yonger in the East part of the world were cruell persecuters. Because ecclesiasticall writers doe not clearely distinguish the crueltie of the father from the crueltie of the sonne, I shall comprise all vnder the name of Galerius Maximinus the father of the other Maximinus.A comparison betwixt Maxi|minus and Pharaoh. He was not vnlike vnto Pharaoh, for when the correcting hand of God was vpon him, then he relented his furie: but when the plague ceased, he returned againe to his wonted malice. First God smote him with a wonder|ful vncouth disease, so that his flesh began to putrifie and innumerable multitude of vermine swarmed out of his inward parts, then hee commanded that the persecution should cease, and that Christians should pray for him,

and hee published edicts of peace in their fauours through|out all his dominions. But scarce continued hee in this good resolution 6. months, when as he sent out contrarie edicts, and caused them to be engraued in brasse (which thing was not done at any time before) and to be set vp in euery Citie,Euseb. lib. 9. cap. 7. whereupon ensued a grieuous persecuti|on of Siluanus Bishop of Emisa. Lucianus Bishop of Antio|chia, who suffered martyrdome at Nicomedia after he had giuen in his apologie to the Emperour, and Peter Bishop of Alexandria.Euseb. lib. 9. cap. 6. The martyrdome of king Antheas and 37. thousand moe martyrs with him I passe by as a thing vncertaine: because Eusebius could not haue ouerpassed with silence such a rare and wonderfull crueltie commit|ted in his owne time, if it had beene of veritie done, as some alledge. Other thirtie thousand are said to haue beene martyred in sundrie places, and this is very probable, because the martyrs who suffered in this tenth persecution were innumerable. Quirinus Bishop of Sce|scania a towne of vpper Pannonia was throwne into the flood hauing an hand-mill hanged about his necke,Quirinus his death. and so was drowned. I leaue a recitall of the names of all the rest of the martyrs, of whom I reade to haue suffered martyr|dome at this time, like as I haue done in all the prece|ding persecutions.
Now to speake somewhat of the cruell edict of this Em|perour ingraued in brasse,Edicts against Christians in|graued in Brasse. and hanged vp in all principall cities, specially in Tyrus. In it he gloried, that peace, wealth, prosperitie and plentie of all good things were in his time: and he attributed the glory of all this aboundance to the deuote worshipping of the heathen gods. At this time (saith Eusebius) was that fulfilled which the Lord Iesus fortold that the tribulation of those dayes should be so great, that except those dayes had beene shortened,Mat. 24, 22, 24. no flesh could haue beene saued: but for the Electes sake those dayes should be shorte|ned: yea and if it were possible the very Elect should be deceiued. But the Lord pitying the infirmitie of his Saints and to stop the blasphemous mouthes of heathen people,

turned suddenly all their joy into mourning and lamenta|tion,A sudden change of the prosperitie of Pagans into aduersitie. with famine, pestilence, warfare, and vncouth diseases, whereby the eyes of men and women were blinded, by which the Lord tamed the insolent pride of this bloody Tyrant. It is to be noted that in time of this publicke ca|lamitie, Christians and no others but they onely, were found to be fraughted with loue and full of charitie euen toward their hatefull enemies.Euseb. lib. 9. cap. 8. The second time where|into Maximinus seemed to change his minde toward Chri|stians was after the victorie obtained by Constantine and Licinius against Maxentius. The said two Emperours set foorth edictes in fauour of the Christians: and Maximi|nus rather fearing Constantine then louing God, began in his bounds also to stay the rage of cruell persecution, as the letter written to his Deputie Sabinus clearely decla|reth. But after a small time he altered his minde and set foorth new commandements to persecute Christians.Eusb. lib. 9. cap. 9. Maximinus was ouercome in battel by Licinius. Yet the Lord pitying the grieuous afflictions of his persecu|ted Church, brought this Tyrant to an ende. For hee made warre against Licinius being counselled thereto by his sorcerers and charmers, who promised vnto him good successe in his battell against Licinius: but the contrarie fell out: for hee was discomfited, and cast off his imperiall ornaments,  fledde feeble and naked, and mixing himselfe with the effeminat multitude, wandering through townes, and lurking in villages, hardly escaped the hands of his enemies. After this he killed and put to death those en|chanters and deceiuers who had bewitched him all his dayes, and had put him in esperance of victorie in his battell foughten against Licinius, and shortly after oppres|sed with a certaine disease, glorified the God of the Christians, and made a most absolute law for the safetie and preseruation of them. And so the Tyrant of Tyrants by the vehemencie of his sicknesse ended his life.Euseb. lib 9. cap. 10.
After wee haue spoken a litle of Maxentius who was chosen Emperour by the Praetorian souldiers, resteth no|thing but to conclude this short summe of the historie

of the ten persecutions with the ende and death of that no|table hypocrite, Licinius. Maxentius was so villanous in his behauiour, that hee abstined not from abusing of the wiues of noble senatours, whom he caught violently from their husbands, and contumeliously abused them, and sent them backe againe.Euseb. lib 8. cap. 14. The like villanie also hee intended to haue done to a certaine Christian gentlewoman at Rome, called Sophronia,Sophronia chused rather to kill her selfe then to be abused by Maxentus. whose husband neither could nor durst make resistance to the vile appetite of the proud Empe|rour, but this noble woman desiring libertie to goe to her chamber to adorne and decke her selfe a short while, and after shee would goe with the messengers to the Empe|rour, shee chused rather to put her selfe to death in her chamber then to be abused by him.Euseb. lib. 8. cap. 15. Which lamentable fact being reported to him, he was nothing moued there|with, neither abstained he any white from his wonted sinnes. The people of Rome being wearie of his villanie sent to Constantine for aide, who gathered an armie in France and Brittaine to represse this Tyrant: to whom when hee approched he feared Maxentius charmes (where|with hee was supposed to haue vanquished Seuerus, whom Galerius Maximinus had sent against him before) and stood in doubt what to doe:Constantine seeth the simi|litude of a bright crosse in heauen, Euseb lib. 1, de vita Con|stantini, Maxentius ouercome in battell by Con|stantine is drowned. and as hee was doubting hee cast his eyes often to heauen, and sawe about the going downe of the sunne a brightnesse in the heauen in the similitude of a Crosse, with certaine starres of equall bignesse gi|uing this inscription like Latin letters, In hoc vince, that is in this ouercome. After this vision his banner was made in the similitude of a Crosse, and caried before him in his warres. Maxentius was compelled to issue out of the towne against Constantine, whose force when hee was not able to sustaine, hee fled, and retired in hope to get the citie, but was ouerthrowne off his horse about the bridge called Pons Miluius and drowned in the flood.
Dioclesian hearing tell of the prosperous successe of Con|stantine,The death of Dioclesian. and what edicts he had set foorth for the peace of Christians, for very griefe hee died. Others alledge that

he poysoned himselfe. Ann. 317.
Licinius was made Caesar by Maximinus, as is said. Hee was very familiar with Constantine and was his colleg in the gouernement 7. yeeres, and married Constantina the sister of Constantine.Euseb. lib. 10. cap. 8. Likewise hee concurred with him to sub|due the tyrant Maxentius. Also he ouercame Maximi|nus in battell. He purposed likewise to haue circumucened and slaine the good Emperour Constantine to whom hee was many wayes greatly addebted, but the Lord disap|pointed his counsells, and preserued Constantine to the great benefit and good of his Church. But Licinius failing of his purpose conuerted his rage against the Christians, notwithstanding he had set out edicts before to procure their peace. Hee pretended this quarrell against them, that they prayed for the welfare of Constantine and not for his welfare.Euseb. lib. 2. de vita Constantini Three cruell edicts of Li|cinius against Christians. He set foorth against the Christians three cruell edicts. 1. Inhibiting assemblies and conuentions of Bi|shops to consult in matters belonging to their religion. 2. He discharged women to resort to the assemblies where men were to pray or to be instructed in matters to reli|gion. 3. Hee commanded that no man should visit im|prisoned Christians or succour them with any reliefe, threatning against those who would disobey such punish|ment as the imprisoned persons were to suffer. After these edicts the mountaines, woods and wildernesses began to be the habitation of the Lords saints. The Bishops about Libya and Egypt were taken, cut in pieces, and their flesh cast into the sea to be meat for the fishes. And this was done by the flatterers of Licinius, supposing to gratifie him by the cruell handling of the Lords seruants. In his time were put to death these 40.Fortie mar|tyrs tormen|ted first with cold and next with heats. martyrs of whom Basilius writeth, who were set in a pond of water all night lying open to the blasts of cold Northen winds, and in the mor|ning they being frozen and almost senslesse with the ex|tremitie of the cold, yet were caried vpon carts to be bur|ned with fire, to the ende their poore carkeses might feele by experience whether the extremitie of cold or heate were

the greater torment. Of these 40. noble souldiers of Christ, one being stronger then the rest, endured the vehemency of the cold better, to whom his mother came, not to desire him to embrace this present life by a filthy denyall of Christ, nor to weepe for the paines of the tormented body of her sonne, but rather to exhort her sonne to persevere constantly in the faith of Christ, to the end: for shee craved licence to lift vp her sonne with her owne hands into the cart, admonishing him to accomplish that happy iourney he had begun. But whether these were the 40. Martyrs who suffered the like punishment in Sebastia,Soom. l. 9.6.2. Basil. Magn. in 40. Martyrs. a towne of Armenia, or not, is not certaine, in respect that some circumstances set downe by Basil, doe agree to those of Sebastia.
Likewise in this persecution suffered Barlan a noble man mentioned in a Sermon of Basilius, who after many tor|ments was in the end layd vpon the altar, whereupon they vsed to offer sacrifice to Idols, and while there was some strength in his hand,The martyr|dom of Barlan. they put frankencense into his right hand, thinking that hee would haue scattered the incense vpon the altar, and sacrificed, but hee endured the torment patiently, saying the words of the Psalme, Blessed be the Lord who teacheth mine hands to fight.Psal. 145. In the end Licinius made warre against Constantine, and being diverse times ouercome both by sea and land,The death of Licinius. hee yeelded himselfe at length, and was sent to Thessalia to liue a private life, where hee was slaine by the souldiers. So Constantine obtained the whole Empire alone.
Here end the ten Persecutions.




CENTVRIE IV.

Constantine.
_THE Church of Christ flourished in time of the ten Persecutions,Similitude. as a Palme tree groweth vnder the burthen, and spreads out her branches by increasing growth toward heaven. Satan on the other part, that piercing and crooked Serpent,Esa. 27.1. who striues against the militant Church of God, both by might and slight: when his might faileth, it is time to try his slight: which he did by the canker-worme of hereticall doctrine. Now therefore, let vs entreate of the Arrian and Eutychian Persecutors, in the three subsequent Centuries. Other Heretiques, albeit they were fierce and cruell, such as the Donatists, yet their crueltie was like vnto the stighling of a fish,Similitude. when the water is ebbed, and shee is not covered with the deepenesse of over-flowing water: the more stirre she maketh, the nearer shee is vnto her death. But the Arrian and Eutychian Heretiques found Empe|rours favourably inclined to the maintenance of their er|rors, such as Constantius and Valens, protectors of the Arrian heresie, Anastatius and Heraclius, favourers of the heresie of Eutyches. This support they had of supreame powers, strengthened the arme of Heretiques, and made them able to persecute the true Church of Christ.
Notwithstanding, betwixt the ten great Persecutions, and the Arrian persecution, a short breathing time was granted by God vnto his Church, who will not suffer the rodde of the wicked perpetually to lie vpo~ the righteous, lest they put out their hand vnto inquity. The dayes of the raigne of Con|stantine, were the breathing daies of the persecuted Church:

Men banished for the cause of Christ, by the Emperours edicts were returned from their banishment, restored to their offices, dignities, and possessions, which duely belonged vn|to them. The heritage and goods of such as had suffered death for the cause of Christ, were allotted to their neerest kinsmen, and in case none of these were found aliue, then their goods were ordained to appertaine vnto the Church. These beginnings of an admirable change of the estate of persecuted men,Euseb. de vita Const. lib. wrought in the hearts of all people a won|derfull astonishment, considering within themselues what could bee the event of such sudden and vnexpected alte|ration.
The care that Constantine had to disburthen persecuted Christians of that heauy yoke of persecution, that pressed them downe so long, was not onely extended to the bounds of the Romane Empire, wherein Constantine was sove|raigne Lord, and absolute Commander: But he was care|full also to procure the peace of Christians, who lived vnder Sapores King of Persia,Sozon. lib. 2. cap. 14. who vexed Christian people with sore and grievous persecution: so that within his Domini|ons, more then sixteene thousand were found, who had concluded their liues by martyrdome. Among whom Si|meon Bishop of Selentia,Idem lib. 2. cap. 8 9.10.  13. and Vstazares the Kings eldest Eu|nuch, and his nurs-father in time of his minority, Pusices, ruler of all the Kings Artificers, Azades the Kings beloved Eunuch, and Acepcimas, a Bishop in Persia: all these were men of Note, and Marke, who suffered martyrdome vnder Sapores, King of Persia.
While the cogitations of Constantine were exercised with meditation,Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 15. by what meanes the distressed estate of Christi|ans in Persia might be supported: by the providence of God, the Ambassadours of Sapores, King of Persia, came to the Emperor Constantine: whose petitions when he had gran|ted, hee sent them backe againe to their Lord and Master: and hee sent with them a Letter of his owne, intreating Sa|pores to bee friendly to Christians, in whose Religion no|thing can be found, that can iustly bee blamed. His letter

also bare the bad fortune of the Emperor Valerian the eight persecuter of Christians and how miserably hee ended his life: and on the other part, what good successe the Lord had given vnto himselfe in all his battels, because hee was a defender of Christians, and a procurer of their peace. What peace was procured to distressed Christians in Persia by this letter of Constantine, the history beares not: alwayes his en|devour was honest and godly.
In Constantines dayes the Gospell was propagated in East India,Ruffin. l. 1. c 9. Theod. l. 1 c. 22. Sozom. l. 2. c. 24 Ruff. l. 1. c. 10. Socrat. l. 1. c. 20 Theod l. 1. 23. Sozom. l 2. c. 6. by Frumentius and Edesius, the brother sonnes of Meropius, a man of Tyrus. This History is written at length by Ruffinus, Theodoretus, Sozomenus, and many others. Like|wise it was propagated in Iberia, a country lying in the vt|termost part of the Euxine Sea, by the meanes of a captiue Christian woman, by whose supplications, first a childe, deadly diseased, recovered health, and afterward the Queen of Iberia her selfe was relieved from a dangerous disease, by her prayers made to Christ. The King of Iberia sent Am|bassadours to Constantine, craving of him, that hee would send Preachers and Doctors to the countrey of Iberia, who might instruct them in the true faith of Christ. Which desire also Constantine performed with great gladnesse of heart.
Now to returne and to speake of the Dominions subiect to the Romane Empire,Euseb. de vita Constant. lib. 4. Constantine the sonne of Constantius Chlorus, began to raigne in the yeare of our Lord 310. and hee raigned 31. yeares: hee gaue commandement to re|edifie the Temples of the Christians, that were demolished in the time of the persecution of Dioclesian. This comman|mandement was obeyed with expedition, and many more large and ample Churches were builded, meet for the con|ventions of Christian people. Likewise, the temples of Idols were locked vp: better they had beene demolished, and e|qualled to the ground: then had it beene a worke of grea|ter difficulty to Iulian the Apostate,Theod. l. 5. c. 20. Socrat. l. 1. c. 1. Idem l. 3. c. 11.  l. 3. c. 18. to haue restored againe Heathen Idolatry. Many horrible abuses, both in Religion and manners, were reformed by the authority and comman|dement

of the Emperour, such as cubitus mensuralis, called , in Egypt, whereunto was attributed the vertue and cause of the inundation of Nilus,Ruff. l. 2. c. 3. by the Egyptians: there|fore by the Emperors commandement this  was trans|ported out of their Temples. In Rome the bloody spectacle of Gladiatores,Socrat. l. 1. c. 18 that is, of Fencing men, with swords killing one another in sight of the people, was discharged. In He|liopolis, a towne of Phoenicia, the filthy manners of young women, accustomed without controulment, to prostitute themselues o the lust of strangers, vntill they were maried: this filthy custom (I say) by the commandement of the Em|perour Constantine, was interdicted and forbidden. In Iu|dea, the Altar builded vnder the Oke of Mambre,Sozm. l. 1. c. 8. where the Angels appeared to Abraham, and whereupon the Pagans offered sacrifice in time of solemne Faires,Gen 18. for buying and selling of Merchant wares in that place: This Altar (I say) was commanded to~ be demolished,Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 4. and a Temple to be buil|ded in the same place, for exercise of divine service.
The care this good Emperour had, to quench the schisme that began in Alexandria, shall bee declared in its due time, God willing. In some things Constantine was not vnlike to King Salomon, who finding his Kingdome to be peaceably settled, hee gaue himselfe to the building of the Temple, of Palaces, and of Townes, which hee fortified and made strong. Even so Constantine finding that no enemie durst enterprise any longer to molest the peaceable estate of his settled Kingdome,Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 2. hee builded magnifique Temples in Bethlehem, the place of the Lords Nativity, vpon Mount Olivet, from whence Christ ascended to Heaven, vpon Mount Calvarie, where Christs Sepurchre was. Hee buil|ded also a Citie in Bithinia,Socrat. l. 1. c. 18 and called it Helenopolis, for honour of his mother Helena, and another in Pale|stina, and called it Constantia, by the name of his Si|ster. Also hee builded a glorious Temple in Antiochia, which his sonne Constantius perfected, and to the dedi|cation of that Temple a number of Bishoppes were as|sembled. And finally, hee builded the great Citie of Con|stantinople

in Thracia, and called it Nova Roma, whereas before it was called Byzantium.Socrat. l 5. c. 8 Socrat. l 1. c. 6 Func. chron. This towne was builded Anno 336.
In the end the good Emperour intended to haue made warre against the Persians, and by the way hee was purposed to haue beene baptised in Iordan, where our Saviour Christ was baptised by Iohn:Iohn 3. but the Lord had disposed otherwise: for the good Emperor fell sicke at Nicomedia, and was bap|tised in the suburbs of that principall towne of Bithynia, not in Rome, nor by Silvester: but in Nicomedia, and by Euse|bius. How this Eusebius coozned the Emperour, and obscu|red the wicked purpose of his hereticall heart from him,Euseb. de vira Const. lib. 4 and continued in good favour and credit with the Emperour, e|ven to the last period of his life, so that hee had the honour to baptise the good Emperour, will bee declared hereafter. In his testamentall legacy, hee left his Dominions to his sonnes, ended his life happily, and was buried in Con|stantinople.


Constantius, Constans, and younger Constantius.
COnstantius governed the East parts of the Romane Em|pire, and he raigned 25. yeeres. The other two brethren governed the West parts. Constantine the younger was slain at Aquileia, after hee had raigned with his brethren three yeers.Ruff. l. 1. c. 18 Socrat. l. 2. c. 46 Idem l. 2. c. 5 Soc. l. 2. c. 32 The Emperour Constans raigned 13. yeeres, and was slaine in France, by the Tyrant Magnentius: so after the death of Constance, the whole government of the Empire turned into the hands of Constantius. He overcame Mag|nentius in battell, who fled to Lions, and slew his mother, his owne brother, and himselfe: And so the Tyrant Magnen|tius brought himselfe and his kindred to a miserable end. Constantius was infected with the heresie of Arrius, by the

meanes of an Arrian Priest, who had beene in Court with Constantia, the sister of the Emperour Constantine, and relict of Licinius.Ruff. l. 1. c. 11 When shee was bound to bed, by infirmity and sicknesse, where of she died: She recommended this Arrian presbyter to Constantine her brother, whereby it came to passe,Theod. l. 2. c. 3 that he had favour and credit in the Emperours court. Hee procured the returning of Arrius from banishment, and was the first reporter to Constantius of his fathers testa|mentall legacie. And finally, he perverted Constantius from the true faith, which his father had professed. So pernici|ous a thing is it to haue deceitfull Heretiques lurking in the courts of Princes.
During the life-time of his brother Constans, Arrianisme had no great vpper hand, because Constans Emperour of the West protected Paulus Bishop of Constantinople,  Atha|nasius Bishop of Alexandria, and the rest of the Bishoppes whom the Arrians had most vniustly accused, deposed, and persecuted. But after the slaughter of Constans, the Arrians were encouraged by the inconstancy of the Emperour,Theod. l. 2. c. 3 whose flexible and instable minde, like vnto a reede shaken with the winde, was inclined to follow the course, that the fore-mentioned Priest put in his head. This Priest informed the Emperour Constantius, that the word , that is, Consubstantiall, was not found in holy Scripture, and that the inserting of this word in the forme of faith set downe by the Nicene Councell, was the occasion of many debates and contentions in the Church of God: and that the retur|ning of Athanasius from banishment,Theod. ibid. was the ground of a terrible tempest, whereby not onely the estate of Egypt was shaken, but also the estate of Palestina and Phoenicia, and o|ther places not farre distant from Egypt. Moreover, he ad|ded, Athanasius had beene the author of mtestine dissention betwixt the Emperour Constantius and his brother Constans, so that  wrote menacing letters to his brother, ei|ther to repossesse Paulus and Athanasius into their places a|gain or else if he lingred in so doing (since their innocency was cleered in the Councell of Sardica) he threatned to lead

an army to the East, and to see them repossessed in their own roomes againe. The Emperour Constantius was easily inci|ted to wrath against Athanasius, and he sent Sebastianus, one of his Captaines,Theod. l. 2. c. 13 accompanied with 5000. armed men, to slay Athanasius: but the Lord delivered him miraculously out of their hands, when there seemed to bee no way of es|caping, because armed souldiers were planted round about the Temple: yet he went safely through the midst of them, and was not discerned, albeit many Arrians were present of purpose to designe and point him out by the finger, as a sheepe ordained for the slaughter.
Georgius, an Arrian Bishop, was seated in Alexandria, in the place of Athanasius, a wolfe in the chaire of a true Pa|stor, whose fury and madnesse was helped by Sebastianus, who furnished him with armed souldiers, to accompany all his wicked and divelish devices. A fire was kindled in the towne: Christian Virgins were stripped naked,  brought to the fire, and commanded to renounce their faith: but the terror of the fire made them not once to shrinke. When the sight of the fire could not terrifie them, he caused their fa|ces to be so dashed with strokes,  misfashioned their coun|tenances, that they could not bee knowne by their familiar friends: but they, like vnto victorious souldiers, patiently endured all kinde of rebuke for the Name of Christ.Theod. ibid. Thir|ty Bishops of Egypt and Lybia, were slaine in the fury of this Arrian persecution. Fourteene Bishops (whose names are particularly mentioned by Theodoretus) were banished, of whom some died in the way, when they were transpor|ted, others died in the place of their banishment. Forty good Christians in Alexandria were scourged with rods, because they would not communicate with the Arrian wolfe Georgius: and so pitiously demained, that some peeces of the rods were so deepely fixed in their flesh, that they could not bee drawne out againe, and many through excessiue paine of their wounded bodies,Pro. 10.9 concluded their liues. Here is a liuely portrait of the mercies of the wicked, which are cruell.
The like crueltie the Arrians practised in Constantinople Paulus Bishop of Constantinople was banished to Cuculus, a little towne in Cappadocia, where he was strangled by the Arrians. Macedonius was placed in his roome, a notable Heretique, who vsed no lesse crueltie, in compelling the Christians of Constantinople,Socrat. l. 2. c. 27. to communicate with him, then was vsed of olde, to compell Christians to sacrifice to the Idoles of the Gentiles.
The exquisite diligence of the Arrians in procuring Councels to bee gathered for establishing of their errour, shall be declared in the right place, God willing. Now, to re|turne to the ciuill estate of Constantius, After that Magnenti|us had made an end of his owne life in most desperate man|ner, as is said, and his associate Britannio had humbly sub|mitted himselfe to Constantius, and obtained pardon: yet was not the Emperours estate quiet and free of trouble: for there arose another Tyrant,Socrat. l 2. c. 32. called Siluanus, whom the Captaines of Constantius armie in France did hastily cut off, and make out of the way. Also the Iewes of Diocaesaria, a towne of Palestina, rebelled against him, who were ouerthrowne by Gallus the Emperours coosen,Socrat. lb. 2. cap. 33. and the Citie of Diocaesaria was leuelled with the ground; This good successe made Gallus somewhat insolent, and he slew Domitianus, the Emperours great Treasurer in the East: therefore the Emperour gaue commandement to cut him off. Finally, the Germans, who had assisted him in his warres against Magnentius, they rebelled against him. And hee sent against them his coosen Iulian, the brother of Gallus, who subdewed the Germans, and hee likewise waxed insolent, and suffered the souldiours to salute him with the name of , that is, of an Emperour. This was not vnknowne to Constantius, who made hast to pre|uent all further vsurpation. But by the way as hee was leading his armie through Cilicia,Theod. lib. 2. cap. 32. hee concluded his life, sorowing for this, as Theodoretus writes, that he had chan|ged the forme of the Nicene faith.



Iulianus.
IN the yeere of our Lord 365. Iulian began to raigne, and he raigned 3 yeeres.Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 21. Ruffinus assignes vnto him one 8. monethes only: he was Constantius neere kinsman, who made him Caesar,Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 1. and gaue vnto him in marriage Helena his sister: He was brought vp in Christian Religion, but was peruerted by Maximus an Ephesian Philosopher, whom Valentinian the Emperour afterward punished vnto the death,Socrat. ibid. as a practiser of Magicall artes. In the beginning of his raigne he restored those Bishops to their places a|gaine,Socrat. ibid. whom Constantius had banished, not for loue of Religion, but to impare the fame of Constantius: yet im|mediately after, hee manifested his affection toward Heathnicke superstition, and opened the doores of the Tem|ples of the gods of the Heathen,Theod. lib. 3. cap. 4. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 4. which Constantine had lock|ed vp, and incouraged others by his owne example, to offer sacrifices to the gods of the Gentiles.
Iulian absteined, for a time, from crueltie, and shedding of blood:Note. Theod. lib. 3. cap. 8. not for pitie, and compassion of Christians: but ra|ther for enuie: For he enuyed the glory of Christian Martyrs whose magnanimitie, courage, and constant perseuerance in the faith of Christ vnto the death, was commended in the mouthes of all men. But he indeuoured by subtile and craf|tie meanes to vndoe Christian Religion. He debarred the children of Christians from Schooles, and from the vse of Learning:Socrat. lib. 13.  14. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 15. Also hee debarred them from warre fare, from offices of gouerment of Romane Prouinces, and from offices of heauie taxations: which taxations also the auarice of the Deputies of Prouinces increased, and made them more grie|uous and intollerable. Neuerthelesse, when Christians com|plained of the vnrighteous dealing of the Deputies, the Em|perour mocked them, and said, their happinesse was increa|sed, according to the speech of Christ their Lord and Master

Blessed are they,Math. 5. who suffer persecution for righteousnesse sake.
Likewise, in the market places of Cities, he set vp his own Image, with the Effigies of the gods of the Heathen pictured round about it: to the ende, that whosoeuer should doe ciuil reuerence to the Emperours Image, might also seeme to worship the gods of the Gentiles: And by the contrarie, they who would not bow to the gods of the Gentiles,Theod. lib. 3. cap. 16. might seem also to refuse all due reuerence to the Emperour. When he distributed gold to his Captaines and Warriours (as the custome was) he vsed a forme of distributing not accusto|med before, to haue an altar neere vnto his Princely throne, and coales burning vpon it, and incense vpon a table neere vnto the altar whereby it came to passe, that no man receiued gold,Sozom. lib 5. cap. 17. before he cast incense vpon the coales of the altar: by this subtile artifice circumuenting many, who knew not, that it was Iulians purpose to intangle them with the rites of ido
|latrous seruice. In Antiochia,  in the Region round about he dedicated all the Fountaines to the Goddesses of the Gentiles, and caused all the victuall that was to be solde in market places, to be sprinckled with Heathenicke holy wa|ter. Neuerthelesse, Christians, without scruple of conscience dranke of the water that was in the Welles, and ate of the meate which they bought in the market, beeing fully per|swaded,Titus 1. verse, 15. 1 Cor. 10. verse, 25. that to the cleane all thinges are cleane: and againe, it is written, Whatsoeuer is solde in the shambles, eat ye, and aske no question for conscience sake. The libertie that Iunentius and Maxentius, two worthie Warriours, vsed in reprouing the Emperour to his face, for his Heathnike superstition, moued Iulian to such wrath, that hee punished them vnto the death: And so by degrees the policie and wisedome of Iulian in the end breakes foorth into the fruites of crueltie and shedding of blo
od.Theodor. lib. 3. cap. 15.
Albeit no publicke mandate of Iulian was set foorth, com|manding to persecute Christians, yet by many euident testi|monies it was knowne to the people, that the Emperour ha|ted them, and that no man would incur punishment, for out|rage and violence vsed against them. Therefore in the towne

of Sebaste,Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 28. the Sepulchre of Iohn the Baptist was opened, his bones were burnt, and the ashes scattered abroad. Like|wise the wicked men of Gaza and Ascalon, killed Preachers and holy Virgins, ripped their bellies, filled them with bar|lie, and cast their bodies to the swine to be eaten. Cyrillus al|so, a Deacon in Hierapolis, a towne of Phoenicia, at the foote of Mount Libanus,Theod. lib. 3. cap. 6. who in time of the raigne of Con|stantine had broke in pieces the images of the Gentiles, was taken by them, his bellie was ript, his liuer was drawne out of his bodie, which with Barbarous inhumanitie they chaw|ed with their teeth. But the Lord suffered not such vnkouth crueltie to escape vnpunished: for the teeth of those who commited this fact of vnnaturall inhumanitie, fell out of their jaw bones,Theod. lib. 3. cap. 7. Note. their tongues rotted within their mouthes and their eyes were darkned and blinded: a just and deserued punishment of brutish Sauages practised by men. Marcus Arthusius had his body ouerlaid with hony, and it was hung vp in hot summer weather, to be molested with wasps, and flies.Theodoret. ibid. In Alexandria many Christians were slaine for discoue|ring the abominations of the Pagans, especially in sacrificing to Mythra bloody sacrifices of reasonable creatures.Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 2. Among others, Georgius the Arrian Bishop was bound vnto a Camel and both he and the Camell were burned with fire: whom no man counts a martyr, because he kept not the true faith. In the countrey of Phrygia, and towne of Miso, Macedonius Theodulus,Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 15.  Tatianus, for breaking in pieces images, were broiled vpon hot grates of yron. The persecution of Atha|nasius, which with great hazard he escaped, by a stratageme, of turning backe his ship in the face of the persecuting ene|mies, was procured by Philosophers, sorcerers,  inchanters, who were about Iulian, and affirmed that all their trauailes would be spent in vaine,Rufsin. lib. 1. cap. 33. if Athanasius, the only barre, and ob|stacle of their doings, were not made out of the way.
The wrath of Iulian was highly kindled against the inhabi|tants of Caesarea in Cappadocia. This towne of old was cal|led Maza, but the Emperour Claudius changed the name of it, and called it Caesarea. The inhabitants of the citie, for the

most part,Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 4. were Christians, and they had of old ouerthrowne the Temples of Iupiter and Apollo, and the Temple of For|tune (which only remained) they ouerthrew in Iulians owne time. For this cause Iulian rased the name of Caesarea, out of the roll of cities, and exacted from them 300. pound weight of gold, compelled their Cleargie to serue in warrefare: And finally, he threatened to punish to the death al the inhabitants of Caesarea: but the righteous Lord cutted the cordes of the wicked and he had not power to performe all his bloody designes.
He had intention to fight against the Persians, yet would he doe nothing without consultation of his gods. He sent his most assured friendes to all the Oracles within the Romane Dominions, and he himselfe would inquire at the Oracle of Apollo in Delphos,Theodor. lib. 3. cap. 9. 10. Socrat lib. 3. cap. 18. 19. what should be the successe of his en|terprises. The answere of Apollo was, that hee was hindered by the dead, to giue his responses. Hereof it came to passe, that Iulian gaue libertie to Christians, to transport the bones of the Martyr Babylas. About the same time fire came down from heauen,Theodoret. ibid. and destroyed the Temple of Apollo in Del|phos and beate the image of Apollo in pieces, like vnto the lightest and smallest powder, or dust.
Moreouer,Ruffin. lib. . cap. 37.38.39. Socrat. l. 3. c. 20. Theod. lib. 3. cap. 20. Sozom. lb. 5. cap. 12. Socrat. l. 3. c. 21. he gaue libertie to the Iewes, to returne to Ieru|salem, to build their temple,  to offer sacrifices conforme to the law of Moses: not for loue he caried toward the Iewes, but for hatred of the Christians: therefore the worke prospe|red not, but was hindered by earthquake, fire and a mightie tempest of wind. Marke how euery thing this hateful enemy of Christ enterprised, had an euill successe. Iulian arriued at Ctesiphon the Metrapolitane towne of Chaldea,Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 1.2. after that Babylon was ruined. The king of Persia had his people in bet|ter preparation then the Emp. looked for: therefore he tooke deliberation to returne back againe to the bounds of the Ro|mane dominio~s:The death of Iulianus. but he who was deceitful al his daies, was in end deceiued by an old Persia~ captiue, who led the Emp. into a baren wildernes, where he co~cluded his life, wounded with a dart: but it remaines vncertaine by whom hee was slaine.



Iouinianus.
Rfin lib. 2. cap. 1.AFter the death of Iulian, Iouinian was chosen, by the Ro|mane armie, to be Emperour, but liued not full 8. months in his Emperiall dignity. He accepted not the soue|raignty, vntill the time the whole army with vniforme con|sent acknowledged themselues to be Christians. He made a couenant of peace with the King of Persia, such as ne|cessity of a distressed army compelled him to condiscend vnto:Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 21.22. for Nisibis, a great Citie in Mesopotamia, with some dominions in Syria, were resigned ouer to the King of Persia. The blame of this hurtfull capitulation, was impu|ted to the temerity of Iulian the apostate, who had burnt with fire the ships that should haue brought victualles to the armie, and gaue hasty credite to a Persian captiue. When he had reduced the army to the bounds of the Ro|mane dominions, hee buried the dead body of Iulian in Tarsus, a towne of Cilicia: and hee reduced from punish|ment the worthy captaine Valentinian, whom Iulian had banished,Theod lib. 4. cap. 2.3. together with the Bishops banished from their places, or compelled to lurke: and in speciall Athanasius, whose counsel hee was resolued to follow in matters of Faith and church gouernement.Theod. lib. 4. cap. 4. In the ende hee tooke purpose to goe to Constantinople: but by the way, in the confines of Galatia and Bithinia, he concluded his life in a Village called Dadasta 9.Sazom lib. 6. cap. 6.


Valentinianus and Valens.
AFter the death of Iovinian, the Romane armie choosed Valentinian to be Emperour, who raigned 13. yeeres. In whom was accomplished which is promised in the Gospell,

to render an hundreth-folde in this life, to them who suffer any losse for Christs sake, in the world to come eternall life. Valentinian for Christs sake lost his office in Iulians Court,Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 31.  he receiued in this world a kingdome, and hath a greater re|compence of reward laid vp for him in heauen. The mag|nanimous courage of Valentinian in beating on the face that heathen priest,Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 2. who sprinkled holy water vpon his gar|ments, whereby he thought his garments to be contami|nate, and not his body sanctified.Theod. lib. . cap. 16. This couragious fact was the cause wherefore Iulian banished him to Miletina, a towne in Armenia. He was relieued from banishment in the dayes of Iouinian, and wa made Emp. after his death. He was borne in a towne of Panonia,Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 6. called Cibalc: he addressed himselfe immediatly after his acceptation of the Emperial soueraignty to Co~stantinople,  within the space of 30. daies he choosed his brother to bee his associate in the gouerne|ment: in such sort, that the Emp. Valentinian gouerned the West,Socrat lib 4. cap. 1. and the Emperour Valens gouerned the Easterne parts of the Roman Dominions.
The Emp. Valens finding the Persians to be quiet,  dispo|sed to keepe the couenant of peace bound vp in the dayes of Iouinian, he vndertooke an vnsupportable warfare against the Homousians. The vsurpation of the Tyrant Procopius, did somewhat slacken the readines and quicknes of his attempts but after Procopius was deliuered into the handes of the Emp. Valens, by Agelon Gomarius his Captaines, he rent in pieces the body of Procopius, by bowing downe to the ground the toppes of strong trees,Socrat lib. 4. cap. 5. whereunto he caused the legs of Pro|copius to be fastened. The bodies of Agelon and Gomarius, the two Captaines who betrayed Procopius, were cutted in twaine with sawes of yron. In which fact the Emprour Valens had no regard to the oath of God, which he made vnto them for their safetie.
Procopius being subdewed,Theodor. lib. 4. cap. 13. he bended all his might against the Homousians: He banished Miletius, B. of Antiochia, to Armenia: Eusebius B. of Samosata, to Thracia: Pelagius Bishop of Laodicea, to Arabia. The town of Samosata was so affectio|ned

to their own Pastor Eusebius,Theod. ibid. that they would not co~mu|nicate with Eunomius, whom the Arians sent to fil his place. Valens was filled with wrath against the Fathers conucened in the councel of Lampsacum (this is a towne neere vnto the straite forth of Hellespontus) because they adhered fast vnto the Nicene faith.Socrat lib. 4. cap. 6. In Constantinople he not only banished the Homousians, but also the Novatians,  their B. Agelius, be|cause they would not consent with the Arrian in the matter of faith.Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 5. In Edessa, a towne of Mesopotamia, the Emperour gaue commandement to slay the Homousians, who were as|sembled together in the church: but the seruent zeale of one woman,Theod. lib. 4. cap. 17. that ran in hast through the rankes of souldiers, drawing with her, her yong and tender child, together with her couragious answere to the Captaine,Sozm. lib. 6. cap. 18. staied the rage of the Emp. wonderfully: for she counted it a sweet fellowship that she and her babe should be found amongst the number of these, who were counted worthy to suffer death for the name of Christ. Neuertheles the Emp. banished of men who dwelt in Edessa, especially of such as were in spiritual offices, to the number of fourscore, whom he commanded, by two  two, to be dispersed through Thracia, Arabia, and Thebaida. The inuincible courage of Basilius, Bishop of Caesarea in Capado|cia, the peaceable death of Athanasius, which hapned in the verie time of Persecution of this Arrian Emperour Valens, together with the furie and madnesse of the Arrian Bishop Lucius, intruded in Alexandria, All these things, God wil|ling shall bee touched in their owne places.
Amongst al the facts of vnspeakeable cruelty committed by Valens,Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 16. one fact ouerwent all the rest. While the Emp. was at Nicomedia, fourescore Ambassadours were directed vnto him: amongst whom Menedemus, Vrbanus Theodorus were the chiefe. These complained to the Emperour, of the mani|fold injuries done to the Homousians.Theod. lib. 4. cap. 24. The Emperour gaue commandement to Modestus, the Gouernour of his armie, to embarke them into a ship, as if they were to be banished vnto some remote and far distant place: but secret direction was giuen vnto the ship-men, to set the ship on fire, and to retire

themselues into a boat. So it came to passe, that these four|score Martyrs circumvented by the craft of Valens,Sozom. l. 6. c. 14 glorified the Name of Christ, by patient suffering of many deaths at one time, both tormented by fire, and drowned in water.
Terentius and Traianus, two worthy Captaines, vsed some liberty in admonishing the Emperour to abstaine from per|secuting of innocent people,Theod. l. 4. c. 34 because his fighting against God, procured good successe to the Barbarians: but the Lord was minded to destroy him, therefore he could receiue no wholesome admonition: for a number of the Nation of the Gothes, whom he entertained as souldiers, meete to de|fend his Dominions against the invasion of forrainers and strangers,Ruff. l. 2. c. 13. they began to waste the Countrey of Thracia: and they fought against the Emperour Valens, and preuai|led against him: so that he fled, and was overtaken in a cer|taine Village, which the Gothes set on fire. So this Empe|rour died miserably,Valens his death. burnt with fire by his enemies, with|out succession, and left his name in curse and execration to all ages,Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 40. after he had raigned 15. or 16. yeeres, as Sozomenus reckoneth.
Now to returne to the Emperour Valentinian: Hee was a defender of the true Faith, and was so highly offended a|gainst his brother Valens, that hee would make him no sup|port against the invasion of the Gothes:Theod. l. 4. c. 12 for hee sayd, it was an impious thing, to strengthen the hand of a man, who had spent his dayes in warfare against God, and his Church. In his dayes the Samaritans invaded the bounds of the Ro|mane Dominions. Valentinian prepared a mighty army to fight against them: but they sent vnto him Ambassadours, to entreate for peace.Socrat. l. 4.c.31. When the Emperour saw that they were but a naughty people, hee was moved with excessiue anger, whereby he procured the rupture of some arters, or veines, wherevpon followed great effusion of blood. And so he himselfe died,Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 36. Valentinians death. leauing behinde him two sonnes, Gra|tianus, whose mother was Severa, and Valentinian the second, whose mother was Iustin



Gratianus; Valentianus the second, and Theodosius.
GRatianus, the sonne of Valentinian, after the death of Valens,Ruff. l. 2. c. 13 his fathers brother, had the government both of West and East.Socrat. l. 5. c. 2 His brother Valentinian the second, was his associate in the government of the West: But when he perceived, that the waighty affaires of the Kingdome requi|red the fellowship of a man who was ripe in yeeres, hee chose Theodosius, a man of Noble parentage in Spaine, to whom hee committed the government of the East, conten|ting himselfe and his brother Valentinian, with the govern|ment of the West. Gratianus in the beginning of his raigne, reduced from banishment those Bishops, whom the Arrian Persecuter Valens had banished. Hee was slaine by Andra|gathius, Captaine of the army of Maximus,Sozom. l. 3. c. 17 who vsurped the Empire of the West. This Andragathius, not by valour and might, but by circumvention, fallhod, and treason, o|verthrew the good Emperour Gratian: for hee made a re|port to passe in Lions, where the Emperour Gratian had his remayning, that his wife was comming to him: and hee in simplicitie went forth to meete his wife beyond the riuer Rhonne: but Andragathius (who was couertly lurking in a chariot) stepped out,The death of Gratian. and slew Gratianus, after he had raig|ned with his father, with his brother, and with Theodosius, fifteene yeares.
His brother Valentinian, young in yeeres, was seduced by the intising speeches of his mother Iustina after the death of her husband, in whose dayes shee durst not pre|sume to avow the Arrian Heresie: yet after his death, shee entised the flexible minde of her sonne,Theod. l. 5.13. to persecute Am|brose Bishop of Millaine, because hee would not consent to the Arrian doctrine. The zeale of the people affectioned

to their faithfull Pastor, hindered the cruell purposes of Iustina.Sozom. l. 7. c. 13. Likewise the miracles wrought at the sepulchres of Protasius and Gervasius, opened the mouthes of the peo|ple to glorifie God, and to magnifie that Faith, which Pro|tasius and Gervasius had sealed vp with their blood: these holy men of God were martyred in the second great Perse|cution, mooved by the Emperour Domitian.Aug lib. Confes. 9 cap. 7. The dolo|rous tithings of the death of Gratianus, and the neere ap|proaching of the Tyrant Maximus to Italy, compelled Iu|stina to leaue the persecuting of Ambrose, and to flie to Illericum,Ruff. l. 2. c. 16 Theod. l. 5. c. 14 for safety of her owne life, and her sonnes life. Theodosius being mindefull of the kindenesse of Gratianus towards him, led an army against the Tyrant Maximus. The Captaines of Maximus army, terrified with the ru|mour of the might of Theodosius army,Soc. l. 5. c. 14 delivered him bound into the hands of Theodosius, and hee was iustly pu|nished vnto the death. Andragatius, who slew the Empe|rour Gratian (as is sayd) seeing no way to escape, threw himselfe head-long into a river, and so ended his wretched life. About the same time, Iustina the mother of Valentini|an the second, shee died, her sonne was peaceably posses|sed in his Kingdome,Ruffin. l. 2. c. 17. and Theodosius returned to the East againe.
But within few dayes hee was compelled to gather a new army, and fight against the Tyrant Eugenius, and his chiefe Captaine Arbogastus, who had conspired against Va|lentinian the second, and strangled him while he was lying in his bed. This battell went hardly at the beginning, but Theodosius had his recourse to God by prayer: and the Lord sent a mighty tempest of winde, which blew so vehement|ly in the face of Eugenius army, that their darts were turned backe, by the violence of the winde, in their owne faces. Of which miraculous support, sent from aboue, the Poet Claudian writes these Verses:
O nimium dilecte Deo eui sundis ab antris
Eolus a mat as biemes,Claudian de 3. consul. honorii. cui at ather,
Et cominrati veniunt ad classica venti.
The Tyrant Eugenius fell downe at the feet of Theodosius, to begge pardon: but the souldiers pursued him so straitly, that they slew him at the Emperours feete. Arbogastus, the author of all this mischiefe, hee sled, and being out of all hope of safety, slew himselfe.
Like as there was no sacrifice, wherein dung was not found, even so the life and actions of this noble Emperour, was spotted with some infirmities. Against the Inhabitants of Thessalonica, the Emperour was mooved with excessiue anger,Ruff. l 2. c. 18. so that seven thousand innocent people were slaine, invited to the spectacle of Playes, called Ludi circenses, and in the Greeke language, . For this fault the good Emperour was reprooved by Ambrose Bishop of Millaine,Theod. l. 5. c. 17. and confessed his fault in sight of the people with teares: and made a lawe, that the like commandements, concerning the slaughter of people, should not haue hastie execution, vn|till the tune that thirty dayes were overpassed: to the end. that space might be left to either mercy, or to repentance. In like manner, he was angry out of measure against the peo|ple of Antiochia,Theod. l. 5. c. 19. for overthrowing the brasen portrait of his beloved bedfellow Placilla. The Emperour denuded their towne of the dignity of a Metrapolitan Citie, confer|ring this eminent honour to their neighbour towne Laodi|cea. Moreover hee threatned to set the towne on fire, and to redact it vnto the base estate of a village. But Flavianus Bishop of Antiochia, by his earnest travels with the Empe|rour mitigated his wrath (for the people repented their foo|lish fact,Sozom. l. 7. c. 23 and were fore afraid) and the good Emperour mo|ved with pitty, pardoned the fault of the towne of Antio|chia. His lenity toward the Arrians, whom hee permitted to keepe conventions in principall Cities, was with great dexterity and wisedome reprooved by Amphilochius,Theod. l. 5. c. 16. Bishop of Iconium: For hee came in vpon a time, and did reve|rence to the Emperour, but not vnto Arcadius his sonne (albeit already associated to his father in government, and declared Augustus) whereat Theodosius being offended, Am|philochius very pertinently, and in due season, admonished

the Emperour, that the God of heaven also would bee of|fended with them, who tolerated the blasphemers of his on|ly begotten Sonne, the Lord Iesus Christ. Wherevpon followed a lawe, discharging the conventions of Heretikes, in the principall Cities. In all these infirmities, it is re|markeable, that the good Emperour ever gaue place to wholesome admonitions.Note. Theod. l. 5. c. 26 The excessiue paines hee was compelled to vndertake in Warfare, hastened his death: for hee contracted sicknesse soone after his returning from the the battell fought against Eugenius, and died in the 60. yeere of his age, and in the 16. yeere of his raigne. He left behind him his two sonnes: Arca|dius to governe the East, and Hono|rius to governe the West. 




CENTVRIE V.

Arcadius, and Honorius.
_THE good Emperour Theodosius left be|hinde him two sonnes,Socrat. l. 6. c. 23 Arcadius to go|verne the East parts, and Honorius the West. Arcadius raigned 14 yeeres: He was a meeke and godly Emperour, but not couragious, as his father had beene. His simplicity was abused by Eudoxia his wife, Ruffinus his chiefe counseller, and Gania his chiefe Captaine. Eudoxia was offended at the freedome that Chry|sostome vsed, in reproving of sinne: And by the meanes of Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria procured his deposition. Theophilus had gathered a Synode at the Oke of Calcedon: and because Chrysostome being warned, refused to appeare, they convict him of contumacy, and deposed him: after de|position followed banishment, from which the affectioned mindes of the people toward their Pastor, constrained the Emperour to reduce him againe: yet Eudoxia continued in her malice, and procured by the meanes of Theophilus, his second deposition  banishment, with commandement to iourney his weake bodie with excessiue travels from place to place,Sozom. l. 8. c. 28 vntill hee concluded his life.
Ruffiinus stirred vp Alaricus King of the Gothes, to fight against Arcadius, secretly presuming to the kingdome, but his treasonable enterprises being espyed, hee was slaine, and his head and right hand were hung vp vpon the port of Constantinople.
Gaina of a simple souldier was made generall Comman|der of Arcadius his army: hee waxed insolent and proud, affected the kingdome, being in blood a stranger, of the

Nation of the Goths, in religion an Arrian. Hee craved a petition of the Emperour, that hee might haue one of the Churches of Constantinople,Theod. l. 5.32. wherein hee might serue God according to his owne forme: but this petition by the prudent advice of Chrysostome given to the Emperour was reiected, and the pride of Gaina for a time was something abated.
Honorius raigned in the West, all the dayes of his brother Arcadius and 15. yeeres after his death. The whole time of his government was very troublesome.Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 3. Gildo, his Lieu|tenant in Africke, vsurped the dominion of Africke; and Mascelzer his brother, who at the first detested treasonable enterprises in his brother, yet afterward followed his bro|thers footsteps, and received the iust deserved reward of his inconstancy, for hee was slaine by his owne souldiers. In like manner Stilico, the Emperours father in law (for Hono|rius married his daughter) and the Emperors chiefe Coun|seller, presumed to drawe the kingdome to Eucherius his sonne, and stirred vp the Vandales, Burgundians, Almans, and diverse others to invade the kingdome of France, to the end that Honorius being overcharged with the multi|tude of vnsupportable businesse, might permit Stilico to set forward to the designes of his owne heart. About this time, Rhadagisus a Sythian,Func. chron. accompanied with an army of two hundred thousand Gothes, came to Italy. And the helpe of Vldinus and Sarus, Captaines of the Hunnes and Gothes, being obtained, Rhadagisus was suddenly surprised, himself was taken and strangled, many were slaine, the most part were sold, whereupon followed incredible cheapnesse of servants, so that flocks of servants were sold for one peece of gold, in Italy.
The next great trouble came by Alaricus, King of the Westerne Gothes, who invaded Italy, and camped about Ravenna, with whom Honorius entred into a capitulation, and promised to him and his retinue, a dwelling place in France. The Gothes marched toward their appointed dwel|ling place:Compend. Theod. catalog. Casaru~. But Stilico the Emperours father in law fol|lowed

after them, and set vpon them at vnawares, when they suspected none evill, and slew a great number of them. By this the Emperour cleerly perceived the treason of Sti|lico, and caused him and his sonne to bee slaine, but to his owne great hurt, hee appointed no generall Commander of the army in his place. Alaricus and his army were enraged, partly by their losse, and partly by remembrance of the co|venant made with them, and incontinent violated: There|fore they turned backe againe, and invaded Italy with all their might, and besieged Rome two yeeres, and tooke it in the yeere of our Lord,Platin. in vita Zosimi 1. 410. or as some reckon 412. In the midst of burning, slaying, robbing, and military outrage, some fauour was showne by the expresse commandement of Alaricus,Sozom. l. 9. c. 9. to such as fled to Christian Churches for safe|tie of their liues. Alaricus led his army from Rome, and was purposed to sayle to Africke, there to settle his abode, but being driven backe with tempestuous windes, hee win|tred in Consentia, where hee ended his life. Alaricus in his life-time had given in marriage Placidia the sister of Hono|rius,Func. chron. to Ataulphus his neerest kinsman, and Ataulphus after the death of Alaricus, raigned over the Gothes. The Gothes vnder the conduct of Ataulphus, returned backe againe to Rome. Placidia through her intercession purchased great good to the towne of Rome: the Gothes abstained from burning, and shedding of blood, and addressed themselues toward France and Spaine.


Theodosius 2. and Valentinian 3.
AFter Arcadius, raigned his sonne Theodosius the second 42. yeeres. His vncle Honorius governed in the West: After whose death the whole government pertained to The|odosius, who associated vnto himselfe Valentinian the third, the sonne of Placidia, his fathers sister. Theodosius in godli|nesse was like vnto his grandfather, in collecting a great

librarie of good bookes, nothing inferiour to Ptolemaus Phi|ladelphus. In collecting in one short sum the Iawes of kings and princes: he tread a path whereinto Iustinian walked, fol|lowing Theodosius example, and benefited all men desirous of learning.Socrat. l. 7. c. 22 Iaem. lib 7. cap 42. Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 3. His house was like vnto a sanctuarie for exercises of reading of holy Scripture, and deuote prayers. He was of a meeke  tractable nature almost beyond measure: his facili|tie in subscribing vnread letters was corrected by the prude~t aduice of his sister Pulcheria. In these two Emp. time the e|state was mightily crossed  troubled by strangers. By the procurement of Bonifacius deputie of Africke, the Vandales vnder the conduct of Gensericus their king came into Africk, tooke the towne of Carthage,  other principall townes and settled their abode in that countrie. Valentinian 3. Emp. of the West was compelled to make a couenant with the Vandales,  to assigne vnto them limited bounds in Africke for their dwelling place.
The Vandales were partly Pagans and partly Arrians whereby it came to passe that the true Church in Africke was persecuted with no lesse inhumanitie; and barbar|ous crueltie by Gensericus King of the Vandales, then it was in the dayes of the Emp. Dioclesian. Attila, King of the Hunnes encombred the Romane Empire with greater trou|bles. Theodosius Emperour of the East bought peace with payment of a yearly tribute of gold to Attila. Valentinian the third by the meanes of Aetius his chiefe Counseller allured Theodoricus King of the Westerne Gothes to take his part. The parties fought in the fieldes called Catalaunici a great fight, wherein a hundreth and fourescore thousand men were slaine. And Theodoricus King of the Gothes in this bat|tell lost his life. Attila was compelled to flee. Thrasimundus the sonne of Theodoricus was very willing to pursue Attila, for desire he had to reuenge his fathers slaughter, but hee was stayed by Aetius. This counsell seemes to be the oc|casion of his death: Valentinian commanded to cut off Aetius. Attila finding that the Romane armie was destitute of the conduct of so wise a gouernour, as Aetius was, he tooke

courage againe, and in great rage set himselfe against Italie, tooke the townes of Aquileia, Ticinum and Millane, sacked and ruined them, and set himselfe directly against Rome, with intention to haue vsed the like crueltie also against it. But Leo Bishop of Rome went foorth, and with gentle words so miti|gated his mind, that he left besieging of the towne of Rome. Soone after this Attila died, the terrour of the world, and the whip wherewith God scourged many nations.
Valentinian the thirde, after hee had raigned in whole 30. yeeres, was cut off for the slaughter of Aetius. Maxi|mus vsurped the Kingdome, and violently tooke vnto him|selfe Eudoxia the relict of Valentinian: but shee was relieued againe by Gensericus King of Vandales, who led an armie to Rome, and spoyled the towne, and relieued Eudoxia, and carried her and her daughters to Africke, and gaue Ho|noricus his sonne in marriage vnto her eldest daughter. Max|imus was cut in pieces by the people,  his body was cast in|to Tyber. From this time foorth the Empire vtterly decayed in the West, vntill the dayes of Carolus Magnus, so that Anit|us,Evigr. lib. 2. cap. 16. Richimex, Maioranus, Severus, Anthemius, Olybrius, Gly|cerius, Nepos, Orestes and his sonne Augustulus, they conti|nued so short time, and gouerned so vnprosperously, that their names may bee left out of the rolle of the Empe|rours.
Now to returne againe to Theodosius Emperour in the East, a King beloued of God, in so much that by praier hee ob|tained of God a wonderfull deliuerance to Ardaburius cap|taine of his armie.Note. When his vncle had ended his life, Ar|daburius was sent against a tyrant Iohn, who did vsurpe the Kingdome in the West.Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 23. The ship whereinto Ardaburius failed by tempest of weather was driuen to Rauenna, where the tyrant Iohn tooke him prisoner. Aspar the captaines sonne, beeing conducted by an Angell of God (as Socrates writeth) entred in Rauenna, by the passage of the loch, which was neuer found dried vp before that time: the portes of the towne were patent, so that Aspar and his armie entred into the towne, slew the tyrant Iohn, and

relieued Ardaburius his father. This miraculous deliuerance is thought to be the fruite of the effectuall prayers of the godly Emperour. His death was procured by a fall from his horse, after which hee was diseased, and died: an Emperour worthy of euerlasting remembrance.


Martianus.
MArtianus by the meanes of Pulcheria the sister of Theo|dosius was aduanced to the Kingdome with whom Valentinian the thirde, of whom I haue already spoken, raigned 4.Catalog. Ca|sarum. yeeres. Martianus, albeit hee obtained the gouernment in a time most troublesome, when the Go|thes, Vandales, Hunnes, and Herules had disquieted the e|state of the Roman Empire out of measure, yet by the pro|uidence of God the short time of his gouernment was peace|able,Evagr. lib. 2. cap. 8. for he raigned not fully 7 yeere, and he left behind him great griefe in the hearts of the people, because a gouerne|ment so good and godly endured so short time. Concer|ning the councell of Chalcedon assembled by him, it is to be referred vnto the owne place.


Leo.
AFter Martianus succeeded Leo, and gouerned 17. yeeres. He was godly  peaceable, not vnlike Martian|us his predecessor. He interposed his authoritie to suppresse those who proudly despised the councell of Chalcedon, and obstinatly maintained the heresie of Eutyches. Notwithstan|ding the madnes and rage of Eutychian heretiques began in his time,Evagr. lib. 2. cap. 8. immediately after the report of the death of Marti|anus. Procerius Bishop of Alexandria was cruelly slaine by them in the Church, haled through the streets, and with

beastly cruelty they chewed the intrals of his body, ha|uing before ordained Timotheus to bee their Bishop.Idem cap. 12.  13. The Emperour banished Timotheus beeing first foreseene, that not only Leo bishop of Rome, but also all other bishops, of chiefe account, damned the ordination of Timotheus. The ter|rible earthquake which destroyed a part of Antiochia,  the more terrible fire which wasted a great part of Constantino|ple, were fore running tokens of the great desolation that should ensue by the detestable heresie of Eutyches.


Zeno.
THe Emperour Leo left his Kingdome to his nephew the sonne of Zeno called Leo, but hee fell sicke and died, when he had scarce reigned 1. yeere. So his father Zeno had the Emperiall soueraigntie 17. yeeres: hee was of a bad religion, dissolute in manners, intemperate, effeminate, and hated of all men.Evagr. lib. 3. cap. 3. Therefore Basiliscus conspired against him and Zeno fled. Basiliscus was a persecuter of the true faith, damned by his encyclicke letters the Councell of Chalce|don: restored Euthychian bishops to their places againe: such as Timotheus Arideus to Alexandria, Petrus Cnapheus to Antiochia,Idem lib. 3. cap. 5. Paulus to Ephesus: fiue hundreth preachers were found, who subscribed Basiliscus letters, and cursed the councell of Chalcedon. So great a plague it is, either to haue ignorant Pastors, who know not the trueth of God,Note. or cowardly teachers, who will suffer no rebuke for the knowne truth of God. Zeno returned to his Kingdome againe within 2. yeeres:Idem cap. 8.  11. hee banished Basi|liscus to Cappadocia, where he was slaine with his wife and children. Hee abolished the encyclicke letters of Basiliscus and eicted Petrus Cnapheus out of Antiochia, and Paulus out of Ephesus. Timotheus of Alexandria was old, infirme, and neere to the last period of his life, els also

he had bin eiected out of Alexandria: for Zeno, not for loue of the true faith, but for hatred of the name of Basiliscus en|deuoured to doe all that he had done.
Vnder the raigne of Zeno came Odoacer assisted with peo|ple of Pannonia called Rugi, Turcilingi and Heruli, and in|uaded Italie, and slew Orestes at Pagia, and compelled his sonne Augustulus,Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 3. to denude himselfe of emperiall honours so that the Romane empire, as it began in the person of Au|gustus Caesar, so likewise it ended in the person of Augustu|lus the sonne of Orestes. Odoacer would not vsurpe the glori|ous title of an Emperour, but called himselfe King of Italie, and raigned 14. yeeres. Zeno on the other part stirred vp The|odoricus King of Gothes to expell Odoacer out of Italie. The|odoricus encountred with him diuerse times, and preuailed. In the end he besieged him in Ravenna, vntill a couenant of peace was bound vp betwixt them, but it lasted a short time: for Theodoricus vnder pretence of friendship,Note. called Odoacer and his sonnes to a banket and caused them cruelly to bee slaine. Afterward he raigned himselfe alone in Italie 33. yeeres: hee reedified the townes in Italie which by violence of warres had beene wasted  made desolate, and was well beloued of the people: and albeit in religion he was an Arri|an, yet he abstained from persecution of those who professed the true faith.
The Eutychian persecution is already begun,Hist. Magd. ibid. but the Arrian persecution is not yet ended. Hunnericus sonne of Gensericus king of Vandales, was an Arrian persecuter so vnmercifull, that in Africke where his dominion was, he had neither com|passion on sexe or age: he banished at one time fiue thousand professors of the true faith. And such as were infirme and weake; and could neither trauell by foote nor horse, he com|manded cords to be knit to their legges, and to traile them through the rough places of the wildernes, and by such merciles dealing, the death of many innocent people was procured: but the Lord suffered not this crueltie to be vnpunished: for the Lord plagued the Vandales with famine, and pest, and Hunnericus was so long tormen|ted

with venemous biles, that in the end he was consumed with vermine, and in great miserie ended his most wretched life.
In this Centurie studying for brevitie, I haue ouerpassed some remarkable thinges, such as the deceitfull practises of the wise men of Persia,Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 8. to diuert the affection of their King Isdigerdes from the loue he had caried to Maruthas Bishop in Mesopotamia, and Embassadour of Theodosius. 2. This histo|rie is set downe at length by Socrates. In like maner the ca|lamitie of the Iewes who dwelt in the Isle of Candie, and were piteously abused by a deceiuing fellow, who called himselfe Moses, and promised to lead them through the Mediterran sea, to their owne lande, as Moses led the peo|ple of Israel through the read sea: this calamitie read in the 7. booke of the ecclesiastical historie of Socrates chap. 38. The Iewes were commanded to cast themselues into the sea,Func. chron. and to swim vnto a rocke: but they were drowned in the sea, and dashed vpon the hard rocke, and by the meanes of Chri|stian fishers some few escaped. This historie is referred vnto the 434. yeere of our Lord: so that it fell foorth vnder the raigne of Theodosius 2. The miraculous conuersion of the Burgundi|ans to the faith of Christ about the same time, I haue of purpose ouerpassed, willing to be short, and to giue a viewe of the historie to those who are desirous to read.




CENTVRIE VI.

Anastatius.
_AFter Zeno succeeded Anastatius, and gouer|ned 27. yeeres. He was a patrone of the he|resie of Eutyches. He banished Euphemius Bishop of Constantinople, because hee would not redeliuer vnto him that letter which he had subscribed before his Coro|nation, wherein he was bound to attempt nothing against the true faith, and namely against the coun|cel of Chaledon. In like manner hee banished Macedonius the successour of Euphemius for the same cause (for he had the custodie of the hand-writing of Anastatius) and the Em|perour gaue secret Commandement to make him out of the way at Gangra the place of his banishment.Evagr. lib. 3. cap. 3. Xenoeas Bishop of Hierapolis, a firebrand of Sathan stirred vp the Emperours minde to great rage, partly by gathering a Councell at Sidon, wherein they damned the actes of the councel of Chalcedon and partly by stirring vp the Emperor to wrath against good men, such as were principall defenders of the true faith: namely Flauianus Bishop of Antiochia and Helias Bishop of Ierusalem. The people of Antiochia were very friendly to their Pastor, and finding that a great number of Monkes sauouring Eutyches errour, had assembled in the towne of Antiochia to compell Flauianus their Bishop to accurse and abiure the councell of Chalcedon:Note. they set vpon the Monkes, and slewe a number of them, others leaped into the riuer of Orontes, where they found a meet buriall for seditious Monkes. On the other part a great number of Syria Caua,Evagr. lib. 3. cap. 32. came to support the troubled estate of Flauia|nus. For these things, as if he had beene a contentious man, he was banished, and Senerus a notable Eutychian heretique

was placed in his roome: this is he, of whom I haue mentio|ned diuers times that Alamundarus prince of Saraceus delu|ded his messengers, and sent them backe ashamed and con|founded. The next attempt was against Helias Bishop of Ie|rusalem, against whom this quarrell was forged, that hee would not subscribe the Synodicke letter of Seuerus, and damne the councel of Chalcedon, and by the Emperours commandement. Olympius the captaine came to Ierusalem, expelled Helias, and placed Iohn a familiar friend of Seuerus in his roome. This Iohn by the perswasion of Sabas a Monke of Palestina forsooke the fellowship of Seuerus, and was cast into prison by Anastatius the Emperours captaine: but when he was brought foorth out of prison againe, he disappointed the expectation of Anastatius the captaine: for he openly a|uouched the foure generall councels, and anathematifed the followers of Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius and Eutyches. In doing whereof he was mightily assisted both by the peo|ple, and the Monks: so that Anastatius the Emperours cap|taine fearing popular commotion, fled and returned againe to the Emperour,Hist. Magd. cen. 6. cap. 3. but Seuerus Bishop of Antiochia moued with wrath against the Monks of Syria, set vpon them, and slew 300. of them, and gaue their carcases to the foules of the heauen, and the beastes of the earth, such mercie was, and is to bee found in headstrong heretiques. In all this desolation the courage of Cosmas Bishop of Epiphania, and Severianus bishop of Arethusa is to be admired, who wrote a booke con|teining a sentence of deposition of Severus Bishop of Antio|chia,Evagr. lib. 3. cap. 34. which booke Aurelianus a deacon of Epiphania clad in a womans apparrell deliuered vnto him in Antiochia, and afterward conueyed himselfe away secretly. The Emperour was highly offended against Cosmas, and Severianus, and he wrote to Asiaticus gouernour of Phoenicia, that hee should eiect them out of their places: but when answere was retur|ned to the Emperour, that it could not be done without blood, the Emperour left off further pursuing of them. Many counted Anastatius a peaceable Emperour, because he would haue setled controuersies in the Church, as eiuil

controversies at sometimes are settled, namely, by a law of oblivion, but there is no capitulation betwixt darknesse and light, but darknesse must yeeld vnto the light of God. In Africke moe then 900.Note. were crowned with martyrdome vnder the raigne of Anastatius, as Magd history recordeth out of the first booke of Regino,Platin. de vi Hormisda. de Anastatio. Platina writeth that he was slaine with thunder.


Iustinus the elder.
AFter Anastatius, succeeded Iustinus a godly Emperour, and governed nine yeeres and three dayes. Hee resto|red the Bshops whom Anastatius had banished. Hee bani|shed also Arrian Bishops, who were found within his Do|minions. Severus Bishop of Antiochia, a vile Eutychian Heretique, and a bloody Foxe, hee displaced, and caused him to be punished by cutting out of his tongue, as some affirme. Theodoricus King of the Gothes obtaining domi|on in Italy,Evag. l. 4. c. 4. persecuted true Christians with great hostility, and sent Ambassadors to the Emperour Iustinus, to restore the Arrian Bishops whom hee had banished: else he would pursue the Bishops who were in Italy, with all kinde of ri|gour. And because the Ambassadors returned not backe a|gaine with such expedition as he expected, hee put hand to worke, and slew two noble Senators, Symmachus, and Boe|tius. Likewise when the Ambassadors were returned, hee cast in prison Iohannes Tuscus,Hist. Magd. cent. 6. cap. 3. Bishoppe of Rome, and his companions, whom hee had before imployed to goe on mes|sage to the Emperour Iustinus. The Bishop of Rome died in prison for lacke of sustentation, but the Lord suffered not this barbarous cruelty of Theodoricus to be long vnpuni|shed: for the Lord strake him with madnesse of minde, so when he was sitting at table,Note. and the head of a great fish was set before him, hee imagined it was the head of Symmachus, whom he had slaine, and was so stupified with feare, that a|non

after hee died. In the dayes of this Emperour Iustinus, was a terrible earthquake,Evag. l. 4. c. 5. the like whereof hath not beene heard at any time before, wherewith the towne of Antio|chia was shaken and vtterly ruined. With the earthquake, fire was mixed, consuming and resolving into ashes the rem|nant of the towne, which the earthquake had not cast down. In this calamity Euphrasius Bishop of Antiochia, perished. The good Emperour mourned for the desolation of Anti|ochia, and put on sackcloth on his body, and was in great heavinesse,Chron. Fue. whereof it is supposed, that hee contracted that disease whereof hee dyed. When he found his disease daily encreasing, he made choyce of Iustinian his sisters sonne to be his colleague, who governed foure moneths in equall au|thority with his vncle, and then Iustinus ended his course.


Iustinianus.
A After the death of Iustinus, Iustinianus his sisters sonne, governed 38. yeares. Hee would suffer no faith to be openly professed,Evag. l. 4 c. 10. except the faith allowed in the foure ge|nerall Councells. Notwithstanding the Empresse Theodo|ra his wife, was a favourer of Eutyches heresie. This Empe|rour was bent to recover all that was lost by his predeces|sors, in Asia, Africke, and Europe, and hee had good suc|cesse through the vertue and valour of his Captaines, espe|cially Belisarius, and Narses. Belisarius first fought against the Persians, who had overcome not onely Mesopotamia, but also many parts of Syria, Antrochena, and Cava. Hee overcame them in battell, and compelled them to goe back beyond Euphrates. Next, he was employed to fight against the Vandales in Africke, who possessed great bounds of the Romane dominions, ever since the dayes of Gensericus, King of the Vandales. And it is to be marked, that the time was now come, wherein the Lord wil declare, that the blood of his Saints is precious in his eyes. For since the dayes of

Dioclesian, that bloody persecuting Emperour, no race of people persecuted Gods Saints with so barbarous cruelty, as the Vandales did, for zeale they had to the Arrian heresie, wherewith they were infected. After Gensericus, Hunericus, and Amalaricus, and Trasimundus, who closed the doores of the Temples of Christians, and banished their Bishoppes to Sardinia. Childericus would haue shewed some favour to Christians, and reduced their Bishoppes from banishment: for this cause the Vandales did slay him, and gaue his king|dome to Gillimer.
Now the Lord remembred the grones of his owne pri|soners,Note. and would not suffer the rod of the wicked perpe|tually to lie vpon the lot of the righteous. Belisarius fought against the Vandales, prosperously recovered Carthage, and all the bou~ds pertaining to the Roman Empire possessed by the Vandales. Also he tooke Gillimer their King, and carried him captiue to Constantinople. It is worthy of remem|brance, that Iustinian would not receiue into his treasure the vessels of gold, which the Emperour Titus (when hee burnt the Temple of Ierusalem) transported to Rome. These same vessels Gensericus King of Vandales when he spoyled Rome transported to Carthage,Evag. l. 4. c. 17. and Belisarius after hee had conquered Carthage, hee brought them to Constantinople, againe but Iustinian sent them to Ierusalem, to bee dispo|sed vpon according to the wisdome of the Christian Bishops in those bounds.
The third warfare against the Goths, for recovering Ita|ly out of their hands, was the greatest of all the rest, and en|dured longest time, to wit, eighteene yeeres, wherein Beli|sarius and Mundus,Idem l. 4. c. 19. and after them Narses, all valiant Cap|taines, were imployed. It was brought on vpon this occa|sion,Platin. de vita Ioan. 1. as Evagrius following Procopius (in whose time this warfare was intended) doth record. Aalasunta, the daugh|ter of Theodoricus, had the government of Italy. Astalarichus her sonne, before hee came to perfect age died. Theodatus, a kinsman of Theodoricus had the government by the mar|iage of Aalasunta,Fun. chron. but he rendered vnto her evill for good,

and thrust her into prison, and slew her. In Theodatus time came Belisarius to Italy, to fight against the Gothes, but see|ing Theodatus was more meet for Philosophy then for war|fare, he gaue place to Vitiges to haue the governme~t. Belisarius recovered the Isle of Sicile,Evag. l. 4. c. 21. he came to Rome, and the ports were opened to him, and hee was gladly received: he tooke Vitiges King of the Gothes, and carried him captive to Con|stantinople. Mundus another Captain, overcame the Goths in Dalmatia, recovered the Countrey to the Romanes: but in the mids of this victory hee was slaine through too hasty and furious pursuing of his enemies, who had slaine his sonne. In the absence of Belisarius (for the Emperour had sent for him to fight against the Persians) the Gothes chose Theudebaldus, and after him Attaricus, who continued but short time. Finally, Totilas was chosen to bee their King, who recovered againe the towne of Rome, and the most part of all the principall townes of Italy. Belisarius, albeit hee was sent backe againe to Italy, and recovered Rome the second time, yet the Persian warre continually was the cause of reducing him backe againe from Italy. In the end, Nar|ses, a valiant man was sent to Italy, who overcame the Gothes, draue them out of Italy, and brought it againe vn|der the soveraignty of the Romans. What good recompence for so great service was rendered to Belisarius and Narses, many writers haue recorded, I passe it over with silence. Narses mooved with indignation against the Empresse So|phia, the wife of Iustinus the younger, the successor of Iusti|nian, he sent for the Longobards, who came out of Panno|nia, and possessed themselues in that part of Italy, which is vnto this day called Lombardy.
It is one of Iustinians chief praises, that he caused the great Ocean Sea of the Romane lawes to bee abriged into short compend, and to be comprised within the compasse of fifty bookes, 2. Concel. vulgarly called Pandectis, or Digestis, having short titles prefixed vnto them, rather then prolix and tedious co~mentaries subioyned vnto them. Also he gathered a gene|rall Councell in Constantinople, about the 14. yeere of his

raigne, to pacifie if it were possible, the contentious dispu|tations that were mooved about the writings of Origen, The|odorus, and Ibas, but this I referre to its owne place.


Iustinus the younger.
IVstinus was nephew to Iustinian.Evag. l. 5. c. 23. Hee governed sixteene yeeres. Hee governed alone twelue yeeres, and with Ti|berius, whom hee associated, three yeeres and eleven months. All things succeeded vnprosperously in his time. Alboinus King of the Longobards, possessed himselfe and his people in Italy.Evag. l. 5. c. 10. Cosroes King of Persia, with his Captaine Adaar|manes, tooke the towne of Apamia, and burnt it with fire, and the towne of Circesium, and put garrisons into it, and miserably wasted the bounds of the Romane dominions. When these things were reported to Iustinus, who would credite no true information before, now is stricken with madnes and astonishment of minde, being grieved for this, that the state of the Romane Empire should haue decayed in his time,Idem l. 5. c. 11.12. and through his default. For remedy whereof, Tiberius a wise and valiant man, by the advice of Sophia, was associate to Iustinus, to governe the affaires of the king|dome. Evagrius describeth at length the Oration of Iusti|nus to Tiberius, when he clothed him with all Emperiall or|naments, and how hee exhorted him not to be bewitched with the splendor of those garments, as he had beene, but with vigilancy and wisedome, to governe the estate of the kingdome. This he spake after he was recovered of his dis|ease;Evag. l. 5 c. 13. and in presence of all the noblemen of his Court, so that they were compelled to shead abundance of teares, when they heard at one time so cleere a confession of his owne miscariage, and so prudent counsell given to his asso|ciate.



Tiberius.
TIberius raigned three yeeres and eleven months, in con|iunct authority with Iustinus, and after his death, hee raigned foure yeeres himselfe alone: so all the time of his government was seven yeeres and eleven moneths. In his time Cosroes King of Persia, was puft vp with such insolen|cie, in regard of his former victories, that hee would not admit the Ambassadours of Tiberius to his presence, but commanded them to follow him to Caesarea of Cappado|cia, there to receiue their answer, for hee had taken Daras a towne of Mesopotamia, in the borders of the Romane Em|pire, builded by the Emperour Anastatius, and called Daras, because about this place Darius had his last overthrow by Alexander of Macedonia.Evag. l. 3. c. 37. After the taking of Daras, hee marched toward Armenia, in the Summer time, and from thence entended to addresse toward Caesarea Cappadocia, expecting none encounter or resistance of the Roman army. But Tiberius had prepared a well appointed army, consisting of mo then an 100.Evag. l. 5. c. 14. and fifty thousand men, to resist Cosroes, whose forces when Cosroes could not match, he fled: and for very heart-griefe hee died, and gaue advice to the Persians, not to make warre against the Roman Empire, in any time to come. The estate of the Church was the more peaceable vnder his raigne, because the Vandales in Africke, and the Gothes in Italy were already vtterly subdued. The Longo|bards, whom Narses brought out of Pannonia to Italy, were the more insolent to afflict Christians, because Tiberius was occupied in the Persian warfare against Cosroes. The Nation of the Gothes had as yet full sway in Spaine,Hist. Magd. cent. 6. cap. 3. and they were miserably addicted to the Arrian heresie, insomuch that Le|mugildus King of the Gothes, caused his owne naturall son Elmingildus to be slaine,Plain. de vit. Gregor. 1. because he forsook the Arrian faith. Also their number was augmented by returning of many

Vandales to Spaine, who had escaped the hands of Beli|sarius.


Mauritius.
MAuritius was Captaine of the Army of Tiberius, to whom Tiberius gaue his daughter in marriage, with his kingdome:Evag. l. 5. c. 22. for he found himselfe sicke vnto the death. He raigned 20. yeeres, hee fought against the Persians, and prospered in that warfare: and after that, peace was bound vp amongst them. Chaianus King of Avares, Hunnes, and Slavonians, fought against him, and carryed away many captiues and prisoners. In redeeming of the captives, Mau|ritius was too niggardly, whereby it came to passe, that Chai|anus slew 12. thousand prisoners, which might haue beene ransomed for a small summe of money. This oversight of the Emperour, not onely stayned other his noble vertues, but also purchased the hatred of the souldiers against him, wher|by it came to passe, that they set vp Phocas to bee Emperour in his stead.Commen Funct. lib. 8. Of this calamity it is thought that Mauritius was foreseene in his dreame, and that hee chose rather to bee punished in this world for his faults, then in the world to come. Afterward he was brought in bands to Phocas, his wife, and fiue children were cruelly slaine in his owne pre|sence, and finally, bloody Phocas slew himselfe, of whom it is reported, that when he saw his wife and children put to death,Note. he gaue glory to God in his greatest calamity, and said; Iust art thou, O Lord, and righteous in all thy Iudge|ments.




CENTVRIE VII.

Phocas.
_THe heresie of Eutyches continued in this Centurie from the beginning, to the end thereof: countenanced by the Em|perours, such as Heraclius and Constans. Neverthelesse I haue cut off the Euty|chian Persecution at the end of the sixt Centurie, because Heraclius, albeit hee favoured the error of the Monothelites, (a branch of Euty|ches heresie) notwithstanding hee was so employed with warres against the Avares in the West, and the Persians and Saracens in the East, that hee had not a vacant time to per|secute them who professed another faith. And Constans be|gan to persecute, but was quickly interrupted by new occa|sion of Sea-warfare against the Saracens, wherein also hee was overcome. For this cause I haue referred the Eutychi|an persecution rather to the former Centurie, then to this. Moreover, in this Centurie the vniversall Bishop, and the Antichrist beginneth to spring vp: so that all the rest of the History must be spent in three heads: First, in decla|ring The growth of the Antichrist, in the seventh, eight, and ninth Centuries: Secondly, in declaring his tyranny, and prevailing power over the Romane Emperours, and Mo|narches of the world, in the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth Centuries: And finally, in declaring his discovery, and his battell against the Saints, especially against those who dis|covered him: and this shall be done (God willing) from the thirteenth Century vnto our time. In the History I am compelled to be short, because it may be read in many Au|thors, Chronologies, and Compends, whereby it may be sufficiently knowne.
Phocas, after the cruell slaughter of his master Mauritius, was proclaimed to be Emperour by the Romaine souldi|ours, in the yeere of our Lord 604. and he raigned 8, yeeres: in crueltie, drunkennesse, lecherie, hee surpassed beyond all men,  justlie was called, The calamity of the Romane Empire; nothing succeeded prosperouslie with this parricide: Cosroes on the East-side, the Auares on the West, the Slauonians on the North-side, inuading Dalmatia, and Agilulphus king of Lumbardis in Italie, adding vnto his dominion Mantua, Cremona, and Vulturnia: all these at one time weakened the Romane Empire, so farre that it could neuer attaine againe to the former strength and splendor that it was wont to haue. Great strife had beene betwixt the chaires of Rome and Constantinople for supremacy. The Patriarch of Con|stantinople thought it due to him,Platina in vita Bonif 3. be
cause Constantinople was the seate of the Empire. The Patriarch of Rome on the other part, said, that Constantinople was but a Colonie of Rome, and that the Grecians themselues in their Letters called the Emperour . To this con|trouersie Phocas put an end, and ordained Bonifacius the third to be called Vniuersall Bishop, and the Church of Rome to bee head of all other Churches. This dignitie the Ro|mane Church begged (as Platina granteth) and not with|out great conention, obtained it at the handes of Phocas. This is that stile, which Gregorius the first counted Anti|christian in the person of Ioannes , Patriarch of Con|stantinople. In the end Priscus his owne sonne in law, Heraclianus, the father of Heraclius the Emperour, and Phocius, whose wife Phocas had vnhonestly abused, conspi|red against him, and ouer-came him, and brought him to Heraclius,Note.
who commanded his head, feete, and secret mem|bers to be cut off, and the stampe of his bodie was giuen to the souldiers to be burnt with fire.



Heraclius.
AFter Phocas raigned Heraclius thirtie yeeres. Cosroes king of Persia had mightilie preuailed,Paulus dia|nus, lib. 18. rerum Rnan. and had conquered Syria, Phenicia, and Palestina, and had taken Ierusalem, and Zacharias the Bishop thereof, and the Holie Crosse, and had giuen many thousands of Christians to the Iewes to bee slaine. Neither would he accept any conditions of peace with Heraclius, except hee would condiscend to forsake the wor|shipping of Christ, and worship the Sunne as the Persians did. For this cause Heraclius was compelled to make peace with the Auares on his West side, and to lead his Army to Asia against the Persians, which indured the space of sixe yeares, wherein he preuayled against Cosroes, and recouered all the Prouinces which Cosroes had taken from the Romane Empire.Hist. Magd. cent. 7. cap. 3. Finallie Cosroes was taken, cast in prison, and cruellie slaine by his owne son Siroes, because he had preferred Me|darses his younger sonne to Siroes, his elder brother. This Siroes made a couenant of peace with Heraclius, and deliue|red vnto him Zacharias Bishop of Ierusalem, with the Holie Crosse and the prisoners whom his father had carried Cap|tiue. And so Heraclius in the seuenth yeere, returned backe againe to Constantinople with great triumph. After this the Emperour being circumuened by Pyrrhus Bishop of Constantinople and Cyrus Bishop of Alexandria, fell into the Heresie of the Monothelites: And to this fault hee added other faults, such as incest, for he married his owne sisters daughter: and hee was giuen to curious Artes, and to seeke out the euent of thinges by judiciall A|strologie: and was admonished by the Astrologians to be|ware of the circumcised people. Heraclius onely deemed, that the Iewes should trouble him but it was the Sara|cenes, in whom this prophesie had performance:A description of the Saracens for in his time beganne the Monarchie of the Saracenes, and the

blasphemous doctrine of Mahomet.Platinain vita Senerini. The Saracenes were peo|ple dwelling in Arabia,Note. the posteritie of Hagar, and not of Sara: These fought vnder the banner of Heraclius in his sixt yeere warrefare against the Persians: when they craued the wages, of their seruice, in stead of money they receiued contumelious words, and were called Arabik dogs by the Emperours treasurer. This contumely did so irritatate them, that they choosed Mahomet to be their captaine, Anno, 623. inuaded Damascus, and tooke it, and within few yeeres con|quered Syria, Phaenicia, Palestina, and Aegypt: And not con|tent with this, they inuaded the kingdome of the Persians and subdued it, and cut off the kings seed. The blasphe|mous Alcaron and alfurca of Mahomet, which hee said hee receiued from heauen, was a doctrine of lies, containing a mixture of the religion of the Iewes, Pagans, and Christians: to the making whereof concurred Sergius a Nestorian heretik, and Iohn of Antiochia, an Arrian heretike, and some Iewes. Mahomet also ordained, that all people whom the Saracenes could conquer, should be compelled by fire and sword, and al kind of violence, to receiue the doctrine contained in these bookes. Heraclius perceiuing the sudden  great increase of the do~inion of the Saracens gathered a great army,  fought against them, but he was ouer-come in battell and lost 150. thousand men of his army. And when he renewed his forces againe to fight against the Saracens, he found that 52. thou|sand men of his army died in one night suddenly, as those did who were slaine by the Angell of God in the army of Se|nacherib.Isai. 37.36. Heraclius was so discouraged with the calamitie of his armie, that he contracted sicknesse and died.


Constantinus and Heracleonas.
AEter the death of Heraclius raigned his son Constantine, 4 moneths,  was made out of the way, by poyson giuen vnto him by Martina his fathers second wife, to the end that

Heracleonas her son might raigne. But God suffered not this wickednes to be vnpunished: For Martina and Heracleonas were taken by the Senators of Constantinople,  her tongue was cut out, and his nose cut off, least either her flattering speeches, or his beauty and comelines should haue moued the people to compassion: and they were both banished.
About this time the Saracenes had taken Caesarea in Pale|stina after they had besieged it seuen yeeres: and they slew in it seuen thousand Christians.


Constans.
AFter the banishment of Martina, and Heracleonas her sonne, raigned Constans the sonne of Constantine, 27. yeeres: in religion he followed the footsteps of Heraclius and was infected with the heresie of the Monothelites, and persecuted Martinus 1. Bishop of Rome, because he had ga|thered a Synode in Rome, and damned the heresie of the Mo|nothelites: whom also he caused to be brought in bands to Constantinople,Hist. Magd. cent. 8. cap. 3. cut out his tongue, and cut off his right hand, and banished him to Chersonesus in Pontus, where hee ended his life. Hee fought also against the Saracenes in sea-warre-fare, and was ouer-come by them, like as in|terpreters of dreames had fore-tolde him: for he dreamed, that hee was dwelling in Thessalonica, and the interpre|ters said it portended no good, but that others should o|uer-come him, as if the world Thessalonica did import , that is, render victory to another. Constans was slaine by one of his owne seruants as hee was washing him|selfe in the bathe-houses of Saracuse.



Constantinus Pogonatus.
COnstans being slaine in Sicile, the army in those parts appointed Mezentius, a man of incomparable beau|tie, to bee Emperour: but Constantinus, the eldest sonne of Constans, sayled to Sicile with a great nauie, slew Mezen|tius, and the murtherers of his father, and recouered his fathers dominion to himselfe. Hee was called Pogonatus, because his face was not bare and voide of haire when he returned from Sicile, as it was when hee sailed thither from Byzans, but his face was rough and couered with haire. Hee had 2. brethren, whom the people reuernced with equall honour as they did him: therefore hee disfigu|red their faces by cutting off their noses, and reigned him|selfe alone 17. yeeres. In religion hee was not like vnto his predecessors,Chron. func. who had beene fauourers of heretiques, but he assembled a generall Councell at Constantinople, vulgarly called, the sixt Oecumenick Councell, wherein the heresie of the Monothelites was vtterly damned, as in his owne place shall be declared, God willing. Likewise, the estate of the Emperour was more peaceable than it had beene in time of his predecessors: for the Saracens were compel|led to seeke conditions of peace from him, and to offer yeerely paiment of 3000.Hist. Magd. cen. 7. cap. 3. pound weight of gold vnto him, with other tributes of horse, seruants, and prisoners.


Iustinianus the second, Leontius, and Absimarus.
AFter the death of Constantine, raigned his son Iustinian the second, sixteene yeeres, to wit, ten yeeres before his

banishment, and sixe yeeres after his banishment: His go|uernement was cruell and bloode, by perswasion of Stepha|nus, and Theodorus, whose counsell hee followed, euen till the purpose of exirpation of all the Citizens of Constanti|nople. But Leontius, a man of noble birth, pitying the Citie, tooke Iustinian the Emperour, cut off his nose, and banished him to Chersonesus Ponti, where he remained in great miserie ten yeeres. Stephanus and Theodorus his bad counsellors, re|ceaued a condigne punishment, for they were burnt quicke in the bellie of an hot brasen bull.
After this banishment of Iustinian the second, Leontius raigned three yeeres. The flexible mindes of vnconstant people, and souldiers, choosed Absimarus to be their Em|perour, who dealt with Leontius as hee had dealt with Iusti|nian, and cut off his nose, and thrust him into a Monaste|rie, where hee remained seuen yeeres, to wit, all the time of Absimarus gouernement.
In the ende, Iustinian, after ten yeeres banishment, reco|uered his Emperiall dignitie againe, by the helpe of Terbelli Prince of Bulgaria. Hee caused Leontius, and Absimarus to be brought vnto him, whom he trampled vnder his feete,  after commanded that they should be beheaded. The crueltie that he vsed against the Citizens of Con|stantinople, and against the inhabita of Chersonesus Ponti, is almost vnspeakeable. He was hated of all men Philippicus conspi|red against him and he was slaine by one named Elias, his seruant.




CENTVRIE. VIII.

Philippicus.
_AFter Iustinian the second was slaine, Philippi|cus, raigned two yeeres, and nine moneths. Great dissention fell out betwixt the Em|perour Philippicus and Constantine Bishop of Rome, for razing (as appeareth) the pictures of Fathers, who were present at the sixt Generall Councell, which being pictured in the Temple of Sopia, were abolished by the commandement of Philippicus. Constantine Bishop of Rome declared the Emperour an heretique, and comman|ded,Note. that his name should be razed out of charters. This was the first great direct, and violent opposition, that the Bishops of Rome attempted against noble Emperours. Phi|lippicus was taken, and his eyes were put out by Anastasius, otherwise called Artemius, his Secretarie who raigned in his stead.


Artemius.
ARtemius, otherwise called Anastasius, raigned one yeere and three monethes: hee deposed Iohn Patriarch of Constantinople, who kept not the true faith: and placed Germanus in his steade. Hee was taken by Theodosius, and sent prisoner to Nice, and from thence to Thessalonica, where he was compelled to renounce his Emperiall digni|tie, and to be clothed with the habite of a Monke.



Theodosius.
THeodosius raigned scarce one yeere: and when he heard that Leo Isaurus, gouernour in the East parts, was saluted Emperour by the armie, he willingly gaue ouer his Empe|riall dignitie, and liued, a priuate and peaceable man.


Leo Isaurus.
LEo Isaurus raigned twentie foure yeeres: great com|motions were in his time, both, in Church and policie In Church-affaires, he was an hater of Images, and burnt I|mages made of wood, other images hee melted,  misfashio|ned: against whom Gregorius the second, pust vp with anti|christian pride,Note. opposed himselfe not only allowing wor|shipping of images, but also forbidding to pay tribute to the Emperour Leo. The Emperour on the other part irrita|ted with the proud attempts of Gregorius the second, vsed indirect meanes to cut him off: but the enterprises of his de|puties, Marinus, Paulus, Eutychius, and their followers, succee|ded vnprosperously. Moreouer, the Bishop of Rome sought support from the Lombardis, who had beene at all times preceding enemies to the chaire of Rome: yet in Leo his dayes they were bounde with the bishop of Rome in a couenant of friendship, for none other cause, but this one|ly, to shake off the yoke of the Emperours obedience. And when the bishop of Rome saw that the Emperour had great businesse in warres against the Saracens hee thought it a fit occasion to draw the dominion of Italie vnto his owne sub|jection: and therefore,Hist. Magd. cent. 8. cap. 3. with aduise of the Clergie, hee both excommunicated the Emperour, as a destroyer of the Images of the Saints, and disauthorised him of his Emperiall soue|raignty

in Italy. So earely began the increasing Grando of Antichrist, to send forth the thunder-bolts of cursings against the anoynted of the Lord.
In this Emperours dayes the Saracens passed over the Straits, invaded the kingdom of Spaine, slew Rodericus King of the Gothes, and his sonne, and put an end to the king|dome of the Gothes in Spaine, after they had raigned 346. yeeres:Platin. in vit. Greg. 2. and being incited by Eudo, Duke of Aquitania, they marched towards France: but through the valour of Carolus Martellus, a man of noble birth in France, they were so encountred, that three hundred thousand, and threescore and ten thousand Saracens were slaine, and the countrey of France was made free of the feare of the Saracens.


Constantinus Copronymus.
AFter Leo, his sonne Constantinus Copronymus raigned 35. yeeres (Chytreus reckoneth onely 23. yeeres) be|cause hee hated the worshipping of Images (which errour had taken deepe roote in this age): The writers of the Hi|story of this time haue dipped their pens in gall and worm|wood, to blaspheme the honourable name of Constantinus: but whatsoever Paulus Diaconus, or Zonoras haue written to his disgrace, his name will bee in honourable account and regard in the Church of Christ. The Senate, and the peo|ple of Constantinople, addicted to the worshipping of I|mages, hated the Emperour, and were glad of the false ru|moured tidings of his death, when he went to fight against the Arabians, and they chose Artabasdus to be Emperour in his stead. But Constantine returned to Constantinople, be|sieged the towne, and recovered his owne kingdome againe. Hee gathered a generall Councell at Constantinople, anno 755. wherein the worshipping of Images was damned, as shall be declared (God willing) in its owne place. In this Emperours dayes were warres betwixt the King of Lom|bardis,

and the Bishops of Rome: but the Roman Bishops begged the helpe of Carolus Martellus against Luitprand, and the helpe of Pipinus against Aistulphus, and the helpe of Carolus Magnus against Desiderius, all Kings of Lombar|dis: and by continuall imploring the helpe of the Nobles and Kings of France, the Lombards were vtterly subdued, the chaire of Rome was enriched, the revenue of the Empe|rour of the East was impaired, and a ground was layd for the advancement of the Kings of France to the Imperiall dignity. In this Emperours dayes the Turkes, or Scythians, invaded the Armenians,Platin. in vit. Step 2. and molested the Saracens, and some countries of Asia minor, in the end they accorded with the Saracens: But this agreement could not bee perfected without condition, That the Turkes in Persia should vn|dergoe the name of Saracens, hoping thereby that they would easily embrace the Mahometan religion, wherin their expectation was not frustrate.
In the yeere of our Lord 579. and in the 18. yeere of the raigne of Constantine, a wonderfull thing fell out amongst wise men of Persia, called Magi, and Maurophori Ps they perswaded both themselues, and others also, That if a man would sell all that hee had,Funct. Com|ment. lib. 8. and throw himselfe head|long from the walles of the Citie, his soule should by and by be transported to heaven.Note. So prone and bent is the cor|rupt nature of man to leane vpon vaine hopes,  to beleeue promises which God hath not made.


Leo the sonne of Copronymus.
LEo the sonne of Constantinus Copronymus, raigned fiue yeeres. Hee followed the footsteps of his father in zeale against worshipping of Images: and punished the Groomes of his owne chamber, such as Iames, Papias, Stratius, and Theophanes, for worshipping of Images. The superstitious writers of the History of this time, such as Zonaras, and Pa|lus

Diaconus reckon the aforesayd persons in the Catalogue of holy Confessors. But Christ will neuer count them to be his Martyrs, who fight obstinately against the truth, e|ven vnto the death: neither will hee count them to be his Confessors, who suffer iustly inflicted punishment for the contempt of the lawes of Magistrates, being agreeable to the law of God.


Irene, and Constantinus her sonne.
AFter the death of Leo, raigned Irene his wife, with her sonne Constantine, ten yeeres. Afterwards Constantine deposed his mother from her authority, and raigned alone seven yeeres. And Irene on the other part, taking this in|dignity done vnto her grievously, shee spoyled her sonne both of his eyes, and of his Empire, cast him into prison, where he dyed for heart griefe: and shee raigned againe 4. yeeres after her sonnes imprisonment: So all the yeeres of the raigne of Irene and her son, coniunctly  severally, first and last, were 21 yeeres. This Empresse was superstiti|ous, crafty, and infortunate. Shee was a superstious defen|der of the worshipping of Images. A malicious and veno|mous hater of the name of Constantinus Copronymus, (whose dead body shee commanded to be brought out of his graue, to be burnt with fire, resolved into ashes, and to be cast into the Sea (albeit Constantine was her owne father in law).Pro. 12. The mercies of the wicked are cruell. Her craft appeared in bringing her forces to Constantinople, in the sixt yeere of her raigne, vnder pretence of fighting against the Arabians, and in disarming of them whom shee knew to haue beene adversaries to the worshipping of Images, and sending them in ships to the places from whence they came. For before the dayes of Constantinus Copronymus, the towne of Constan|tinople by famine and pestilence, and being besieged three yeeres by the Saracens, was miserably dispeopled, so that

thirty thousand of the people of Constantinople died.Platin. in vit. Greg 2. But Copronymus for the repayring of that losse, sent for strangers, and replenished the towne with new Inhabitants. These strangers she sent backe againe,Funct. Com|ment. in chron. lib. 8. to the places from whence they came, especially, because in popular commotion they had set themselues in armes, and menaced the Fathers con|vened in Constantinople, by Irene and her sonne, for allow|ance of adoration of Images. Shee was infortunate, because the Empire of the East was so extenuated in her time, that it was rather like vnto a shadow, then vnto an Empire. So that in the subsequent History I will forget (after a manner) the Emperours of the West. Now Irene was deposed, and banished, by Ni|cephorus, who raigned eight yeeres after her banishment.




CENTVRIE IX.

Carolus Magnus.
_IN the yeere of our Lord 801. Charles the Great, King of France, was declared Emperour, by Leo the third, Bishop of Rome: and hee raigned sixteene yeeres in his Imperiall dignity: for hee conti|nued King of France forty and six yeeres. The Empire of the West had beene cut off since the dayes of Augustulus, the sonne of Orestes, whom Odoacer, King of Rugiheruli, c. had compelled to denude himselfe of the Imperiall dignity. Now after the issue of 300. yeeres, and after the Hunnes, the Gothes, the Lom|bards, and other Nations had obtained dominion in the West, all abstaining (notwithstanding of their prevailing power) from the name, dignity, and stile of Emperours. Now at length (I say) Charles the Great is anoynted, and crowned Emperor, by Leo the third, in the towne of Rome. And this was the beginning of that evill custome which af|ter followed, to wit, That Emperours should receiue their coronation from the Bishops of Rome. At this time the Empire of the East was in the hands of the Empresse Irene, and in the hands of the Emperour Nicephorus, who had ba|nished Irene, and raigned in her stead. The Empire of the East was also weake at this time, as appeareth by a covenant of peace which they concluded with Charles, Emperour of the West: in the which no mention is made of Exarchatus Ravennae, to be rendred againe vnto them: onely that the Isle of Sicile, and the townes and lands which lie from Na|ples Eastward on the right hand, and from Manfredonia (sometimes called Syponto) on the left hand, compassed a|bout

with the Seas, called Superum  Inferum: these should remaine in the possession of the Emperours of Constanti|nople. 'Charles a prudent and godly Emperour, more sound and vpright in sundry heads of Christian doctrine, then many others: for hee detested the worshipping of Ima|ges, as vile Idolatry: as appeareth by his bookes wri|tten against the second Councell of Nice. Charles was very friendly to Christians, and defended them against the violence and tyranny of their persecuting enemies: namely, against Godfridus, King of Denmarke, a fierce adversary a|gainst the Christians, who dwelt in Saxony. Likewise hee subdued the Slavonians, and Bohemians, enemies to Chri|stian Religion: and was iustly called Magnus, for his great exploits and valiant acts, which God prospered in his hand. Pipinus, the sonne of the Emperour Charles, was declared King of Italy: who died before his father, and after his death hee appointed Bernard his nephew to raigne in Italy, with expresse commandement, That hee should bee obedi|ent to his sonne Ludovicke, whome hee ordained to be suc|cessour to himselfe in the Imperiall office. So the Emperor Charles full of dayes, died in the 71. yeere of his age, and was buried in Aken.


Ludovicus Pius.
AFter Charles succeeded his sonne Ludovicus Pius, and raigned 26. yeeres. For his gentle and meeke behavi|our, he was called Pius. He received the Imperiall Diadem from Stephanus the fourth, at Aken. Bernard his brothers sonne, forgetfull of the mandate of Charles the Great, re|belled against Ludovicus Pius, and was beheaded at Aken. Likewise, his owne sonnes (assisted with Hugobortus, Bishop of Lions, and Bernhardus, Bishop of Vienne, and other Bi|shops, who did excommunicate the Emperour for adhe|rence to Iudith his wife) behaued themselues very vn|dutifully

towards their father. Neverthelesse, he freely par|doned his sonnes, and accepted them againe into favour. Also Fredericke, Bishop of Vtrecht, threatned to excommu|nicate the Emperour, if hee did no forsake the company of Iudith, his welbeloved wife, and daughter to the Duke of Bavaria, because shee was his neere kinswoman, to wit, in degrees of consanguinity for bidden, in the Popish lawe. The Empresse willing to bee revenged of the Bishop, shee hired two Gentlemen, who set vpon him after Church ser|vice, and slew him in his Priestly garments. In his time also the Saracens in huge numbers, like vnto Locusts, swarmed out of Egypt and Africke, and invaded the Isle of Sicile. By cutting downe all fruitfull trees, burning Townes, Tem|ples, and Monasteries, and by killing Bishops, Priests, and Monkes, they brought the Ile to an vtter desolation. Gre|gory the fourth at that time was Pope: and hee exhorted the Emperour, and his sonne Lotharius, to support the distres|sed estate of the Isle of Sicile. They answered, That albeit that matter duly belonged to Michael, Emperour of Con|stantinople, yet neverthelesse, they refused not to vndertake the worke, vpon the common charges of the Countrey.
Now whilest these things were in reasoning,Platin. in vit. Greg. 4. Bonifacius, Count of Corsica, and his brother Bertarius, with support of the people of Hetruria, arrived with a Navie at Africke: and betwixt Vtica and Carthage, encountred with the Sa|racens foure times, and slew of them so great a number, that they were compelled to recall their forces backe againe from Sicile: like as of old the Carthaginians vexed by Scipio, re|called Hanniball for the safety of his owne country: So Bo|nifacius returned back againe with an army victorious, and richly lodened with the spoyle of his enemies. Nothing was more vnprovidently done by the good Emperour Lodovi|cus Pius, then the giving ouer of that right, voluntarily con|ferred to Charles his father, by Adrian the first, and Leo the third: to wit, That no man should be elected Pope with|out the consent and allowance of the Emperour.Funct. com|ment. l. 9. This fore|said right Ludovicus gaue over to the Clergie and people of

Rome: onely; the Romanes for keeping of friendshippe, should send an Ambassadour to the King of France, decla|ring whom they had elected to bee Pope.Note. Hereby a patent doore was opened to all mischiefe, which after followed: and to that horrible contention betwixt Emperours and Popes, concerning investment of Bishops. In his time three Emperours raigned in the East, at Constantinople: to wit, Leo Armenius, Michael Balbus, and Theophilus. Leo Arme|menius raigned seven yeeres. Hee banished Nicephorus, Pa|triarch of Constantinople, for defending adoration of Ima|ges. Michael Balbus slew Leo, his predecessor, whilst he was praising God in the Church, and raigned in his stead nine yeeres. In his time the Saracens mightily prevailed: a num|ber of them issued out of Spaine, and tooke the Isle of Can|die. Another company comming from Africke, wasted the Isle of Sicile. Theophilus raigned ten yeeres, and fought a|gainst the Saracens, who did oppresse the countrey of Asia: but he had no good successe.


Lotharius.
LOtharius, the sonne of Ludovicus Pius, was declared King of Italy, and Augustus before his fathers death. He was anoynted by Pope Paschalis, in the Church of Saint Pe|ter: and he raigned 15. yeeres. Great hostility and bloody warres fell out amongst the children of Ludovicus Pius: to wit, Lotharius, Lewis, Charles, and Pipinus, fordividing of their fathers Lands. In this civill dissention, the Nobility of France was so miserably weakened, that the Normans and Danes tooke boldnesse to invade the countrey of France: which they vexed for the space of twenty yeeres. In the East, after Theophilus had concluded his life, his sonne Mi|chael, with his mother Theodora governed the estate. Micha|el raigned foure and twenty yeeres. Theodora continued on|ly eleven yeeres. She persecuted those who would not wor|ship

Images: albeit her husband before his departure from his life had seriously admonished her, that shee should not trouble the Church for restoring of Images.


Ludouicus the second.
LVdouicus the second, and son of Lotharius, raigned one and twentie yeeres. The intestine dissention betwixt him and his brother Charles, seemeth to be like vnto an heredita|rie sicknesse. Howsoeuer, the Emperour Ldouicke had dis|honour thereby: because the rebelles of Charles desired the Emperours protection against his owne brother: which when hee had graunted; the rebelles were recon|ciled againe with their owne King Charles: and the Emperour, with dishonour, was compelled to retire from his brothers Dominions. In the East, Michael, Em|perour of Constantinople, slew his brother Theoctistus, and thrust his mother Theodora, and her sisters, into a Monasterie, and raigned himselfe alone after his mothers deposition thirteene yeares. So the whole time of the gouernement of Michael, was twentie and foure yeeres. He fought against the Saracenes, but very vnprosperously, and was slaine by Ba|silius, who raigned in his stead seuen yeeres.


Carolus Caluus.
LVdovicus the second dying without children, his brother Carolus Caluus, king of France, obtained at the handes of the Bishop of Rome, by many liberall giftes, to be annoin|ted Emperour. Hee continued Emperour not aboue two yeeres: and was poysoned by one Sedekias, a Iew, whom hee vsed for his Physitian.



Carolus Crassus.
CArolus Crassus was the sonne of Lewis, king of Ger|manie: hee raigned ten yeeres. Carolus Balbus, the son of Carolus Caluus, was quicklie cut off by death. I herefore, I haue ouerpassed his name with silence.Hist. Magd. cent 9. cap. 16. In this Emperours time the Normanes and Danes made such horrible ex|cursions and desolations in France, that the Emperour, who came with a great Armie, to support the distressed estate of France, was compelled to make peace with them, Anno 888. and assigned vnto them that part of Fraunce which lieth beyonde Seane, towardes the Britan|nicke Ocean, to bee their habitation: which hath the name of Normandie vntill this day. Crassus, for his neg|ligence and euill gouernement, was deposed from his authoritie, and Arnulphus, his nephew, was declared Em|perour.


Arnulphus.
AFter the death of Carolus Crassus, great troubles ensued in Italie, by the factions of Berengarius, whom the Lombardes choosed to be king of Italie, on the one part: and Guido, Duke of Spoleto, whom others choosed to raigne in Italie, on the other part. In the middest of these factions Arnulphus leadeth an armie out of Germanie. He tooke the Towne of Bergamum, and hanged Ambrose, the Earle thereof, vpon a Gibbet, before the port of the Towne. This seueritie terrified other Townes, and made them to yeelde. Hee addressed towardes Rome, and was crowned Emperour by Formosius, whose enemies he puni|shed vnto the death. From thence hee addressed to fight

against Guido: but hee fled, and escaped the Emperoures hands. The wife of Guido, hauing no puissance to resist the Emperours forces, shee hired some of the Emperoures seruantes, who gaue vnto him a cup of poyson, which brought vpon him a lethargie, and three dayes sleeping continually. After this he arose sicke, and left the siedge, (for hee was besieging the wife of Guido) and he died, after hee had raigned twelue yeeres. In the East gouerned Leo, the sonne of Basilius, in whose time the Sa|racens co~quered Tauromi|nium, a towne in Sicile, and the Isle of Lemnos.




CENTVRIE. X.

Ludovicus tertius.
_AFter Arnulphus succeeded his son Lewis the 3.  raigned 10. yeeres, he receiued not the Emperial Diadem at Rome: because Bere~|garius by force inioyed the Kingdome of Italie. At this time the Hungares a na|tion fierce and cruell inuaded Italy, France, and Germanie, and made in these nations horrible desolations. Likewise the Sa|racens invaded Calabria and Apulia in Italie,Platin. in vita. Ioan. 10. and if the Lord had not pittied the distressed estate of Europe, it was at this time like to be vndone, for Platina writeth that while they were besieging Consentia, the King of the Saracens was slaine with thunder, and the Saracens terrified with this vnprosperous successe returned backe againe to Africk. In this Emperours dayes a remarkable thing fell out. Albert Marquis of Bamberg rebelled against the Emperour Lewis,Funct. Comment in chronol lib. 9. and hee had slaine Conrad the Emperours brother. The Emperour seeing that by no meanes hee could prevaile a|gainst him,Note. hee was supported by the coofening treason of Hatto Arch-bishop of Mentz; for he came to the noble Mar|quis as though he would make reconciliation betweene the Emperour and him, and swore vnto him, that hee would bring him backe in safetie to his owne house, but his deceit|full maner of reducing was this. After they had riden a short way the Bishop felt his stomach, and repented they had not first dined before they had taken iourney. Thus the Marquis and the Bishop returned backe againe and dined, this the Bishop counted an exoneration of his promise and oath, and like a traitour deliuered him to the Emperour, who by and by beheaded the Marquis. In the East Alexander raigned two yeeres, and after him Constantine, a man of good dispo|sition,

but defrauded of his kingdome by Romannus Captain of his armie.


Cunradus primus.
AFter Lewis, his Nephew Cunrad the first was made Em|perour and ruled seuen yeeres. Hee was the last of the of-spring of Charles the great (who had enioyed the empire of the West 112. yeeres) after whom the Empire was trans|ferred to the Saxons. When he fell sicke hee called for his brother Eberhard, and desired him to deliuer the imperiall ornaments, to Henrie Duke of Saxon, who for his wisedome and worthinesse was most meet to gouerne the troubled e|state of the Empyre,Note. which dutie Eberhard most faithfullie performed, preferring fidelitie in performing his promise made to his brother, before the desire of a kingdome.


Henricus auceps.
HEnrie Duke of Saxonie to whom Eberhard broght the Imperial ornaments, was called Auceps, because he was delighting himselfe in hauking when Eberhard came vnto him with the ornaments a foresaid. He raigned 17. yeeres for wisedome and magnanimitie worthy of so high a place. He made a couenant of peace with the Hungars for the space of 9. yeeres. He fought against the Sclauonians, the people of Dalmatia and the Bohemians, and made them tri|butaries vnto him, when the 9. yeeres were expired hee fought a great battell against the Hungares at Mersburg and prevailed against them, and in testimonie of his thank|fulnesse to God who gaue vnto him victorie, he purged his dominions from Simonie, a fault vniuersallie ouerspread in those dayes,Not and dedicated to Gods seruice the whole tribute

which the Saxons were accustomed to pay to the Hungars, hee was greatly beloued of his subiects and was called Rater patriae.
In the East Constantine recouered his Empire againe From Romanus and his Sonnes, and measured to his sonnes such measure as they had measured to their fa|ther Romanus. For Stephanus and Constantine had cau|sed their father Romanus to bee shauen and thrust into an Isle called Prote.Hist. Magd. cent. 10. cap. 16. And Constantine after the issue of 26. yeeres, wherein Romanus and his sonnes raigned, he laied hands on Stephanus and caused him to bee shauen and sent vnto the isle Mytelene,Note. and his brother to the Isle of Samothracia. Thus the Lord who will not suffer iniquitie to escape vnpunished rendered to the sonnes of Romanus a iust recompence of their vnkindlie dealing with their father.


Otto Primus.
OTto the first after the death of his father Henrie was chosen Emperour, and raigned 36. yeeres. Hee was molested with many forraine and domestique warres, but hee prospered in all his enterprises, yea and Lyndol|phus his owne sonne conspired against him, for the mar|riage of Adelphed the relict of Lotharie sonne to Hugo, who contended against Berengarius for the kingdome of Italie.
This Adelphed the Emperour, Otto not onely relieued from her distressed estate, but also married her. The mo|ther of Lindolphus was daughter to Edmont King of Eng|land, after whose death it displeased him that his father should marrie Adelphed. But when hee made warre a|gainst his father he was ouercome, and besieged at Ra|tisbon, and in the end was reconciled to his father. The tyrannie of Berengarius the second enforced the Romans

to implore the assistance of the Emperour Otto, who led an armie to Rome at diuerse times. The first time hee gathered a Councell at Rome and deposed Ioan. 13. whom others call Ioan. 12. and placed Leo 8. in his steed. Likewise hee subdued Berengarius, and his sonne Albertus did flie to Constantinople, and so the Emperour recouered againe his owne dignitie to be king of Italie, and that no man should bee chosen Pope with|out consent of the Emperour. Againe, the inconstancie of the Romans in reiecting Leo 8. and receiuing againe Ioan. 13. or 12. compelled the Emperour to returne to Rome, and to punish the authors of that sedition to the death. After hee had declared his sonne to be Emperour, he died and was buried in the Church of Magdeburg, which he had builded in his owne time.
In the East, after Romanus the son of Constantine had raig|ned 3. yeeres, Necphorus raigned 6. yeeres, a man more magnanimous in warfare, then wise in government. He was murthered by the Counsell of his owne wife Theophania, and Zimisces raigned in his steed.


Otto Secundus.
OTto the second after his fathers death raigned ten yeeres, he was a vertuous Prince, but not like vnto his father. Henrie Duke of Bavare contended against him for the title of the Empire, but Otto prevailed. Like|wise Lotharie the King of France invaded the countrie of Loraine, onely belonging to the Emperour. But Otto ga|thered a strong armie, recouered the Countrey of Loraine and pursued Lotharie to Paris, burning and destroying all the Countrey whether hee went. The third great con|flict was against the Eretians assisted with the Saracons, for the Countries of Apulia and Calabria. These coun|tries did appertaine of old to the Emperour of the East.

But Basilius, with his brother Constantine willing to re|couer these Countries, againe did fight against the Em|perour Otto, and discomfited his armie, and the Empe|rour himselfe hardly escaped in a fisher boate, faining himselfe to bee but a simple Souldier, and payed his ransome. Afterward hee conuerted all his wrath against the Italians, who had trayterouslie forsaken him, and were the chiefe cause of the discomfiture of this armie, hee died at Rome and was buried in the Church of S. Peter.
Basilius Emperour of the East raigned 50. yeeres, and recouered the Isle of Candie from the Saracens, and the Countryes of Apulia, and Calabria from Otto as is said, after whom his Brother Constantine raigned 3. yeeres.


Otto Tertius.
OTto the third was young in yeeres when his father died. For hee exceeded not eleuen yeeres old, not|withstanding he was chosen Emperour, and raigned 19. yeeres. Hee was wise aboue his yeeres, and was called Mirabile mundi, that is, the admirable thing of the world. The Italians continuallie breaking soueraigntie, advanced one Crescentius to bee Emperour. The Emperour Otto for suppressing such seditious attempts, pearced into Ita|lie with an armie at three diuers times, and pardoned Crescentius twise. But when hee made no ende of his seditious attempts, the third time, hee hanged him. Like|wise Iaon 18. whom the Seditious Romanes had advanced, reiecting Gregorie the fift who was made Pope with the Emperours consent, his eyes were plucked out, and hee was throwne headlong from the Capitol. By the pru|dent aduise of Otto, Gregorie the fift, appointed Seuen e|lectors of the Emperour, to wit the Bishops of Mentz,

Collen, and Treer, with Count Palatine the Duke of Saxo|nie, and the Marquis of Brandenburgh: and in case of contrary opinions, the King of Bohemia. Which custome doth continue even to our dayes. One thing was lacking in the felicity of this noble Emperour, that his wife, Mary of Arragon, was a notable and barren harlot, and the wi|dow of Cresentius,Note. and had almost bewitched his noble heart. Shee being alwayes disappointed of her ex|pectation, sent vnto the Emperour a paire of impoysoned gloues, which procured his death, and hee was bu|ried in Aken.




CENTVRIE XI.

Henry the second.
_AFter Otto the third, Henry the second, Duke of Bavaria, by the Princes Electors was declared Emperour, hee raigned two and twenty yeeres. Platina assigneth vnto him onely eighteene. Hee was a wise, valiant, and godly Emperour. He subdued all his rebells: He received the Imperiall crown from Benedict the eight: Hee expelled the Saracens out of Italy.The Danes invade Eng|land. In this Emperours time Sueno King of Denmarke invaded England, and subdued it to his obedience. A sa|vage Prince, in whom (if power had not lacked to per|forme his designes) his cogitations were highly bended to extirpate all profession of Christian religion in England. Likewise, about this time Calipha of Egypt, one of the Sa|racen Princes, destroyed some of the temples of Ierusalem, and poluted the rest, but in speciall he overthrew the Tem|ple builded about the Lords Sepulchre. His mother was a Christian woman: when that was obiected to him in way of exprobation, as if hee had favoured Christians for his mothers sake: hee bended all his might against the Chri|stians, destroyed and poluted their Temples, and massacred in most cruell manner, all them who were in spirituall offi|ces. This was the first ground of the terrible warfare which afterward ensued,The occasion of Bellu~ sacru~. vulgarly called Bellum sacrum.



Conrad the second.
AFter Henry the second, succeeded Conrad the second: and was elected Emperour three yeares after the death of Henry. In this inter-raigne many cities of Italy desirous of libertie, made desertion from the subiection of the Em|perour. But Conrad was a wise and valiant warriour,Comment Func lib. 9. and reduced the cities of Italy in short time to subiection. He was the first Emperour who made a law,Note. that the perturbers of the common peace in Germany should be punished vnto the death. Hee received the Imperiall crowne from Pope Iohn 21. and raigned 15. yeeres. In whose dayes Michael Paphlago, who married Zoe the daughter of Constantine the tenth, raigned in the East eight yeeres.


Henry the third.
AFter Conrad the second, his sonne Henry the third, raigned 17. yeeres. Hee married the daughter of Ca|nutius, the sonne of Sueno King of Denmarke, who at that time raigned in England. In his time great strife was a|mong the Bishops of Rome, contending for the Popedom. Which sedition the Emperour suppressed, by remooving all the three seditious Popes, and appointing Clemens the 2. to bee Pope, as shall be declared God willing in the Head of Councels.
In the East,Hist. Magd. cent. 11. cap. 3. after the death of Calypha Prince of Egypt, his sonne Dabir made a covenant of peace with Argyrophi|lus Emperour of the East, and gaue liberty to Christians to build those Temples againe, which Calypha had demolished. Constantinus Mononiachus, also furthered the building, so that the worke was perfected, anno. 1048.



Henry the fourth.
HEnry the fourth, was a young childe of seven yeeres old when his father died, and hee raigned 50 yeeres. Hee was an Emperour valiant, wise, eloquent, and fortunate in warfare. Neverthelesse hee was miserably vexed with the divilish pride of Pope Gregorie th 7. by whom hee was twice excommunicate, and his subiects in Germany were stirred vp by the Pope to rebell against him, vnder the con|duct of Rodolph Duke of Sueue. But the God of heaven gaue victory to the the Emperour Henry, and Rodolph was sore wounded in the last battell, for his right arme was cut off, and hee convicted in conscience of the treasonable at|temps against the Emperour his Master, and the breaking of his oath of allegance, admonished the Bishops who had in|cited him to seditious insurrection, to bee more obedient to their soveraigne Lord in time to come,Note. because God had pu|nished him for his disloyalty in his right arme, which was once lift vp to sweare the oath of allegance to his Master. The seditious enterprises of Gregorius the 7. against the noble Emperonr Henry of purpose to throw out of his hands the power of investment of Bishops, together with the wise re|solution of the Emperour, to represse the pride of this inso|lent Pope, they are to be declared (God willing) heareafter in a more convenient time.
In this Emperours time William Duke of Normandy en|tered into England, to whom Harold (who at that time v|surped the government of the countrey) gave an hard and sharpe encounter:illiam Duke of Normandy subdueth Eng|lan but Duke William prevailed, slew Ha|rold, and governed the countrey. At this time also was the estate of Christians in most lamentable manner afflicted by the Turkes and Saracens: as shall bee declared hereafter at greater length, God willing.




CENTVRIE XII.

Henry the fift.
_IN this Century the Bishops of Rome, who breathed for preheminence, and longed for soveraignty, attained to all their inten|ded desires. And albeit no age afforded more magnanimous  couragious Em|perours, such as Henry the 4. Henry the 5. Lotharius the 2. Conrad the 3. Frede|ricke the 1. called Barbarossa, yet the power of the wrath of God iustly punishing the defection of men from the true faith, suffered the man of sinne, and childe of perdition to be mounted vp to high preheminence, and to treade vn|der foot the power of the Emperour: So that the Bishop of Rome was reverenced as a God in the world, and all high powers stouped vnder his authority. Henry the fift, was incited by the Councell of Bishops to make cruell warre a|gainst his naturall father Henry the fourth. And from a Councell assembled at Mentz,Note. the Bishops of Mentz, Col|len, and Worms, were sent to depriue Henry the fourth of all his Imperiall ornaments, and to conferre them to his sonne. The father through sorrow, and partly through sicknesse, departed this life, after hee had raigned 50. yeeres, as hath beene declared.
After the dayes of Henry the fourth, his sonne Henry the fift raigned 20. yeeres. Who came to Rome to bee crowned Emperour by Pope Paschalis the 2. The Pope would not consent to his coronation, except hee first did giue over all right of election of the Pope, and all right of invest|ments of Bishops, by staffe and ring. The Emperour grie|ved with this proud carriage of the Pope, layd hands vpon

the Pope and his Cardinals, and compelled them to perfect the worke of his coronation, and to confirme his priviledges of right to elect Popes, and to conferre investments to Bi|shops. It is to be noted, that Pope Paschalis when hee co|venanted with the Emperour, and confirmed the priviled|ges aforesaid, tooke a consecrated Hostie, and divided it in two parts, and gaue one part of it to the Emperour, and tooke the other part vnto himselfe, vttering with his owne mouth this imprecation.Hist. Magd. cent. 12. cap. 8. Let him be divided from the king|dome of Christ who shall presume to violate this covenant, bound vp betweene you and mee.Note. Neverthelesse Pope Pas|chalis, so soone as the Emperour returned vnto Germany, hee revoked all that hee had done, and cursed the Empe|rour, and called the priviledge which hee had confirmed vnto the Emperour, pravilegium, and not privilegium.
The Emperour hearing what the Pope had done, with expedition marched toward Rome, with an army: the Pope was forced to flie to Apulia. The Emperour returned to Germany, where he did find the Bishops for the most part seditiously affectionat to the Pope. Therefore the Emperor wearied with multitude of businesses stirred vp against him by Bishops, gaue over his priviledges aforesaid, gaining some peace with giving over of rights. At this time died Mathildis, a noble Countesse in Italy, and excessiuely addic|ted to the Romane Church. In restamentall Legacy shee gave to the Church of Rome many townes and possessions, lying betwixt the Apenning and the Sea: and among the rest the towne of Ferrara. The Romane Church braggeth of many donations, such as the donation of Constantine, of Aistulphus, of Pipinus, of Charles the Great, of Ludovicus Pius, of Otto, and of Mathildis. If these bounds appertai|ned to the chaire of Rome by so many anterior donations, How did these townes belong to Mathildis in hereditary possession,Note. so that she had power to bestow them on whom she pleased?
In Ierusalem, after Godfrey succeeded Baldowin his bro|ther, the second King of Ierusalem: and after him another

Baldowin, of Burgon. Hee prospered for a time, but in the end was taken prisoner by Balach, King of Parthians, and was redeemed by paying a great summe of money. He left Fulto Earle of Aniow his successor, the fourth King of Ierusalem.


Lotharius the second.
AFter the death of Henry the fift, Lotharius Duke of Sax|onie, by the consent of the Electors, was chosen Em|perour, and raigned thirteene yeeres. In his time two men contended for the Popedome, to wit, Inncentius the 2. and one Peter a citizen of Rome, and sonne to Peter Leo, whom they called Anacletus, whom Rogerius Count of Sicile did favour. But the Emperour Lotharius came to Rome with an army, and authorized Innocentius. Rogerius fearing the power of the Emperour, returned backe to Sicile.


Conradus the third.
AFter the death of Lotharius, Conradus Duke of Sueue, and sister sonne to the Emperour Henry the fift, was e|lected Emperour, and raigned 15. yeeres. Henry Duke of Saxonie, and Guelphus Duke of Bavaria, rebelled against him, whom hee easily subdued. And hee besieged Guel|phus in a towne called Winspergh. The men of the towne were saved by the wisedome of the women. For they foreseeing that the towne could not endure the strict|nesse of the siege, they gaue a petition to the Emperour, that they might haue liberty safely to depart out of the towne, onely with so much as they were able to beare vpon their backs. The Emperour supposing they would trans|port vpon their backs burthens of silver or gold,Note. or costly

rayment, hee condescended to their petition. The women preferring the liues of their husbands to all rich treasures, came out of the towne, every woman bearing her husband on her backe. The worthy Emperour admirng the vertue, wisedome, and piety of the women, spared their husbands, and would not violate his promise.
After this the Emperour gathered a great army, and set forward to fight against the Turkes and Saracens, of whose cruelty against the Christians in Edessa, many advertise|ments were sent to Europe. In the way hee conferred with Emmanuel Emperour of Constantinople, who with deceit|full promises betrayed the good Emperour Conrad, and suf|fered him not to tarry and get provision of victuals for his army: for Emmanuel promised that hee would in all haste send prouision vnto him. And while Conradus was besieg|ing Iconium,Note. Emmanuel in stead of wholsome victuales, sent meale mixed with lyme, whereby the army was im|poysoned, and huge numbers of them died, so that Conrad left the siege of Iconium, and went backe to Thracia.
In Ierusalem after Fulco, his sonne Baldowin was made the fift King of Ierusalem, who repaired Gaza, and conque|red Askalon, and gaue it to the templaries. At this time many Christians were in Asia. For besides the Emperour Conrad, and Lewis King of France, Rogerus Count of Sicile, all these were sore grieved with the villany done by Emma|nuel Emperour of Constantinople, and they subdued Cor|cyra, and tooke Corinth and Thebes, and the townes of Eu|boia. Conrad and Lewis also went to Ierusalem, and ioyned their forces with Baldwin, and besieged Damascus, but with no good successe. After they returned to Europe. But the Christians in Asia, and Syria dayly decayed in number and courage, vntill all the conquered places were reduced againe vnder the dominion of Infidels.



Fredericus 1.
AFter Cunradus, Frederike the first surnamed Barbaross was chosen to be Emperour, and raigned 39. yeeres. He was a man valiant, of a quicke Spirit, expert in warrefare, strong in bodie, in Counsel giuing, prouident. In doing of his affaires, magnanimous: verie affable to meeke men: a enemie to proud persons: a man of an excellent wit and m morie: whomsoeuer he had once knowne, albeit hee had beene absent from him a long space, yet the Emperour could call vpon him by his name, as if hee had beene day|ly conuersant with him: He was crowned Emperour by Pope Adrian the 4. to whom hee did this honour, when the Pope met him at Sutrium, the Emperour lighted off his horse, and came on foote to salute the Pope. And when our holy father was dismounted from his horse, the Empe|rour did hold his left stirrop in steed of the right, and when the Pope was somewhat offended, thereat, the Emperour softly smiling craued pardon of his ouersight, because hee was not accustomed with such seruile offices. Before the Coronation of the Emperour,Note. Pope Adrian required of him this condition that hee should fight against William Duke of Apulia for recouering of that Dukedome to the Chaire of Rome. Neuerthelesse the Pope not expecting the Emperours leasure, incited Emmanuell Emperour of Con|stantinople to driue William Duke of Apulia out of Italie, and addressed himselfe and his Cardinals to warrefare, ha|uing first excommunicated William Duke of Apulia. On the other part, William begged peace from the Pope, pro|mising to restore vnto him all that belonged to the chaire of Rome; and more also. But by the malignant Councel of his Cardinals, the Pope would not hearken to conditi|ons of peace, hoping to gaine more by warrefare. The Duke seeing no hope of peace brought his forces out of Sicile, ariued at Apulia, and did fight against Emmanuel

and did put him to flight. This done, hee marched fore|ward toward Benaventure, where the Pope and his Cardi|nalls were expecting victorie. But the Duke so strictly pressed the cittie, that the Pope and his Cardinals were glad to sue for peace, which they refused before. The conditi|ons of peace were these, that the Duke should invade no possession belonging to the Roman Church, and on the o|ther part the Pope should acknowledge William to be King of both Siciles.
The bad successe of the Popes enterprises was not vn|knowne to the Emperour, who pondering in his own heart, the iniures which his predecessors had suffered by Popes, specially in bereauing them of the right of inuesting of Bishops, and in sending Ambassadors so frequently to Ger|manie to the great impouerishing of his dominions, where|at the Emperour conceiued such indignation, that he char|ged all Germanie,Note. that they should not receiue the Popes Legats in time to come, except they were expreslie sent for: and that no man should make appellation to Rome: also in the Letters sent to the Pope hee prefixed his owne name to the Popes name. The Pope tooke all this matter grieue|ouslie, and perswaded the towns of Italie to make defection from the obedience of the Emperour, and specially the towne of Millan rebelled against him. But Fredericke brought them partly by force, and partly by feare vnder his subiection againe. In the end the Pope had recourse to the old weapons of his warfare, and he excommunicated the Emperour, but the Lord suffered not this proud Pope to es|cape vnpunished, for as he was walking with his attendants, in a Towne called Anagnia, a flie entered into his throte, and choked his breath.
After the death of Adrian the Emperour was not free of trouble, in regard of the schisme that fell out in the Ro|man Church, for two Bishops contended for the Pope|dome, to wit Alexander the third and Victor the fourth. The Emperour was required to pacifie this schisme, who gathered a councel at Papia, and desired both the Popes

to be present to heare their cause discussed in a lawfull as|semblie. But Pope Alexander disdained to be iudged of any man, and therefore he appeared not before the councell; For which cause the Emperour and the councell ratified the election of Victor the 4. Pope Alexander fled to France and cursed both the Emperour, and his owne competitor Victor. Afterward by money and flatterie, (powerfull weapons in a declining age) he procured such fauour in the Citie of Rome that he was receiued gladly of the most part of the city. Pope Victor had ended his life before this time, to whom Guido Bishop of Cremona was appointed successour whom they called Paschalis tertius, and many followed him. When Pope Alexander came to Rome the Townes of Italie were in great ope of libertie, and rebelled against the Emperour, they reedefied the towne of Millan, which the Emperour had sacked, and ruinated, and they builded a towne called A|lexandria in contempt of the Emperour; and in honour of the Pope. When the Emperour Frederike came to Italie, hee besieged this new builded towne called Alexandria, but was betraied by Henry Duke of Bauaria, and Saxonia, so that he escaped hardlie in the habit of a seruant and retur|ned to Germanie. The Emperour renewed his forces againe, and pierced into Italie with a great armie. Pope Alexander fled to Venice. Otto the Emperours sonne on the other part with a well appointed nauie pursued after him, hauing recei|ued a commandement from his father to attempt nothing against the Venetians vntil his owne comming. But the young man more hardie, then circumspect, encountred with the Venetians, and was ouercome, and taken prisoner. The father for relieuing of his sonne from Captiuitie was content to come to Venice, and in Saint Marks Church to craue absolution from Pope Alexander. When hee knee|led downe at the Popes feete,Note. the proud Pope set his foot vpon the Emperours necke, and abused the words of holy Scripture, Super aspidem  basiliscum ambulabis,  conculcabis leonem  draconem,Psal. xci. 13. that is, thou shall walke vpon the Lyon and the Aspe: the young Lyon and the Dragon shalt thou

tread vnder feet. The Emperour answered, non tibi sed petro, that is, not to thee but to S. Peter: but the proud Pope reply|ed, Et mihi  petro, that is both to me and to S. Peter, (to wit) thou doest this homage. The Emperour not willing to giue any further occasion of offence held his peace, and so was absolued, and his sonne relieued, with whom hee de|parted from Venice.
After this, some affirme, that he led an armie to Palestina, to fight against the Turks, and that hee prospered, vntill at length he was drowned in a certaine riuer. The Christians in Ierusalem had their last helpe and refreshment from Phi|lip king of France, and Richard king of England. These two besieged Acon and conquered it. But there was kindled be|tweene the two kings a feruent heat and indignation, euerie one of them enuying the honour of another,Note. so that Philip returned to France, and king Richard after hee had conque|red Ioppo, returned also to England. But by the way hee made ship-wracke, and hardly escaped the perill of drow|ning. And albeit hee disguised himselfe, putting on the habite of a seruant, yet he was knowne and taken prisoner, by the Duke of Austria, and was brought to the Emperour Henry the sixt: where hee was detained vntill hee paied the ransome of 10000. pounds money.
After Baldowine succeeded Amalricus the sixt king of Ie|rusalem. And after him his sonne Baldowine the 4. the 7. king of Ierusalem. Hee was sickly and not meet for governe|ment. Therefore he committed the gouernement to Guido and Raimundo Count of Tripoli. The discord and debate betweene Raimund and Guido presented occasion to Saladin king of Turkes to recouer againe Ierusalem,Note. and other Townes possessed by Christians for the space of 88. yeeres.



Henry the Sixt.
AEter the death of Frederike the first, his sonne Henry the sixt was declared Emperour, who raigned 8. yeeres: hee was Crowned by Pope Caelestinus the second who tooke Constantia the daughter of Rogerius out of a Monasterie, and gaue her in marriage to Henry the sixt, and both Sicils were bestowed to him in way of dowrie, paying alwayes to the Bishop of Rome the fee duely that was accustomed to bee paied out of those parts. Henry the sixt tooke Trancredus the young king of Sicile, put out his eyes and thrust him into a Monastery; and vsed great cruelty against the Bishops and other inhabitants of the Isle of Sicile; So that Pope Cae|lestinus did excommunicate him for his Barbarous crueltie, but hee went to Rome, acknowledged his fault, and obtai|ned pardon together with a confirmation of the kingdome of Sicile. The Pope sollicited also the Emperour to lead an armie to Asia, for support of distressed Christians, which thing hee performed, albeit he went not thither in his owne person for he sent the Bishop of Mentz, the Duke of Saxonie, the Duke of Austria, and the Duke of Bauaria, and the Lantgraue of Thuringia, with many other noble persons, and with a well appointed armie. But the yeere following their arriual at Palestina, the report of the Emperour Henries death, caused them to returne backe againe to Germanie, leauing the Chri|stians in a verie desolate care.




CENTVRIE XIII.

Philippus.
_AFter the death of Henry the sixt, Philip his brother by the helpe of the Bohems, Sax|ons, Bauaroies, and Sueuians tooke on him the Emperiall authoritie, contrarie to the minde of Innocentius Bishop of Rome and reigned 10. yeeres. In his time the country of Germanie was tormented with most cruell wars, for the Pope of Rome did excommunicate him, and caused the Bishop of Colen and other electors to make Otto Duke of Saxon Emperour, betweene whom and Philip were fought diuers battels. But Philip defended him|selfe so couragiously, that by force hee held the Emperiall Crowne all his life-time against the heart both of Otto and the Roman Bishop who oftentimes had threatened, that either hee would pull from Phillip the Imperiall Crowne, or else that Phillip shold take from him his triple Diademe:Note. so meek was this gentle Byshop. In the end the Countrey of Germa|nie being wearied with continuall warres entreated for peace betweene Philip and the Pope, which was obtained vpon these conditions, that one of Philips daughters should bee giuen in marriage to Count Richard the Popes Nephew, and another of his daughters should be giuen in marriage to Otto Duke of Saxon, who should for that cause denude himselfe of the Emperiall dignitie. Not long after this peace was concluded,The begin|ning of the Tartarian kingdome. the Emperour was cruellie murthered in his owne chamber by Otto Count Palatine. In this Emperours daies began the kingdome of the Tartarians who came from the mountains of India with their wifes and children in  1202, and began to spoyle the Prouinces nerest adia|cent

to themselus, afterward they ouerhaled the Parchians, Medes, Assyrians, Persians, Armenians, and Sarmatians, and in the end setled their dwelling place at Meotidis Paludes, a barbarous and fierce people, practising great crueltie a|gainst all nations both of Christians and others.


Otto Quartus.
AFter the death of Philip, Otto Duke of Saxon was Crowned Emperour by Pope Innocentius the third. Now it was the custome that hee who was crowned Empe|rour vsed to distribute gifts to the Romans, which custome being neglected by Otto the Romans made some commoti|on and tumult, wherein they abused the Emperours ser|uants. He therefore departing from Rome with great discontentment invaded certaine townes belonging to the Chaire of Rome, whereby hee incurred such hatred at the Popes hands, that hee was forth-with excommunicated, and although the Pope hated the of-spring of Henry the sixt, yet when the Electors of Germanie condescended to make Frederike the sonne of Henry Emperour, the Pope agreed thereto, because hee had a more deadly hatred at those who touched the apple of his eye, that is S. Peters patrimonio (as they call it) then at any other sort of people.
In the East Alexius Ducas, otherwise called Murzulfus raigned a short time, for hee was taken by the Venetians and Frenchmen, (who had restored againe Isacius, to his kingdome) and they threw him headlong ouer a steepe place because hee had murthered his Master for ambitious desire of his kingdome. These Venetians and Frenchmen set vp Baldwine Count of Flanders to bee Emperour of the East. Thus was the Empire of the East translated to the French nation for a time, as the Empire of the west had beene be|fore in the dayes of Charles de maine. After him raigned Henry his brother 2 yeeres, who hauing no male children

left the kingdome to Petrus Antisiodorensis his sonne in law, who was cut off by the fraud of Lascharis after hee had raig|ned two yeeres. After him his sonne Robert raigned 7 yeeres, hee was crowned Emperour by the Bishop of Rome, as the Germane Emperours were accustomed to be. To him suc|ceeded his young sonne Baldwine, in whose time the Em|pire returned againe to the Grecians. And Theodorus Las|caris sonne in Law to Alexius Commenus who plucked out the eyes of Isacius, was saluted Emperour and raigned eight yeeres, after whom Ioannes Ducas his sonne in Law raigned 33. yeeres.


Fredericus Secundus.
AFter the death of Otto, Frederike the second sonne to Henry the sixt, obtained the Empire and rigned 38. yeeres. Hee was by inheritance king of Naples, Apulia, Ca|labria, and Sicilia. His father obtained, shortlie after he was borne, of the Princes Electors that they should choose his sonne Frederike Emperour after his death, which they did, crowning him Emperour at Aquisgraue when he was about 20. yeere old. From thence hee passed with his nobles and Princes to Rome, and there with great solemnitie was consecrated  called Augustus by Pope Honorius the third. After his consecration he gaue by his charter to the Church of Rome the Dukedome of Fundanuus, for by the insatiable couetousnesse of the Roman Bishops this wicked vse and custome grew, that except the Emperours Elected and crowned would giue vnto them such great and large gifts, they could not obtaine of them their consecration and con|firmation, which for that intent they deuised.Note. Furthermore the said Emperour willing to shew himselfe more bountiful towards the Church of Rome, gaue and admitted those con|stitutions which the Pope himselfe would desire, by which doing he gaue a sword in their hands to cut his owne throat;

for hee did grant to the Canon of proscription devised by the Pope and his adherents, that whosoever were excom|municate for diminution of the liberties of the Church, and so continued a yeeres space, that this person should be within the danger of his proscript, and should not bee re|laxed before hee had made satisfaction, and was admitted by the Pope to the Church and Congregation of good men againe.
But this liberty of Fredericke was well required by Hono|norius, for soone after his returning to Germany, hee heard of certaine who begun to raise and make new factions a|gainst him: amongst whom were found Thomas Richard, the brethren of Innocentius the third, Earles of Anaquinos, that held certaine Castles in the kingdome of Naples against him by force, which Castles hee besieged and beat downe. Richard also hee tooke and sent him prisoner to Sicilia. But Thomas escaped and came speedily to Rome, where hee was not onely received by Honorius, but also when the Emperor began to expostulate with him for the vnseemlinesse of this deed, the Pope was so chased, that without further delay, he thundred out against him like a tyrant,Note. his cursings and ex|communications.
After this fell out a ground of a new debate between the Emperour and the Pope. For the Christians that were in Asia were so weakened, that Iohn surnamed Brennus, King of Ierusalem came himselfe to the Emperour, and to the Pope to seeke helpe for the distressed Christians, who were in A|sia. This Iohn gaue his daughter Ioel in mariage to the Em|perour, with the title of the Kingdome of Ierusalem in dowrie with her. The Emperour on the other part promi|sed that with all possible expedition hee would leade an ar|mie into Asia against the Turkes: wherevpon, and by the meanes of Iohn King of Ierusalem, the Emperour and the Pope were reconciled againe. But before the Emperour tooke his iourney to Asia, Honorius died, in whose roome succeeded Gregorius the ninth, who excommunicated the Emperour a new againe, because hee was compelled by sick|nesse

to come backe from his iourney to Asia, and to re|maine a space in Europe for the recouering of his health againe.
The next yeere after, to stop the mouth of the slanderous and cruell Pope, and to declare to the world, that the last yeere hee did not leave off his iourney by his owne volun|tary will, but by necessity: hee set forward with a great ar|my and arrived at Ioppa. The Saracens were so troubled with his arrivall, that they were content to render to Frede|ricke the towne of Ierusalem, with all the possessions that were scituate betweene it and Ptolemaide, and the greatest part of Palestina, and the Cities of Tyrus and Sydon, which were in Syria, and all other territories which Baldwin the fourth at any time had occupied there. Also they were con|tent to set at liberty all the prisoners who were in their hands: and finally, to conclude peace for the space of ten yeeres.
In the meanetime, while the Emperour is thus occupied in Asia, Pope Gregory the ninth in the Emperours absence, made it knowne to the whole world, for what cause he was so earnest to chase him away to the East: not that he cared for the welfare of the distressed Christians in Asia, but to the end hee might worke him some trouble in his absence,Note. as appeared by all these subsequent practices. For hee inva|ded the kingdome of Naples, and the rest of the dominions which pertained to the Emperors inheritage: and subdued a great part of these dominions to himselfe. Likewise he had a secret dealing with Henry the Emperours son, to stirre him vp against his father, and prevailed so farre in this divellish treason, that by the Popes counsell hee put from him his trustie Counceller Ludovicus, Duke of Boioria, whom his father had ordained to be guider of his sonne in his absence. Likewise when the Emperour sent letters out of Asia decla|ring the good successe that God had given him, and there|with desiring the Pope and Christian Princes and people, to give thanks to God for the same. These letters so grieved the Popes minde, that hee rent them in peeces, cast them

vpon the ground, and trode them vnder his feet to the great admiration of the Emperours Legats. Againe to colour the rage of his impotent minde with some excuse,Note. who could not brid the fury of his malicious heart, pretending this to be the cause of his anger, because the Emperour amongst other conditions of peace, bound vp betweene the Chri|stians in Asia and the Saracens, hee had licensed them to come (alwayes without armour) to the place of the holy grave. Also hee made rumours to passe through Italy of the Emperours death, to the end the townes which were vnder his dominion, might be faint-hearted, and resigne o|ver their cities into his hands. As likewise the souldiers who returned home out of Asia, he caused to be cut off, left by their reporting the truth, and the good successe of Fre|dericke, the townes vnder his obedience might be encou|raged.
The Emperour being advertised of all these practices done against him in his absence, left in Asia Renaldus with his garisons, co~manding all the other bands to be vnder his appointment: And with all speed came with certaine gallies to Calabria, and within short space tamed his enemies, and recovered all his holds and dominions againe. Also he sent to the Pope to entreate for his favour, notwithstanding all the iniuries he had received at his hands, but was not heard nor accepted into favour, vntill hee had paied an hundred and twenty ounces of gold, for his absolution.
After this, great rebellon was stirred vp in Germany a|gainst Fredericke, for his owne sonne Henry Caesar began to vtter the fruits of that old traffique that was betweene him and the Pope, and caused Ludovicke Duke of Boiaria, of whom we did speake before, not onely to be put from his Court, but also most cruelly to be murthered. The Empe|rour thought it no time to sleepe: wherefore enting into Germany, hee assembled a Councell in the citie of Nur|burg, where the conspiracy of Henry Caesar was manifestly detected, whereof the Pope was the chiefe author, and ee by the iudgement and sentence of  Princes, condemned

of high treason. And being commanded by his father to be bound, was as a prisoner brought to Apulia, where not long after hee died in prison. In whose roome hee ordained his third sonne Conradus Caesar, by consent of all the Peeres and Princes. Also Fredericus Austriacus his sonne, was pro|claimed for an enemy to the Common-wealth, from whom were taken Austria and Stiria, and brought againe vnder the Emperours obedience and fidelity: who having set Ger|many at quietnesse, left there Conradus Caesar his sonne, and with his army returned to Italy, to punish such as with Henry his eldest sonne had conspired against him, whose treasons were all detected at the condemnation of Henry Caesar, and chiefly the Popes, who vnderstanding that the Emperour with warlike furniture marched towards Italy, albeit hee fained himselfe to be reconciled, and a friend to him, yet was hee notwithstanding to him a most secret and intestine enemy. For hee sent to those cities who had con|spired against the Emperour, admonishing them that they should ioyne themselues together, and that they should fur|nish strongly their cities with garrisons, and send for aide to friends, and that with all their force they would prepare themselues for warre. Also hee sent Ambassadors to the Emperour to forbid him and his army to come forward vn|to Italy, and to say vnto him (not by way of entreaty, but imperiously) that what cause of controversie hee had against the Longobards, the same hee should commit to him, and stand to his arbiterment. The Emperour nothing regarding this foolish interditement, prosecuteth his purpose and mar|cheth towards Italy: where he brought vnder his subiecti|on those cities that rebelled against him, as Mantua, Vero|na, Ternisium, Patavium, and others: and then hee after|ward set vpon the great Hoast of Mediolanenses, the Brixi|ans, the Placentines,Note. and other confederats, of whom hee tooke a thousand prisoners, and also their Generall, being the chiefe Magistrate in the citie of Mediolanum, Petrus Te|nopolus the Dukes sonne of Venice, and slew diverse Cap|taines moe, and tooke all their Ensignes.
The Pope perceiving the overthrow of his confederates, could no longer cover his malice, but did breake out in open fury and rage against the Emperour, and pronoun|ced a sentence of proscription against him, depriving him of all his dignities, honours, titles prerogatiues, kingdoms, and whole Empire. Also calling vnto him the Venetian and Genuan Legats, made a peace betweene them (for they had beene at variance for certaine causes about their Sea coasts) and covenanted with them vpon this con|dition, that vpon their charges they should rigge and man 35. gallies, which should spoyle and burne all along the Sea coasts of the kingdomes and dominions of Fredericke. But when hee saw the good will and fidelity that the Duke of Venice bare vnto the Emperour, who notwithstanding the displeasure he tooke by the imprisonment of his sonne, yet would he not make warre against him. For which cause the Pope had recourse to his old practises, whereby his pre|decessors had trodden all Princes vnder their feet. And so hee put forth an edict at Rome, to the vniversall Church and people, the beginning whereof is, Ascendit de mari bel|lica bestia: wherein hee declareth the causes wherefore hee curseth the Emperour to the divell of Hell, and deiecteth him from his Princely dignity: charging him with treason, periury, cruelty, sacrilege, killing of his owne kindred, and all impiety, and accuseth him as an hereticke, schismaticke, and miscreant. And this edict of the Emperours cursing,Note. he commanded all Bishops, Prelats, and others of the Cler|gie, that they should solemnly recite the same in their Chur|ches in stead of a Sermon. And furthermore, charged them and all other Christian men, vnder paine of cursing and damnation, that they neither helpe the Emperour, nor yet so much as wish him well.
Moreover, by meanes of Albertus Bebauus his Legat, hee stirred vp great rebellion against the Emperor in Germany. For hee drew Otto Duke of Boiaria from the Emperours o|bedience, and with him Venceslaus and Belus, Princes of the Hungarians, and Henry Duke of Polonia. To whom

also Fredericus Austriacus the Emperours sonne (because he was proscript or out-lawed of his father) was easily adioy|ned. The Emperour was at Patavium, when these newes were brought to him. Therefore hee commanded Peter de Vineis his Secretarie, vpon Easter day to make a narration to the people of his great munificence to the Bishoppes of Rome, and againe of their iniuries towards him in recom|pence thereof: of his innocencie also, in all the heads whereof hee was accused by the Pope: and finally, of the vse of Ecclesiasticall censure, and of the errors and abuse of the Church of Rome. By which Oration of his, he so re|mooved the clowds of blinde superstion from mens hearts, and the conceived opinion of holinesse of the Church of Rome, and also of their vsurped power, and subtle perswa|sion, that both they saw, and plainely perceived the vices and filthinesse of the same. At the same time the Emperour (as faith Albericus) writ to the Pope these veres.
Roma diu titubans longis erroribus acta
Corruet,  mundi desinet esse caput.
To whom the Pope answered againe in other verses.
Niteris incassum navem submergere Petri;
Fluctuat, at nunquam mergitur illa ratis.
The Emperour moreover, by his Letters and Legats, gi|veth intelligence to all Christian princes, as well of the fai|ned crimes wherewith he was charged, as also of the cruelty of the Bishop of Rome against him. In all this time it plea|sed God to support the Emperor with some comfort, which many of his Predecessors lacked. For the Bishops of Ger|many were faithfull subiects vnto him, and not onely refu|sed to execute the Popes edicts and mandats in their Chur|ches, but also they accused and condemned Albertus Beba|vus the Popes Legat, as a most impudent impostor and a wi~cked fellow, and a most pestiferous botch and sore of the Christian Common-wealth, and gaue him to the Diuell

as a ruinous enemy as well of the Church, as of his naturall Countrey. This warre betweene the Emperour and the Pope waxed so hot, that vpon a time the Emperour came to Pisas and Viterbium, the Pope fearing hee would come to Rome, caused a supplication to be made, wherein the heads of Peter and Paul were carryed about, and with a sharpe and contumelious Oration hee fought to deface the Emperour, promising everlasting life, and giving the badge of the Crosse to so many as would arme themselues and fight a|gainst the Emperour, as against the most wicked enemy of God and his Church. Now the Emperour marching some|what neere the gates of Rome, when hee saw souldiers mar|ked with the badge of the Crosse comming out against him, gaue a sharpe charge vpon them, and put them soone to flight, and as many as he tooke (cutting off that badge from them) he caused to bee hanged. But the more hee prospe|red the more he was enuyed of the Pope, who by his Le|gats, called to a Councell at Rome, all such Prelats out of Italy, France, and England, as hee thought to favour him and his proceedings: that hereby as his last shift and onely refuge, hee by their helps might depriue Fredericke of the Empire, as an vtter enemy to God and his Church. Of all which the Emperour having intelligence, and knowing that these assemblies should be but to his destruction, hee determined to stop and let their passages to Rome, both by Sea and Land. And therefore sent out his sonne Henry with certaine Gallies, to keepe the coasts of Sardinia, and from thence to Pisas, and with the Pisans to rigge out a Navie to meete with such as should aide the Pope of Rome. The Popes associats on the other part, procured that the gallies and shippes of Genua (having Guilielmus Braccius for their chiefe Captaine) should bee sent out for defence of the Pre|lats that were to repaire to the Councell. Thus the Pisan army launched forth to the Sea with forty ships and gallies, and betweene the Isles of Lilium and Mons Christs, which lie betweene Liburnium and Corsica, they met with the Ge|nuan ships, and fiercely began to boord them. In which

fight at length were three of the Genuan shippes sunke and 22. taken and brought away, with all the riches and treasures in them. In those were taken three of the Popes Legats (whereof two were Cardinals) Iacobus Columna, Ot|tho Marchio,Note. and Gregorius de Romania (all cruell enemies a|gainst the Emperour) and many other Prelats moe, besides a great number of Legats and Procurators of cities, with an infinit number of Monkes and Priests, as also the Genuan souldiers, with diverse others. Also besides the prey and booty, they found many writings and letters which very much helped the Emperour, in cleering his cause against his enemies.
Whilest this discord was between the Emperour and the Pope, Orthodarius the Emperour of the Tartarians, soone invaded the borders next adiacent to him, and conquered Ropolanium, Bodolium, Mudanium, with diverse other townes and villages: destroying, wasting, and burning the countries all about: killing and slaying, men, women, children, sparing none of any sex or age. At whose sudden invasion the people being affrighted and troubled, were glad to leaue all that they had, and disperse themselues into woods, and flie vnto marshes and mountaines: so that by this time the Tartarian Hoste was come as farre as Wratis|lavia, where Henricus of Polonia, and the Duke of Silesia met with them, but by reason of inequality both in num|ber and forces, they were easily defeated and slaine. From thence they came to Moravia, and from thence to the king|dome of Bohemia and Hungary, at which time Belus King of Hungarie sent to the Emperour for support against the Tartarians, promising that Hungarie ever after should be vn|der the iurisdiction of the Emperour. The Emperour on the other part was most willing to helpe the Hungarians and other Christians, and sent to the Pope to perswade him that hee would take vp and conclude a peace, and mitigate somewhat his wrath, in regarde of the immiment danger like to ensue vpon the whole state of Christendome, by rea|son of a civill dissention.
But when hee saw that by no meanes the Pope would relent his furie, hee was compelled to write againe to the King of Hungarie, that hee could stand him in no stead at that time, because the Bishop of Rome refused all trea|tie of peace: notwithstanding hee sent Conradus Caesar king of Bohemia, and other Princes of Germame to resist and withstand the enemie so farre as in them lay. Thus may bee seene the louing zeale and affection that the Pope of Rome hath toward Christian people, that hee had rather bend his forces to revenge his malice vpon the Christian and good Emperour, then either by himselfe to withstand, or yet by concluding a profitable peace to permit others to withstand the most bloodie and cruell Tartarian. But euen in the midst of this spoyle and havock of Polonia, Bohemia, and Hungaria, was it determined that Libussa the Princes confederate with the Pope should bee assem|bled about the deposing of the Emperour,Note. and creating of another. When Frederike saw there was none other re|medie and that hee laboured in vaine to haue peace, hee prosecuted the warre to the vttermost, and when hee had gotten Tudetum and reconciled the same, hee destroyed the Townes of Geminium and Naruia and gaue the spoyle of them to his souldiers, hee gentlie receiued the yeelding vp of Siburnium and wasted all the countrey about Rome: wherewith the Pope being dismaied, and seeing that things prospered not so well with him against the Emperour as he looked for, being in dispaire of obtaining his purpose died in great anger and displeasure.
Thus when the author of all this conspiracie was gone, The Emperour with his armie marched forward against the Tartarians who hearing of his comming left the straigh+way through Hungarie by which they came, and returned by the riuer of Danubium to Taurica, and so through the Fenns of Meotida and by the riuer of Tanaium into Sar|matia Asiatica.
After Gregorie Celestinus was created Pope who died with|in 18. daies after, to whom succeeded Innocentius. In whose

time the Emperour hoped for peace but was disappointed; for albeit a day was appointed for their meeting together at Festennia, and the Pope had promised that hee would be there before the Emperour and expect his comming, yet hee mocked the Emperour, and secretly in the night tooke ship and first came to Genua, and from thence to Lyons in Fraunce where hee gathered a councell and excommunica|ted the Emperour. Notwithstanding the Emperour was determinate to goe to Lyons himselfe, and to conferre with the Pope, both concerning this sentence pronounced a|gainst him, as also about the conclusion of peace, if by any meanes it could be obtained. But as he was vpon his iour|ney newes was brought to him that Parma was taken by his out lawes assisted by the Popes Legat, wherefore being out of hope of peace, he set himselfe againe to the warre, and besieged Parma planting ouer against it the forme of a towne, which he called Victoria, wherein his Souldiers cam|ped. But the citizens of Parma getting knowledge vpon a time that the Emperour was gone to hunting and his soul|diers were stragling here and there without order, issued out of the towne, and slew a great number of them, and burnt his Campe Victoria. Soone after the Emperour being in Apulia in a certaine Castle called Florentinium, ended his life.
In this time it is to be noted that there was such dissenti|on betweene the Emperour and the Pope that the facti|ous names of the Guelfes and Gibelins sprang vp in Italie,Note. and continued euer since, almost to our owne dayes, for the Guelfes followed the Pope, the Gibelins the Empe|rour, so that it came to passe that all they who followed the Pope were called by the name of Guelfes, and these who followed the Emperour, Gibelins.



Conradus Quartus.
AFter the death of Fredericke succeeded Conradus his sonne who with manly courage, began to subdue the Townes of Apulia, and of the kingdome of Naples which rebelled against him, but he was hastily cut off by his bro|ther Manfred, who being couetous to keepe in his owne hand the Dukedome of Apulia (which hee had invaded) caused to empoyson the Emperour Conrad, after hee had raigned 2 yeeres. Also hee caused the testament of Conrad to be suppressed wherein hee had appointed Cunradinus his sonne to be heire of all his dominions. At this time Inno|centius 4. thinking it most convenient to invade the King|dome of Sicilie and bring it vnder his dominion sent two strong armies to subdue it, but they were both ouercome and driuen back by Manfred, whereat the Pope was so grieued with Melancholie that hee died. But Pope Cle|mens succeeding Innocentius stirred vp Charles Count of Angeow brother to Lewis king of Fraunce to make war against Manfred, who prevailed against him, and killed him and possessed Sicilia, Calabria, and Apulia, and all that Manfred before had vnder his obedience. Cunradinus the sonne of Conrad being come to perfect age came with an armie to Italie to claime his fathers Dominions and was gladly receiued at Rome, soone after was ouercome in battell by Charles Count of Angeow (who had slaine Manfred before) and was cast into prison, and afterward by commandement of the Pope was beheaded at Naples with Fredericke Duke of Austria his assister. For Charles vpon a time demanded the Roman Bishop Clemens 4. what hee should doe with his prisoners, to whom he answered Vita Cunradini, mors Caroli,Note. that is, the life of Cunradinus, is the death of Charles, wherevpon ensued their publike ex|ecution. So the Kingdome of Naples by the crueltie of

the Romane Bishop against the iust owner, came into the hands of Frenchmen.


Wilielmus.
William Count of Flanders (whom Pope Innocen|tius had declared Emperour when hee excommu|nicated Frederike at Lyons) was yet aliue and was accoun|ted Emperour, but hee was slaine by the Frisians, after hee had raigned one yeere, after the death of Cunrad. After whose death variance fell betweene the Electors of Germa|nie for choosing of the Emperour, for part named Al|phonsus King of Castile, others Richard the brother of king Henry of England. But because neither of them were re|ceiued by the whole Empire,The Empyre voyd of an Emperour the space of 17. yeers. the Emperiall authoritie was counted voyd and vacant the space of seuenteene yeeres. In the East raigned Theodorus Lascaris the younger 4. yeeres.


Rodulphus.
IN the yeere of our Lord 1273. the Princes Electors be|ing assembled together at Frank foord choosed with one consent Rodulph Count of Halsburg to be Emperour, who gouerned 18 yeeres. This man neuer receiued the Empe|riall dignitie nor entred into Italie, for hee vsed to recite to his familiars, the fable of the foxe that said to the Lyon hee was affraid to enter into his denne, because hee percei|ued the stepps of many beasts going inward, but of none that returned out againe.Note. And so he said, many Emperours haue entered Italie with great Pompe and glorie, but by the meanes of the Bishop they returned euill handled with great iniuries. He had deadly warre with Ottiocarus King

of Bohemia who had invaded Austrich and appropria|ted it to himselfe while as the Empire wanted an head through the variance of the Electors, against him he fought a sore battell in the fieldes of Austrich and obtained the victorie, and Othocarus there was slaine, whose sonne the Emperour gentlie entreated, giuing him Suta his daughter in marriage, and giuing Agnes daughter to Othocariu in marriage to Rodulph the Emperours sonne.


Adolphus.
AFter Rodolph, Adolph Count de Nassaw was chosen Emperour and raigned six yeeres, he was infortunate in all things hee went about, and therewith so needie and poore that when hee had receiued of King Edward of England a great summe of money to aide him against the King of Fraunce hee spent the money vpon his hous|hold and had not wherewith to fulfill his promise when time required. Hee had great warres with Albert Duke of Austrich, whom he trauelled to depriue of his Dukedome, But Albert led out his armie against him, in the fieldes of Spira, and discomfited his hoste and killed himselfe, and raigned in his steed as will be declared in the next Centurie, god willing.
In Constantinople after Theodorus Lascaris the younger,Emperours of Constantino|ple. succeeded Michael Paleologus, and raigned 35. yeeres. He plucked out the eyes of Iohn the sonne of Lascaris and right heire of the Empire. His sonne Andronicus againe who succeeded to him, caused his father to bee buried in an obscure place and not in a princely Sepulchre, because he had agreed with the Church of Rome.
Now as touching the holy Land many great armies went to Asia in this Centurie for recouering of Ierusalem,The first Ar|mie was led for recouerie of the holy land. first vnder the co~duct of Ludouick Duke of Bavaria, Leopold D. of Au|strich, and Andro king of Hungarie with the Florentins and

Genuans marked with the badge of the Crosse, and di|uers Bishops of France and Germanie raised an armie, tooke the towne of Damiata in Aegypt, but soone after it was lamentably lost, by a deuised stratageme of the Sultan of Aegypt, who fained as though hee had beene flying from place to place, vntill hee found the Christi|an armie Camping in a low place beside the riuer Nilus, and then opening the slues of the water, the most part of all the Christians were drowned, and Damiata againe recouered.The second armie. The second armie was led by Fredericus the second into Asia, at what time Ierusalem was recouered againe, and all that Baldwine the fourth had of old in his possession, was rendered to the Christians, and a couenant of peace was bound vp for 10. yeeres to come, as hath beene declared in the treatise of the life of Fredericke. The third armie was raised vp by Theobald King of Nauarre,The third armie. Americus Count of Montfort, Henry Count of Campanie, Peter Count of Britan, and Anselmus de Insula: Theobald hauing the chiefe regiment of the armie, which set fore|ward by the intisement of Gregorie the 9. before the time of the 10. yeeres peace concluded by Fredericke had taken an ende. For the which cause it is not to be doubted but this voyage had the more vnprosperous successe, for they had lost the third part of the armie before they came to Antiochia, from thence they went to Ptolemais and from thence to Gaza. The Barbarians perceiuing that this ar|mie was set forth without the Emperours aduice (because his Souldiers that were in Asia keeped the bond of peace and assisted not this armie of Theobald) they laid there Ambushments in secret places wayting for advantage of the Christian armie, and set vpon them when they were wea|rie, returning from their spoiling with great prey: but the Christians made strong resistance and put the aliens to flight. The day next following the Barbarians renewed their forces and prevailed against the Christians, Americus Count of Montfort, and Henry Count of Campanie being slaine. And Theobald king of Navarre with great diffi|cultie

escaped and returned home accompanied with a very few number of men who remained vndestroyed in that vnprosperous voiage. The fourth armie was led by Richard Count of Cornwall,The forth armie. whom the Pope had put in hope to be made Emperour, but when hee came to Ierusalem, and vnderstood by Rainoldus the Emperours deputie there, of the peace which had beene concluded by a solemne couenant hee enterprised nothing against the Barbarians, but subscribed the bond of peace concluded before by the Emperour Fredericke, and left he should seeme to haue made all his trauels in vaine, hee receiued some dropps of the Lords blood from the Patriarch of Ierusalem, so blind was this seduced age that a vaine shew of counter|set reliques was counted a worthie price to recompence the ieopardous trauels of Princes leading great armies from one end of the world to another. After the death of Rainald,The templars breaking the couenant made with the Barbarians are destroyed. the Templaries without all regard of the peace bound vp, denounce warre to the Saracens and compelled the Christians in Asiato put themselues in armes. But the Soldan of Aegypt sent for support of the Babylonians, who sent vnto him a companie of sauadge men called Grossouij who pitched their campe at Gaza and tooke it, and destroied all the Templaries that dwelt therein. The like did they to the inhabitants of Askelon, also the people that came to support the Templaries were vtter|ly cut off, and finallie they set vpon Ierusalem which was easily conquered, and all the inhabitants thereof were put to the sword without regard of sexe or age, and the towne it selfe was subuerted, neither was any building spared though neuer so ample pleasant, also they subver|ted the Sepulchre of the Lord.
The first voiageThe fist vov|age. was vndertaken by Lewis King of Fraunce sonne to the Queene Blanch who being diseased and almost at the point of death vowed to God that in case hee recouered health: hee would be crossed or mar|ked with the crosse, to visit the Lords Sepulchre and there solemnly to render thankes; which vow also hee endeuored

to performe, and in the yeere of our Lord 1248. after he had receiued the Popes blessing at Lyons, set forward with a mightie armie hauing in companie with him the Earle Atrabacensis his brother the Duke of Burgundy, the Duke of Brabant, the Countesse of Flanders with her two sonnes, the Earle of Britanie with his sonne, the Earle of Barrensis, the Earle of Swesson, the Earle of S. Paul, the Earle of Druise, the Earle Retel, with many other noble Persons.
In the beginning of this enterprise they seemed to pros|per well, for they tooke the Towne of Damiata at their first arriuall into Aegypt, which was the chiefe seat and hold of the Saracens in all Aegypt. At the losse whereof the Soldan of Aegypt with the Saracens in those parts were so astonished, that they offered the Christians the possession of Ierusalem, and the holy Land, which the Christians so much contended for, prouiding they would render vnto them againe the Towne of Damiata. But the Earle of Ar|toys, the kings brother puft vp with insolent pride would in no waies suffer the offers of the Saracens to be accepted, but required also Alexandria the chiefe Metropolitan towne of Aegypt to be deliuered vnto them. But soone after the Soldan of Aegypt beset them so stronglie, both by Sea and Land, that they were glad to craue againe the peace which was offered and could not obtaine it. In the ende they were purposed to leaue a Garrison to keepe Damiata, and to march out in battell themselues. The Earle of Artoys through his insolent pride (thinking all was his owne when|soeuer he gat any small aduantage of the enemie) brought himselfe and all the armie to confusion, for he passed ouer a shallow foord of Nilus which a certaine Saracen lately con|verted to Christ had made knowne, and hauing in company with him the Master of the Temple, and William Longspath, with his companie of English souldiers and diuers others, euen the third part of the armie, set vpon the Saracens when they were not aware, and did them great harme. This victo|rie obtained he would needs goe forward, deuiding him|selfe

from the maine Hoast and besieged the Castle, and Village of Mansor. But the Saracens finding him separated from the rest of the army, compassed him about, and de|stroyed him and all his company, in so much that scarce one man escaped aliue (except two Templars, one Hospi|tular, and one poore Souldier) to bring newes thereof to the King. After this the Souldan suddenly appeared with multitude of innumerable thousands, against the King him|selfe. In this miserable conflict the King with his two bre|thren, and a few that claue vnto him were taken captiues, all the residue were put to the sword, or else stood to the mercy of the Saracens, whether to bee slaine or remaine in wofull captivity.
The Souldan after the captivity of the King, fraudulent|ly suborned an army of Saracens to the number of the French army, with the armes and ensignes of them that were slaine, and sent them toward Damiata, where the Duke of Burgundie with the French Queene, and Odo the Popes Legat and other Bishops, and their garrisons were remai|ning, supposing vnder the shew of Frenchmen to be let in. But the Captaines mistrusting their hasty comming, and misdoubting their visages not like to the French-mens, shut the gates against them, whereby they returned frustrate of their purpose. Yet afterward Damiata was rendered to the Saracens as a part of the Kings ransome, which citie being twice won, and twice lost by the Christians, the Souldan afterward caused vtterly to be razed downe to the ground. It is to bee noted in this Tragedy,Note. that the Pope of Rome was the chiefe ground of all this lamentable calamity. For the King wisely considering what great helpe hee might haue gotten by the concurrance of the valiant and wife Em|perour Fredericke, travailed for reconciliation between him and the Pope, before hee vndertooke his voyage, but all his travails were spent in vaine, and so the King of France went alone to this dangerous enterprise, taking with him the Popes blessing, as is sayd before.
But like as Fredericke before prospered not the worse thate

he was cursed of the Pope, so it may be perceived that Lewis King of France prospered not the better, albeit the Pope blessed him. Before wee speake of the sixt voyage of his age it is to marked, that God raised vp Mango King of the Tartarians to make warre against the Saracens: he was bap|tised and professed the name of Christ,Mango King of the Tarta|rians fighteth against the Saracens. and sent his brother Hal to fight against the Saracens. Who overhailed Persia, Assyria, Mesopotamia, and in the end came to Syria, and conquered Damascus, appointing his sonne Abaga to bee Governour of the same, for hee returned himselfe to inhe|rit the kingdome of his brother Mango, whom hee heard to be dead. Also Abaga afterward hearing of the death of his father Halo, returned to gouerne his fathers kingdome, lea|ving behinde him ten thousand horsemen to support the Christians, in the hands of Guirboca, who also favoured the Christians for a time, vntil they slew his Nephew, and then hee also became an enemie vnto them, and invaded the towne of Caesarea, and set it on fire.
At this time Nelethinus the sonne of Turqueminius, Soul|dan of Egypt, fearing the dominion of the Tartarians in Sy|ria, provoked Guirboca to fight, and destroyed him and his army: and they that escaped of the Tartarians fled to Ar|menia. Thus the small comfort which the Christians had by the Tartarians, was first turned into hatred, and after|ward was vtterly taken away by their destruction.
The sixt army.The sixt voyage was vnder the King of France, and Hen|rie King of England, who sent Prince Edward his sonne to Palestina in his place, and Charles Duke of Angeow, who was declared by the Pope to be King of Sicile, and King of Ierusalem. In this voyage the one part of the army, to wit, French-men, arrived at Africa and besieged the towne of Carthage and tooke it: also they besieged Tuenetum sixe moneths, at which time the army was troubled with a grie|vous pestilence,A peace con|cluded. whereof the King himselfe, and the Popes Legat both died. But Charles King of Sicile came with a fresh army: Mulet the Prince in those parts, entreated for peace, which was granted vpon these conditions. First, that

if any in Africke would professe the Christian religion, they should bee permitted so to doe without molestation. Next, that the Christians who were detained in captivity should be set at liberty. And thirdly, that there should bee payd yeerely to the King of Sicile forty thousand crownes.
The other part of the army vnder the conduct of Edward Prince of England, came to Syria, where Edward was cir|cumvented by a deceitfull Saracen, who came with letters to him from his master, and wounded him with an inve|nomed knife, whereby hee was in great danger of his life, but being cured by skilfull Physitians, he escaped death. Al|so hee staied in Ptolemais vpon the arrivall of the rest of the army out of Africke, but when hee had long waited in vaine, hee was compelled to returne back againe to his owne countrey.
In this voyage it is to be noted, that the Pope of Rome miserably abused the Christian people: for the armies rai|sed against the Turkes and Infidels,Note. hee caused to serue the covetous appetite of his bloody heart, as plainely appeareth in the French army which Guido Bishop of Altisiodorum conducted to Viterbium: Vrbanus Quartus sent his army a|gainst Manfred King of Sicile, to subdue vnto him Sicilia, and to roote out the ofspring of Fredericke, which he dead|ly hated; and when this enterprise succeeded not to his hearts contentment, Clemens his successor stirred vp this Charles Duke of Angeow, who vsurped the kingdome of Sicile, destroyed the posterity of Fredericke, and at the Popes desire vndertooke this voyage to Asia, whereof wee haue last spoken.
The seventh voyage of this age, was vndertaken by the Emperour Rodolph,The 7. army. who according to his promise made to Pope Gregory the tenth, was willing to raise an ar|my and succour the Christians in Asia, but hee was so im|peded by the warres hee had with the King of Bohemia, that hee could not in his owne person goe to Syria, but hee sent Henrie Prince of Mechelburg with a strong army to supply his place, who comming to Ptolemais wasted and

burnt with fire the region round about Damascus. The Barbarians durst not encounter with him in open battell, but circumvened him, and vpon a time as hee was leading away a great prey, they lying in wait for him, arose and brought him to the Souldan: where hee was detained in captivitie 26. yeeres. After this the Christians in Asia were brought to vtter wracke,The Christi|ans vtterly de|stroyed in Asia. for the Saracens invaded Antio|chia and tooke it, and destroyed the Christians there. After|ward vnder the conduct of Aphir their Souldan, they be|sieged Tripolis and tooke it, and razed it to the ground. Also Tyrus was rendered vpon condition that the Christi|ans there should safely depart with so much of their sub|stance as they could transport with shippes, or drawe with beasts. And finally, all the townes and holds which the Christians had in Syria, were taken by the Saracens, onely Ptolemais excepted, which afterward was taken by Araphus the Souldan, the Christians therein being put to the sword, and the citie it selfe vtterly razed to the ground, in such sort that there was not so much as a monument of it left vn|destroyed.
Now when all was lost,Note. the Christians obtained some new and fresh comfort by the conversion of Cassanus Prince of the Tartarians, to the Christian religion, who expelled the Saracens out of Syria, and repayred the temple and towne of Ierusalem, and restored it to the Christians, and set at liberty Henry Prince of Mechelburg, who had been detained captiue a long time. Also he tooke the towne of Damascus, and appointed Capcacus to be Governour there, like as Mo|lais was left to defend Ierusalem. But after the returne of Cassanus to his owne countrey, Capcacus revolted to the Souldan of Egypt, and Molais finding himselfe alone, vn|able to resist the force of the Saracens, departed to Mesopo|tamia. So did the Saracens easily recover againe Ierusalem.
Here also is to be marked, that the Popes of Rome who were too prodigall of Christian mens blood, continually instigating them to lead armes to Asia, for the recovery of the Holy Land, yet did they esteeme so much of their owne

glory, that they preferred it to the Holy Land and the liues o all the Christians that were in Asia, as evidently appea|reth in the doings of Bonifacius the 8. who had the fairest occasion offered to him of all others, of recovering the Ho|ly Land. For Cassanus Prince of the Tartarians had con|quered Syria from the Saracens, and left Governours in it, with expresse commandement that they should binde vp a covenant of friendship with the Princes of the West, and get support from them for the keeping of Syria, in the Chri|stians possession. But the Bishoppe of Rome puft vp with pride, was so busie to tread vnder his feet the King of France that hee neglected this ocasion, the like whereof was never offered in any time following. And this negligent dealing was the cause why Cap|cacus made defection to the Soul|dan of Egypt.




CENTVRIE XIV.

Albertus the first.
_AFter the slaughter of Adulph, Albert the first, Duke of Austria was made Empe|rour, and raigned ten yeeres: and in the end was killed by his Brothers sonne. In his dayes sprang vp Otthoman the first King of the Turkes,The death of Albert. Otthoman first King of the Turkes. who being a con|ragious warriour, by spoyles and robbe|ries enriched himselfe, and subdued a great part of Bythi|nia, and of the countrey lying about Pontus Euxinus, and tooke vpon him the name of a King, to be called the King of the Turks.


Henricus the seventh.
NExt to Albert, raigned Henrie the 7. A Prince, wise, iust, honest, and beloved of all men, neither puft vp with pride in his prosperity, neither deiected in mind for any kind of adversity. After hee had pacified the countrey of Ger|many, hee tooke his iourney toward Italy, to reforme the abuses there, but was hastily cut off by the wicked malice of the Florentines, as is supposed, for they hyred a certaine Monke to poyson the Emperour, which thing hee perfor|med, and mixed poyson with the bread of the Eucharist,Henry the 7. poysoned by a Monke. wherewith the noble Emperour was impoysoned in the Castell of Bonconvent, after hee had raigned foure yeeres and eight moneths.



Ludovicus the fift.
Lewis the fift was chosen Emperour after the death of Henry the 7. and raigned 32. yeeres. Hee was Duke of Bavaria, against whom others had elected Fredericus Pulcher, Duke of Austria to be Emperour, which was the ground of cruell warrs betwixt the two new chosen Emperours,Warre betwixt Lewis and Fre|dericus Pulcher about the Em|pire. but Fredericke was vanquished in battell, and taken prisoner him|selfe. During the time of these warres, the burgesses of V|ren, Switz, and Sylvania, or Vnderwalden, assisted Lewis of Bavaria, and would not acknowledge the Emperour Fre|dericke Duke of Austria, for which cause they were continu|ally vexed by him, so that at last they assembled themselues in the towne of Vrania, and there entered into a mu|tuall league of perpetuall society amongst themselues. To whom afterward were ioyned Lucernates,A league made amongst the Cantons of Helvetia. then Tugani, then the Tigurines, then the Bernates. The last almost of all were the Basilians, after whom fol|lowed other seven pages, who now by a generall name are called the Switzers, or the Cantons, or Pages of Hel|vetia.
The Emperour Lewis after hee had subdued his com|petitor, fell into a greater trouble, for hee was excommuni|cate by Pope Clement the sixt,Lewis excom|municated by the Pope and Charles the 4. chosen Em|perour. and the Princes Electors were commanded to choose another Emperor, which com|mandement they also obeyed, and assembled themselues at a certaine towne of the Diocie of Trevers, called Bens, and chose Charles the fourth, sonne to Iohn King of Bohemia.



Carolus the fourth.
CArolus the fourth was chosen Emperour, after that his predecessor Lewis was excommunicated by the Pope, and raigned 32. yeeres.Amurath King of the Turkes conquereth Thracia. In his time Amurathes the King of the Turkes, passed over Hellespontus, and tooke the townes of Cestus and Callipolis, which was the first be|ginning of the conquest of Thracia, and all other regions of Europe which are now subiect to the Turke. This Charles procured at the hands of the Princes Electors, that his sonne Vinceslaus should be proclaimed King of the Ro|mans in his owne time.


Vinceslaus.
TO Charles the fourth succeeded his sonne Vinceslaus, and raigned two and twenty yeeres. A man very vn|like his father, for hee was sluggish and carelesse, more en|clined to ryot, excessiue drinking and voluptuous plea|sures, then to any princely vertue. In his time Baiazeth King of the Turkes,The Battell of Nicopolis be|twixt the Christians  Turkes. fought a cruell battell against the Christians at Nicopolis, a towne of Thracia, at the side of Ister: and albeit many moe of the Turkes were slaine then of the Christians, yet at length the Turkes prevai|led against the Christians, and put them to flight. This is that King of the Turkes, who afterward was over|come by Tamberlaine King of the Sythians, and being

inclosed in a cage of yron was carried about all Asia,Baiazethes ouercome by Tamberlane and carried a|bout in a Cage Vinceslaus de|priued of his Emperiall dig|nitie. Emperours of the ast. as a mocking stocke to men, and as a spectacle of the wrath of God against all cruell Tyrants. The Emperour Vinceslaus for his beastlines was depriued of his Emperiall dignitie by the Princes Electors, and Rupertus Duke of Bauaria chosen to be Emperour in his steed.
In the East during the raigne of those foresaid Empe|rours, ruled Andronicus the sonne of Michael, Pa|leologus, and after him Michael, and after him Andronicus the younger, after whom follo|wed Ioannes, Catecunzenus, and Calo Ioannes and his sonne Manuell these are all the things worthy of remem|berance, are left in writing.




CENTVRIE. XV.

Rupertus.
_VIncesaus the Emperour for his Cowardize,  vnhonest life, was deposed,  Rupertus Duke of Bauaria was advanced to the Emperiall authoritie by the Electors of Germanic, and ruled (10.) yeeres. This Emperour went vnto Italie, against Ga|liatius of Millan, but hee preuailed no|thing. In his time Mahomet, the Turke when hee had kil|led his brother,Mahomet after the death of Tamburlan vexeth the Christians and taketh Hadri|anopolis. obtained alone the kingdome; who after the death of Tamburlan, the Tartarian, recouering againe his fathers dominion, vexed with extreme murther and slaugh|ter, the Bulgares and Vallaches, and tooke the citie of Ha|drianopolis, which he made his Seat royall.


Sigismundus.
AFter Rupertus Sigismund sonne of Charles 4. and bro|ther to Vinceslaus being King of Bohemie and Hun|garie was ordained Emperour and reigned 27. yeares. Hee was a prudent, wittie, learned, and noble Prince, but in warre and deeds of armes vnfortunate: for hee was often|times ouercome and chased of the Turkes and other ene|mies. By the procurement of this Emperour a great coun|cell was holden at Constance, for the vnion of the Church which continued for the space of 4. yeeres. In this councell Iohn Husse was burned for preaching against the Bishop of Rome. Also Hieronymus of Prague was condemned by the

same councell and burned,The burning of Iohn Husse the cause of a great tumult and sedition. after whose burning in Bohe|mie, was great tumult, sedition, and ciuill warre: For the common people that fauoured Iohn Husse, gathered toge|ther in great number, and choosed a certaine valiant man named Zisca to be their Captaine, a man verie witty and ex|pert in warfare, as may appeare by this wittie policie which hee vsed against his enemies. Vpon a certaine time, his ene|mies set vpon him in a rough place, where no battell could be fought but on foote only, whereupon when his enemies were lighted from their horses,The polieie of Zisca for the ouerthrow of his enemies. Zisca commaunded the wo|men which customably followed the hoast, to cast their kir|chiefes vpon the ground, wherein the horsemen being in|tangled by their spurres were slaine before they could vn|loose their feete. And forasmuch as he had no walled nor fenced towne to inhabite, he chosed out a certaine place vp|on the riuer of Lusinitius which was fenced by nature, a|bout 8 miles from the Citie of Ausca. This place he com|passed with walles,  commanded euery man to build them houses where they had pitched their tents, and named this Citie, Thabor; and the inhabitants his companions Thabo|rits, because their Citie was built vpon the top of a moun|taine. He fought against the Emp. Sigismund and draue him out of Bohemia, and although the Emperour came backe againe to Bohemia with a great armie of Hungarians and Morauians, yet the second time also hee cowardly fled, and Zisca pursued after him a daies iourney, found great and rich spoyles, and tooke the towne of Broda by force and set it on fire.The proui|dent care of Zisca in time of his blind|nes. It is almost incredible that a man, being blind, as Zisca was in the time of his hottest warres (for ha|uing but one eye he lost it at the siege of a certaine towne) did so prouidently forecast all opportunities and ad|uantages against his enemies, as if hee had seene.
It is reported that when hee was lying sicke and readie to die,Zisca at his deth appoin|teth a drumme to be made of his skin. being demaunded where he would haue his body to be buried, hee answered that they should pull the skin from off his dead body, and that a Drumme should be made thereof, which they should vse in the battell, affirming that as soone

as their enemies heard the sound of that Drumme they would not abide but take their flight. After the death of Zis|ca the Emperour Sigismund assembled the Nobles of Germa|nie at Norinberge, and leuied a great armie to enter into Bo|heme, and pursue the Hussites or Thaborites of new againe: Also Pope Martin sent Iulian his Cardinall of S. Angelie into Germanie to that same effect, that is to say, to make warre against the Bohemians.
The Empe|rour warreth vpon the Hus|sits with bad successe.But the Emperour had no better successe in this enter|prise, then hee had in the former, for all his armie was stri|ken with a sudden feare, before any of his aduersaries were come in sight, and fled most shamfully to the great en|couragement and inritching of their aduersaries. The Car|dinall Iulian himselfe being present and marueling at the sudden feare, went about the Captaines, perswading them to put on armour, to order their battells, and couragiously to abide their enemies. But this exhortation was all in vaine, for feare had put away all boldnesse, and euerie man did runne headlong away. The Cardinall also, although it were against his will, was forced to doe the like, after this, the Cardinall addressed himselfe to the councell of Basile wherein he was appointed to be president in name and behalfe of the Bishop of Rome. But of this hereafter.


Albertus.
NExt to Sigismund, Albert Duke of Austria his sonne in law, was chosen to be Emperour, and gouerned eight yeeres: for his liberalitie, iustice  manhoode in wars, great|ly renowned. He subdued the Bohems,Amurathes subdueth Sco|pia and New|mount in Ser|uia, as also Thessalonica and Croia. and brought in sub|iection the people of Morauia. In his time Amurathes Empe|rour of the Turkes invaded the king of Seruia, from whom after long siege he wanne Scopia, and Newmount, and hee tooke in battel his two sonnes whom he berest of their sight, but after he tooke their sister in marriage and restored New|mont.

Hee tooke also the famous towne of Grecia called Thessalonica, being then vnder league and protection of the Venetians, and the towne of Croia in Epirus, but God raised vp Ioannes Huniades a valiant man in Wallachia,Ioannes Hunia|des an enemie to the Turkes. who being aided with the power of Vladislaus the king of Polonia did infringe the puyssance of the Turke, and recouered againe to the Christians the greatest part of Seruia, and Bulgaria, so, that the Turkes was compelled to desire truce for ten yeeres. But after the truce was concluded on both parts, and with solemne oath also confirmed,A truce con|cluded be|twixt the Christians and Turkes for 10 yeeres, by means of the Pope broken to the ouer|throw of the Christians. and Amarathes was returned backe againe to Asia, Pope Eugenius the 4. sent Iulianus Caesarianus, to the foresaid king with full dispen|sation to breake his oath and league with the Turke, whereby it came to passe that the young king inticed by the wicked instigations of Eugenius set forward his armie a|gainst the Turke vntill he came to Varna a towne of Bul|garia, where he was discomfited and slaine by Amurathes to the great hurt, and greater shame of Christian people, whom the Infidels might iustlie accuse of periurie, and brea|king of Couenants, sealed by the name of Christ whom they professe to be their Sauiour. This battell at Varna fell out in the raigne of Fredericke,The battell at Varna. of whom we are to speake in the next place.


Fredericke 3.
AFter Albert Frederick the 3. Duke of Austria was chosen to be Emperour and raigned 53. yeeres, in whose daies much war and dissention raigned almost thorow all Christi|an Realmes,Note. whereby it had beene easie for the Turke to haue ouerrunne them all, if the mercifull prouidence of God had not kept Amurathes occupied at this time. To this Fre|derick came Elizabeth the spouse of Albert sometime Empe|rour with Ladislaus her son, by whom he was nourished and entertained a certaine space, till at length after the death of

Vladislaus aforesaid king of Hungarie (who was slaine by the Turkes, in the battell of Varna) the men of Austria rising vp in armour required the Emp. to giue them their young King,The king|domes of La|dislaus com|mitted to three gouernors. who being restored into their hands, and being yet vn+der age, committed his three Kingdomes to three gouer|nours, whereof Iohn Huniades the worthy Captaine aboue mentioned had the ruling of Hungarie.
George Pogicbzachius had Bohemia, and Vlricus the Earle of Cilicia had Austria.Vlricus seeketh the destructi|on of Huniades But Vlricke had the chiefe custodie of the young King, and was a great enemie to Huniades by many secret meanes seeking his destruction. But Huniades being couragious, and wise, and circumspect, easily disap|pointed all his fetches.
After the death of this worthy gouernour his two sonnes Ladislaus and Mathias gouerned Hungarie, and in their time Ladislaus King of Bohemia, Hungarie, and Austria came into Alba a towne of Hungarie, accompanied with Vlricus Earle of Cilicia, and governour of Austria vnder the young king. Ladislaus most gladly receiued the king, but debarred from entering into the Citie 4000. armed soul|diers, of the number of them that accompanied the king. Vlricus the Earle grudging at this and sitting in Councell required Ladislaus to appeare before him and accused him of treason, for shutting the gates vpon the kings souldiers, and not content with this, hee tooke his sword from his Page and let a stroake flee at his head. But the Hungari|ans hearing the noyse in the Councell brake in vpon them and there incontinent killed Vlrick the Earle,Vlricus sline by the Hunga|rians. wounding him and cutting him in peeces. The king hearing thereof, al|though hee was not a litle discontented thereat in his mind, yet seeing there was none other remedie hee dissembled his griefe for a time.The king of Hungaria cau+seth the one sonne of Huni|ades to be be|headed, the o|ther impriso|ned. But afterward in his Progresse when hee came to Buda accompanied with the two sonnes of Huniades, hee caused them both to be taken and cast in|to prison, and Ladislaus forthwith was beheaded. Ma|thias was carried Captiue to Austria, to suffer the like punishment, if the Lord had not prevented La|dislaus,

the king by sudde~ death,The death of the king of Hungaria. who departed this life about the verie time appointed for the celebration of his marriage in Prague with Magdalen daughter to the King of Fraunce.
Thus the young king who hated the race of Huniades, and more hated the light of the Gospell that shined in Bohemia, and was of purpose (as is supposed) at his mar|riage to root out the sect of the Hussits (as hee called it) was timously in the mercie of God cut off himselfe to the great benefit of the true Church of God.
In this Emperours time suite was made by the Ger|manes to the Emperour that hee would prouide remedie against the actions of the insatiat Popes,The Germans make petition to the Empe. to be freed of the Popes bur|thens, but in vaine. and that hee would not suffer his subiects in Germanie to bee ex|hausted, and empourished by them. The Emperour be|ing moued and ouercome by their perswasion, promised that hee would prouide no lesse for them, then the king of Fraunce had done for the Frenchmen. But the subtle perswasions of Aeneas Syluius did so bewitch the Empe|rour that he contemning the equall iust and necessarie re|quests of his subiects, chosed the said Aeneas to be his Am|bassadour to Calixtus newly chosen Pope, to sweare vn|to him in his name, and to promise the absolut obedience of all Germanie. Thus the Germans were derided and fru|strate by Fredericke, and the Emperour on the other part fearing least the Germanes after his death should transport the Empire to another familie caused his son Maximilian 7. yeeres before his death to be chosen and also crowned king of Romans, and did associate him to the ministration of the Empire. In this Emperours time likewise flourished a vali|ant man sonne of Iohn Castriotus Prince of Epirus,The valour of George Castrio named by the Turkes Scan|derbege. and Al|bania, called George who was giuen in hostage to the Turke, with other two brethren. But this George excelling all the rest of his equalls, in strength of body, vigour of minde, and actiuitie in warfare, was named by the Turkes Scanderbeius, which soundeth as much as Alexander Magnus.He ouercom|meth Carama|nus of Cilicia. Hee was sent out by the Turkes to fight against Cara|mannus of Cilicia the Turkes enemie, in which expedi|tion

hee behaued himselfe so manfully, that hee wanne great renowne with the Turke, insomuch that hee trusting to the Turkes fauour,Asketh of Amurathes his fathers do|minion of Epi|rus. when hee heard of the death of his father, durst aske of the Turke the grant of his fathers domi|nion to be giuen vnto him. The which request although Amurathes did not deny vnto him, yet notwithstanding hee perceiuing that the matter was dallied out with faire words,Is put off with faire words, flieth from the Turke: reco|uereth Croia and the other Cities of Epi|rus, and main|taineth vvarre against the Turkes. by subtle meanes and policie slipt out of the Turkes Court, and came to Epirus his owne inheritance, where first by counterfeite letters hee recouered Croia. The other cities of their owne voluntarie minde yeelded to him, and hee so manfullie behaued himselfe, that against all the force both of Amurathes and Mahomet he maintained his owne, repulsed their violence, and put to flight their armies many yeeres together.
Mahomet the second taketh the Isle of Euboia, de|stroyeth the towne of Cal|cis, razeth Athens, besie|geth, taketh, and sacketh Constantino|ple.In this Emperours time Mahomet the second tooke the Isle of Euboia, and destroyed the towne of Calcis, after|ward hee commanded the Cittie of Athens to be razed and vtterly subverted, and from thence returning his armie to Thracia, with a mightie multitude compassed the towne of Constantinople both by sea and land in the yeere of our Lord. 1453. and in the 54. day of the sayd siege, it was taken and sacked, and the Emperour Constantinus slaine: such terrible crueltie did they vse as the like is not often read of in any historie. There was no corners in Constantinople which was not defiled with floodes of Christian blood,His crueltie a|gainst the Christians of Constantino|ple. so that in this one towne are reckoned to the number of fortie thousand persons that were slaine, amongst whose dead bodyes, the body of Constantine the Emperour was found, whose head being brought to Mahomet, he commaunded it to be carried vpon a speare through the whole Citie, for a publike spectacle and deri|sion to all the Turkish armie.He causeth the Crucifixe to be carried a|bout in derisi|on. Also he tooke the Image of the Crucifixe, being there in the high Temple of Sophia and (writing this superscription vpon the head of it, Hic est Christianorum Deus, this is the God of the Christians) caused it to be carried thorow all his armie,

and made every man to spit at it most contumeliously. Thus was the noble citie of Constantinople sacked 1139. yeers af|ter it was first built by Constantine the great,Constantino|ple made the seat royall of the Turkish Emperour.  now is made the Imperiall seat of the Turkish dominion. Notwithstan|ding the proud heart of Mahomet which was so highly lift vp by the conquest of Constantinople, was by the provi|dence of God somewhat abated soone after. For at the siege of Belgradum in Hungarie, in the yeere 1436. hee was so manfully resisted by that worthie Governour Iohannes Hu|niades, that hee was compelled after the losse of a great part of his army,Mahomet is forced by Iohn Huniades to raise his siege of Belgrade. to the number of 40000. souldiers, his owne person also being sore wounded, to raise his siege, and for feare and shame ready to kill himselfe.
In the East after Emanuel raigned Iohannes his sonne, who was present at the Councell of Florence,Emperours of the East. with Eugenius 4. Pope of Rome, but lived not long after his returning. And after his death, because hee had no children, his brother Constantine succeeded, in whose time the town of Con|stantinople was pitifully destroyed, and the Em|perour himselfe slaine, as hath beene de|clared. And here is the end of the Empire of Christians in the East.




CENTVRIE XVI.

Maximilianus.
_IN the yeare of our Lord 1486. Fredericus waxing aged, and partly also mistrusting the hearts of the Germaines, did in his life-time associate his sonne Maximili|an to be ioyned Emperor with him, with whom he reigned for the space of 7. yeers till the death of Fredericke his father, after whose departure he reigned 25. yeers. This Maximilian as he was a valiant Emperor, prudent and singularly learned, so was his raigne intangled in many vnquiet and difficult warres. First in the lower Countries of Flanders and Bra|bant, where he was taken captiue,Maximilian ta|ken prisoner,  relieved by his father. but worthily againe relie|ved by his father. Hee had to wife Mary the onely daugh|ter to the Duke of Burgundie, by whom hee had two chil|dren, Philip the father of Charles the fift, and Margaret. this Mary by a fall from her horse, fell into an ague and died. So happy was the education of the Emperor in good letters, so expert hee was in tongues and sciences,, but espe|cially such was his dexteritie and promptnesse in the Latine tongue,He writeth an history in La|tin of his own acts and feats of warre. that hee imitating the example of Iulius Caesar, did write and comprehend in Latin Historie his owne acts and feats of warre done by him.
In this Emperours time Baiazeth the second Empe|rour of Turkes, after long siege tooke a strong towne of Peleponesus called Methon,Baiazeth the 2. subdueth Mo|don,  killeth the Noblemen found there. or Modon, being vnder the dominion of the Venetians, and caused all the Noblemen of the Venetians and Grecians that were found in the towne, to be brought into his owne presence, and there most cruel|ly to be slaine.



Carolus quintus.
AFter Maximilian, Charles King of Spaine, Duke of Au|stria and Burgundie, and nephew to Maximilian, was chosen Emperour, and raigned 37. yeeres. He was a Prince of singular wisedome, expert in warre, slow to wrath, and if it had pleased the Lord to haue illuminated his heart with that true light that begun to shine in his time, hee might haue beene reckoned amongst the most renowned Empe|rours. His inclination to wisedome may appeare by these witty sentences vttered by him.Sentencs v|tered by Caro|lus quintus. Like as Saturne which is counted the most supreme planet, hath the slowest course of all the rest, even so they that are in supreme authority, ought to doe all things with greatest deliberation and advisement. And like as the Sunne sendeth out his beams in like bright|nesse both vpon poore and rich, so ought supreme Magi|strates minister iustice without partiality, both to poore and rich. And like as the eclipse of the Sunne is a foretoken of great commotions, so likewise the errors and oversights of Princes bring with them great perturbations to coun|tries. Hee was intangled with great and dangerous warres all the time of his government, either against forraine Prin|ces, or some of the Empire. In his warrs against the King of France, hee had better successe then he could haue looked for, for as much as the towne of Millaine being already ta|ken by the King of France, and the towne of Pavie in Italy likewise besieged, yet the Emperours army shortly after en|countred with the French-men, and both vanquished them,He subdueth the Frenchme~  taketh their King prisoner. and also tooke the King himselfe prisoner, and from thence conveyed him away to Spaine, where through care and griefe hee fell into sicknesse, but when hee was comforted by the Emperour, and put in some hope of agreement, hee began to take heart vnto him and recovered: and in the end a peace was agreed vpon at Madruce in Spaine, and the

King was set at liberty, leaving for pledges his two eldest sonnes. But shortly after hee revoked his oath, being absol|ved by the Bishop of Rome, and said he was forced to swear or else hee should never haue beene delivered. The Empe|ror after the delivery of the King of France, gaue to Charles Duke of Burbon the Dutchie of Millaine, on condition to pay 4000. ducats, and finde a number of souldiers yeerely. This Charles Duke of Burbon passing through Italy to Na|ples afterward,Rome sacked by the souldi|ers of Charles D. of Burbon: and the Pope and his Car|dinals besieged in the Emperours quarrell besieged Rome, and in the assault was slaine, but his souldiers tooke the ci|tie, spoyled it, and besieged the Bishop Clement with his Cardinalls, in the Mount Adrian, from whence hee could not be dismissed by any meanes, vntill hee agreed with the souldiers. Notwithstanding this, the Emperour Charles be|ing then in Spaine, and staying the thunderbolt of Excom|munication (which the souldiers nothing regarded) did ex|cuse himselfe by letters, that hee knew not of that his men had done, and therefore willed the Bishop to bee set at li|berty.
The begin|ning of refor|mation of reli|gion in Ger|many by Mar|tin Luther.In this Emperours dayes begun reformation of religion in Germany, by meanes of the disputations, writings, and doctrine of Martin Luther, whom the Emperour laboured by all meanes to suppresse. First, by gathering a convention of the estates of Germany, in the towne of Worms. Which convention was kept in the yeere of our Lord 1521. and Martin Luther being cited by an Herald of armes to ap|peare before the said Councell, with a letter of safe conduct by the Emperour and Princes, appeared: and although ma|ny perswaded him not to adventure himselfe to such a pre|sent danger,He appeareth at the conven|tio~ of Worms. yet Luther answered that he was resolved, and certainely determined to enter Worms, in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ, although hee knew that there were so many divells to resist him, as there were tyles to cover the houses in Wormes: thus being presented before all the E|states of the Empire,Questions propounded by Eccius. Iohn Eccius (who then was the Bishop of Triers generall officiall) at the Emperours command de|manded of Martin two questions. First, whether hee con|fessed

those bookes which were given out vnder his name to be his or no, shewing herewith an heape of Luthers bookes written in the Latin and Dutch tongues. Secondly, whether hee would revoke and recant them, or stand to all that hee had written.Answered by Luther. To the first point hee answered affirmatiuely, that hee would acknowledge his owne bookes. As touch|ing the second, whether he would recant any thing contai|ned in his bookes or no, he craved time to premeditate what hee should speake in that matter: which was the more easily granted, because they were in some hope that Luther would recant some of his writings, but it fell out farre otherwise then they looked for. For at the time of his next appearance hee divided his bookes into three sorts,Luther vrged to recant some things vvhich he had writ|ten, refuseth. some of them ope|ned the grounds of Christian religion simply, which his very enemies had counted inculpable, and therefore hee would not condemne them himselfe. Another sort contai|ned invectiues against the Papacie, and others of that retinue which had with their pestiferous doctrine and pernitious examples, corrupted the whole estate of Christianity, which bookes if hee should revoke, hee should adde more force to their tyranny, and his retraction should be a cloake and sha|dow to all their impiety and naughtinesse. The third sort of his bookes were written against certaine particular per|sons, who with tooth and naile laboured to maintaine the Romane tyranny, and to deface his doctrine, and these like|wise hee could not recall, left by his recantation it should come to pasle, that tyranny and impiety supported by his meanes should rage more violently against the people, then ever it did before. When no recantation could be obtained, nor yet submission of his writings to the iudgement of the Emperour, and his Estates: Martin Luther departed from Wormes, being dismissed according to his promise of his safe conduct, and returned to his owne countrey.
Soone after this,The Empe|rours decre against Luther. the Emperour Charles to purchase fa|vour with the Pope (because hee was not yet confirmed in his Empire) provideth and directeth out a solemne writ of outlawry against Luther and all them that take his part,

commanding the said Luther, where-ever hee might be got|ten, to be apprehended and his bookes burned.
After this another convention of the Estates of Germa|nie was gathered at Norinberg for the suppressing of Mar|tin Luther, to which Councell Pope Adrian the sixt, sent his Ambassadour Cheregatus, to desire that the sentence of the Apostolick Sea, and the Emperours edict against Mar|tin Luther should bee put in execution.The procee|dings of the convention of Norinberg a|gainst Luther. The Princes of Germany on the other part, declared great vrgent causes wherefore they were compelled to forbeare the execution of those decrees for a time, and namely for this, that the greatest part of Germany haue alwayes had this perswa|sion, that great inconvenience hath come to this Nation by the Court of Rome: and now if they should proceede with rigour in executing the Popes sentence, and the Em|perours edict, the people would suspect in their mindes, this to bee done for supporting and confirming the former abuses, whereupon great warres and tumults (no doubt) would ensue. For the avoyding whereof, they thought to vse more gentle remedies serving better for the time. Also seeing the Pope by his foresaid Ambassadour desired to be informed what way were best to take, in resisting those er|rours of the Lutherans: The Estates answered, that if the Popes holinesse with consent of the Emperours Maiestie, should gather a free Christian Councell in some conve|nient place of Germanie,The Princes of Germanies iudgement concerning the suppression of Luthers at|tempts. and that with such speed as conue|niently might bee, it were in their iudgement the rea|diest way to suppresse the attempts of Luther: and in the meane time vntill the Councell might bee set, they had provided wayes to stay the tumults of the Germaine people.
1. First, by dealing with the Noble Prince Fredericke Duke of Saxony, that Luther nor his followers shall not write, set foorth, or print any thing during the saide space.
2. Item, that the Princes shall labour so with the Prea|chers of Germany, that they shall not in their Sermons

teach or blow into the peoples eares such matters, where|by the multitude may bee mooved to rebellion or vprore, or bee induced vnto errour, and that they shall preach or teach nothing but the true, pure, sincere, and holy Gos|pell, and approoved Scripture, according to the exposi|tion approoved and received of Christs Church.
3. And finally, as concerning Priests that contract Ma|trimony, and religious men leaving their Cloysters, for as much as in the civill law there is no penalty for them or|dained, they shall bee referred to the Canonicall constituti|ons, to be punished thereafter accordingly: that is by losse of their benefices and priviledges, or other condigne censures.
Amongst others things done at this assembly of Norin|berg,An 100. grie|vances collec|ted by the Germaines, and exhibited to the Bishop of Rome. certaine grievances were collected to the number of an hundreth, and exhibited to the Bishoppe of Rome, wherewith the countrey of Germanie was grieved, as namely, that many things were prohibited by mens Con|stitutions, which are not prohibited by any Commande|ment of God, and many things were exacted which are not commanded by any precept of God.
Item, that the Popes indulgences and pardons bee most importable, perswading simple people of a remission of sinnes, a poena  culpa, and that not in this life onely, but after this life: through the hope and occasion whereof, true piety is almost extinct in all Germany, whilest every e|vill disposed person promiseth to himselfe for a little mony licence and impunity to doe what him listeth, whereupon followeth fornication, incest, adultery, periury, homicide, robbing and spoyling, rapine, vsurie, with a whole flood of mischiefes.
Item, that whosoever hath received Ecclesiasticall orders, doth contend to bee free from all punishment of the secu|lar Magistrate, how great soever his offence be which hee committeth.
Also, that in many places the Bishoppes and their Offi|cialls doe not onely suffer Priests to haue concubines, so

that they pay certaine summes of money, but also com|pell continent and chaste Priestes to pay tribute for concu|bines, which being paid, it shall bee lawfull for them either to liue chaste or otherwise, as it shall please them.
These with many mo, to the number of an 100. the secular States of Germanie delivered to the Popes Legat, desiring him to present them to Pope Adrian. But Pope Adrian died about the same time, and Pope Clemens the seventh succee|ding in his place, sent downe his Legat Cardinall Cam|peius, vnto the Councell of Germane Princes assembled againe at Norinberg the next Convention, with letters to Duke Fredericke full of many faire petitions and sharpe complaints. But as touching the grievances aboue menti|oned, no word at all was sent.
Thus was the Pope ever ready with all diligence to call vpon Princes to suppresse Luther,Note. and the liberty of the Gospell. But when any redresse or reformation of the Church was craved, hereto the Pope neither gaue eare nor answer.
In these Councels of Norinberg it is to bee noted, that the execution of the sentence of Leo, and the Empe|rours edict made at Wormes against Luther was suspended for a time; and many other things that were desired by the Popes Legate to bee enacted in a full Councell, and with consent of all the Empire, yet could not bee brought to passe, by reason that the mindes of divers were gone from the Pope. For this cause Ferdinand the Emperours bro|ther, with Campeius and the Cardinall of Salisburg,A conventicle at Ratisbone, wherein arti|cles were rati|fied for sup|pressing of Lu|thers doctrine. the two Dukes of Bavaria, the Bishops of Trent and Ratis|bone, also the Legates of the Bishops of Bamberg, Spires, Stransbrugh, Ausbrugh, Constance, Basile, Frising, Pas|savie, and Brixine, assembled themselues together in a par|ticular Conventicle at Ratisbone, and there ratified all the articles which they had hatched amongst themselues for suppressing of Luthers doctrine.
1. First, that the edict of the Emperour made at Worms should be observed in all their precincts.
2. That the Gospell, and all other holy Scriptures shall be taught according to the interpretation of the auncient forefathers.
3. That in the Sacraments of the Masse, and in all other things, no invocation shall be, but all things shall stand as before time they did.
4. That all that approach to the Lords Supper without confession and absolution, or doe eate flesh on dayes forbid|den, or which doe runne out of their order, also Priests that be married shall be punished.
5. That no Booke of Luther or Lutheran shall be Prin|ted or sold.
6. That they of their iurisdiction, which studie in the V|niversitie of Wirtenberge, shall euery one repaire home within three moneths after the publishing hereof, or els turne to some other place free from the infection of Luther, vnder paine of confiscating all their goods,  loosing their heritage.
7. That no Benefice or other office of teaching be giuen to any Student of that Vniversitie; with diverse other Arti|cles conteined at greater length in the commentaries of Iohn Slendan.
After this other two Conventions were kept at Spiers.Two conven|tions at Spiers with a rehear|sall of those things which were conclu|ded. In the first were exhibited to the Princes many billes of re|quest, that Monkes and Fryers might be no more in place of them that died, and that the priviledges of the Clergie might be taken away, as lets of ciuill administration, that certaine holy dayes might be abolished, that choice of meats and ceremonies might be free. And finally, seeing there was no hope of a generall Councell, that either the Empe|rour would appoint a Provinciall Councell in Germany for matters of Religion, or els cause the decree of Wormes to cease. At this time the Bishops would not suffer any matter of Religion to be handled, and therefore the Duke of Saxonie, and the Landgraue would haue departed. At last it was decreed, that either a generall or provinciall coun|cell should be had within the space of a yeare, and in the

meane time the decree of Wormace Councell to cease. In the next Councell kept at Spire, where Ferdinand Ambas|sadour in the Emperours name was present, certaine Citties were greatly blamed for altering Religion, contrary to the Emperours commandement; and the Ambassadour for the Citie of Argentine was not suffered to sit in the Councell, because that Cittie had disanulled the Masse. Shortly after by the assent of a few Princes, these points were decreed.
That such Cities as had altered Religion should make no further change.
That other places should obey the decree of Wormes vn|till a generall Councell.
That it should be lawfull to all men who would vse the masse, euen in those Citties where it was abolished.
That the Anabaptists should be punished by death. That the doctrine of the Lords supper shuld not be receiued.
That the Ministers should teach according to the inter|pretation of the Church.
That the Princes and Cities should not receiue foreiners comming for Religion into their dominions, if any man did otherwise, he should be proscript.
The Duke of Saxonie, George Prince of Brandenburgh, Erneste and Francisse, Princes of Luneburg, and the Land|graue of Hesse, and a Prince called Anhaldius, withstood this decree, and answered to euery point thereof, saying that the consent of a few could not vndoe that decree which before was made at Spire by the whole Empire,A protestati|on against the decrees of the a conventions of Spire. and there|fore that they all made protestation, that they would not ac|knowledge it. And of this protestation were those Princes, and all that allied with them called Protestants, which name is now giuen to all them that in their doctrine swerue from the Bishop of Rome.Whence the name Prote|stants was deriued.
To the Princes aboue-named, these Cities following did agree, Argentine, Norinberg, Vlmes, Constance, Ruteling, Winsemium, Mening, Lindan, Campodune, Hailbrune, Isna, Wiseborough, Norling Sangall. All these Cities with the Princes refused the act of Spire,  appealed to the Em|perour,

and to a generall or provinciall Councell. After the breaking vp of this Councell, the Protestants send Ambassa|dours to the Emperour, to declare the causes of their appel|lation from the Councell of Spire.The Prote|stants Ambas|sadors rough|ly enreated by the Empe|rour. The Emperour at this time was in Italie, and on his iourney to Rome to be crow|ned with the Emperiall Diadem by Pope Clement the se|uenth; who hauing heard the Ambassadours of the Prote|stants, entreated them roughly and sent them backe againe with menacing words, threatning to punish with all rigour those that would not be obedient to the Decree of the fore|said Convention of Spire.
This was the first ground that moued the Protestants in the conventio~ of Smalcaldy,A league a|mongst the Protestants. to bind vp a couenant amongst themselues of mutuall ayde, if any of them were pursued for Religions sake, as shall be declared afterward, God willing. In the meane time, the Citie of Argentine entreated league with Tigure, Berne, and Basill (who being not farre distant might be more helpfull each to other) that if they were in|vaded for the quarrell of Religion, they should mutually as|sist one another, wherewith the Councell of the Empire were much grieued, and found great fault with them. After the Emperours returning from Italie, where he was crow|ned with the Emperiall Diadem, and had sworne to be a de|fender of the Roman Church, a solemne conuention of the Estates of the Empire was kept in the Towne of Angusta, or S. Ausbrugh,A convention at Ausbrugh. to which were brought many learned di|uines. The Protestants brought with them Philip Melanch|ton, Iustus Ionas, Georgius Spalatinus, Iohannes Agricola, Isle|bius, and diverse others. The Romane Church had for their part Cardinall Campeius, the Popes Ambassadour, Eccius, Iohannes Faber Cochleus, and many others. The Emperour commanded the Princes of the Protestants to come to Masse with him, and to command their Preachers to silence, but they answered, they would neither come to Masse, nor in|ioyne their Preachers to silence, before the matter was con|cluded. Onely the Duke of Saxonie after deliberation with his Divines, was content at the Emperours commandement

(according to his dutie) to carrie the Sword before him as he went to the Church. Then the Emperour vnder great perill commanded both the parties to silence, and he by pre|rogatiue appointed certaine to Preach that should touch no Controversie.
The Prote|stants obtaine their confessi|on of faith to be openly read.In this Convention the Protestants offered vnto the Em|perour a copie of the Articles of their Faith, which with great difficultie they obtained to be openly read before they delivered it into the Emperours handes. This Confession commonly called Augustana Confessio, was exhibited to Ec|cius and Faber, Divines on the contrary part, to be confuted, and the copie of this confutation was also openly read. But when the Protestants desired that they might answere to it, the Emperour would not grant it, saying, he would heare no more disputation, but willed them to returne to the Catho|lique Church.
Also the Citizens of Argentine, Constance, Mening, and Lindan (who differed from the other Protestants in the o|pinion of the Sacrament) did in like manner exhibite a con|fession of their Doctrine: a confutation of this Booke also was made by Eccius and Faber, with very bitter and sharpe words; but the other partie could not haue licence to reply, nor any sight of the copie but as they heard it read. After this, three were chosen on each side to debate matters of Re|ligion, where although Melanchton granted more then his ellowes would haue him, yet nothing was agreed, because that Eccius and his two Lawyers, who were chosen for the Romane Church, stucke so fast by their Masse and Monasti|call Vowes, that in those things they would admit no refor|mation.
In the end the Emperour published a Decree, wherein he declared, that although the confession of the Protestants was sufficiently confuted, yet he would giue them respite for a time, to returne to the Church of Rome. In which time they should keepe peace, and alter nothing of Religion, and suffer all that would to follow the Church of Rome. But the Princes and Protestant Cities answered, that they could

not keepe that Decree with safe consciences.The Princes  Protestant Citties refuse to obey the Emperours Decree con|cerning the returing to the Church of ome. Another De|cree of the Emperour. Thus was the Emperours interim refused, wherefore he set forth another Decree, wherein he confirmed the Doctrine of the Church of Rome in all points, and abrogated all manner of appella|tions made by the Protestants. It appointed also an order how the Emperours Court, called the Chamber, should pro|ceed in iudgement against the Protestants, and forbidded that any Prince of that sect should beare any office in the Court, and all that were of the faith of the Romane Church to be taken into the protection of the Emperour against their owne Princes. This act caused great feare, wherefore the Princes and Ambassadours of the Protestants shortly af|ter met againe at Smalcalie,The Princes and Ambassa|dours of the Protestants meet at Smal|caldie, and en|ter league to ayde one ano|ther. and went through with the League which they had begunne the yeare before, to ayde each other in the quarrell of Religion.
About this time the Emperour hauing sure information, that the Turke with great preparation, was setting forward his armie against Vienna in Austrich, begun somewhat to relent of his rigour, and through the intercession of the Bi|shop of Mentz, and the Palsgraue,Peace granted by the Empe|rour to the Protestants. granted peace to the Protestants, so that they should ayde the Emperour against the Turks, and on the other part the action of the Chamber|court should cease in all sutes of Religion against the Prote|stants. About the same time that all this businesse was in Germanie for the Doctrine of Martin Luther,Vlricus Zuing|lius Preacht at Zurik against the corruptio~s of the Roman Church. Vlricus Zuin|glius Preached the Word at Zurik, detested the abuse of par|dons,  of other corruptions then reigning in the Church: but, see, great offence begun to rise, and diverse stepped out on the contrary side to Preach and inveigh against him. Vpon this the Magistrates and Senate of Zurik, sent forth their commandement to all Priests  Ministers within their Dominion,A disputation at Zurike. to repaire to the Citie of Zurik against the 29. of Ianuarie next ensuing; there euery one to speake freely, and to be heard quietly touching those Controversies of Religi|on. This disputation was appointed in the yeare of our Lord 1523. Zuinglius had contriued all his doctrine in a certaine ord of places, to the number of 77. Articles, which he had

published also abroad before, to the end that they who were disposed might resort thither better prepared for disputati|on. The Bishop of Constance sent thither Iohannes Faber Stapulensis his Vicegerent; who in stead of disputation, rea|soned that this was no convenient place for disputation, but rather the handling of Controversies in Religion belonged to a generall Councell, which he said was alreadie appoin|ted, and nigh at hand.
The decree of the Senate of Zurik concer|ning the abo|lishing of mens traditi|ons, and pure|ly Preaching of the Gospel.Wherevpon the Senate of Zurik caused incontinent to be proclaimed through all their Dominions and Territories, that the traditions of men should be displaced and abando|ned, and the Gospell of Christ purely taught out of the old and new Testament.
When the Gospell begun thus to flourish in Zurik: the yeare next following, Anno 1524. another assemblie of the Helvetians was convented at Lucerna, where Decrees were made on the contrary part;An assemblie of the Helve|tians at Lu|cerna, contra|ry to that of Zurike. that no man should deride the Masse; that no mention should be made of Luther, or any new doctrine; that Pictures and Images of Saints in euery place should be kept inviolate: and finally, that all the lawes and decrees set forth by the Bishop of Constance should be obserued.
After these things thus concluded at Lucerna, the Can|tones of Helvetia together direct their publique Letter to the Tygurines, or men of Zurik, complaining that they had receiued a new Doctrine, which would be the seed of dis|cord, whereas before time all things were in quiet. Where|vnto the Tigurines answered, that at the first this Doctrine seemed strange to themselues, but after they vnderstood it directed them onely to Christ, as the pillar and onely rocke of their saluation; they could no otherwise doe but with ar|dent affection receiue so wholesome and ioyfull message. And like as faithfull Christians in former times after they had receiued the Gospell, did not by and by fall out in de|bate with their neighbours: So lkewise they trusted, God willing to keepe peace with all men. Neuerthelesse, the rest of the Cantons grew in hatred against the men of Zurike,

and for suppressing of the doctrine of Zuinglius, appointed a disputation to be holden at Baden,A disputation at Baden. which was kept in the moneth of Iune, Anno 1525. where were present amongst other Divines, Iohannes Faber, Eccius, and Murnerus. The Bishops also of Lucerna, Basile, Curiak, and Lawsanna. The conclusions there propounded were these.

1. That the true body and blood of Christ is in the Sa|crament.
2. That the Masse is a Sacrifice for the quicke and the dead.
3. That the blessed Virgin, and other Saints are to be in|vocated as Mediators and Intercessors.
4. That Images ought not to be abolished.
5. That there is a Purgatorie.

Which Conclusions or assertions Eccius tooke vpon him soundly to defend. Against him reasoned Oecolampadius, Preacher at Basile, with other moe. Zuinglius at that time was not there present, but by writing confuted the doctrine of Eccius,The causes of Zuinglius absence. declaring withall the causes of his absence, which were for that he durst not for feare of his life commit him|selfe to the hands of Lucernates, Vrbani, Suitij, Vnternaldi, and Tugiani his enemies, and that he refused not to dispute, but onely the place of disputation; excusing moreouer, that he was not permitted of the Senate to come. Neverthelesse, if they would assigne the place of disputation, either at Zurik, Berna, or Sangallum, thither he would not refuse to come.The conclusi|on of the disputation. The conclusion of this disputation was this, that all should remaine in that Religion which hitherto they had kept, and should follow the authoritie of the Councell, neither should admit any other new Doctrine within their dominions.
In the yeare of our Lord 1527. the Senate and people of Berne (whose power amongst all the Helvetians chiefely excelled) considering how neither they could haue the acts of the disputation of Baden committed vnto them,A disputation ordained to be holden at Berne. and that the variance about Religion still more and more increased, assigned another disputation within their owne Cittie, and

sending forth writings thereof, called vnto the same all the Bishops bordering about them, as the Bishops of Constance, Basile, Sedune, Lusanna, determining also the whole dispu|tation to be decided only by the authority of the old  new Testament. To all that would come thither they graunted safe conduct. And to the end men might come thither bet|ter prepared before, they proposed in publique writing ten conclusions in the said disputation to be defended by their Ministers by the Scriptures,Conclusions maintained by the Mini|sters of Berne. which Ministers were Francis|cus Colbus, and Bertholdus Hallerus. The Theames or Con|clusions were these.

1. That the true Church, whereof Christ is the head, ri|seth out of Gods Word, and persisteth in the same, and hea|reth not the voyce of any other.
2. That the same Church maketh no lawes without Gods Word.
3. That traditions ordained in the name of the Church doe not binde, but so farre forth as they be consonant to Gods Word.
4. That Christ onely hath made satisfaction for the sins of the world, and therefore if any man say, there is another way of saluation, or meane to put away sinne, he denieth Christ.
5. That the body and blood of Christ cannot be recei|ued really and corporally by the testimonie of the Scrip|ture.
6. That the vse of the Masse, wherein Christ is presented and offered vp to his heauenly Father for the quicke and the dead, is against the Scripture, and contumelious to the Sa|crifice which Christ made for vs.
7. That Christ onely is to be invocated as the Mediatour and Advocate of Mankinde to God he Father.
8. That there is no place to be found y the holy Scrip|ture, wherein soules are purged after this life, and therefore all those prayers and ceremonies, yeerely dirges, and obiles, which are bestowed on the dead, also Lampes, Tapers, and such other things profit nothing at all.
9. That to set vp any Picture or Image to be worshipped, is repugnant to the holy Scripture, and therefore if any such be erected vp in Churches to that intent, the same ought to be taken downe.
10. That Matrimony is prohibited to no estate or order of men, but for eschewing of fornication, generally is per|mitted to all men by the word of God. And forasmuch as all fornicators are excluded by the testimony of Scripture from the communion of the Church; therefore this vn|chast and filthy single life of Priests, is most of all inconue|nient for the order of Priesthood.

At this disputation were present Oecolampadius, Bucerus, Capito, Blanreus, with many other moe, all which defended the affirmatiue of the conclusions propounded. On the con|trary part of the opponents, the chiefest Captaine was Con|radus Trogedus, a Fryer Augustine, who to proue his asserti|on, when he was driuen to shift out of the Scripture to seeke helpe of other Doctors: and the Moderators of the disputa|tion would not permit the same (being contrary to the or|der before appointed) he departed out of the place, and would dispute no more. The disputation indured nineteene dayes,The conclusi|ons aforesaid allowed. in the end whereof it was agreed, that the conclusi|ons there disputed, were consonant to the truth of Gods Word, and should be ratified not onely in the Cittie of Berne, but also proclaimed by the Magistrates in sundrie o|ther Citties neere adioyning. Furthermore, that Masses, Altars, Images, in all places should be abolished. The day and yeare when this reformation with them beganne from Popery to true Christianitie, they caused in a pillar to be engrauen in Golden letters, for a perpetuall memorie to all posteritie to come. This was Anno 1528. The rumour of this disputation and alteration of Berne was noysed in o|ther Citties and places abroad; and others were encouraged by this occasion, to take the like order within their bounds, and namely the Townes of Strousbrough, and Basile, and Geneua. All this time by the providence of God, the Em|perour and the King of France were together occupied in

Warres and strife, which hapned very commodiously for the successe of the Gospell: for otherwise it is to be thought that the Helvetians and other Germanes should not haue had that leisure and rest to reforme Religion, and to linke themselues in league as they did: albeit, Ferdinandus the Emperours brother and Deputie in Germanie omitted no time nor diligence to doe what he could in resisting the pro|ceedings of the Protestants: as appeared both by the decrees set forth at Ratisbone and Speirs, as hath beene declared.
The rest of the Pages of the Helvetians which were of a contrary profession, hearing of the end of this disputation at Berne (and namely because they had not regarded their ad|monition, disswading them to proceed in their intended purpose of disputation and reformation of Religion) confe|derated themselues in league with Ferdinandus,Ferdinand and fiue Pages of the Helvetians enter league against the Bernates. to suppresse the Religion of Christ in Berne and Zurik. The names of which Pages especially were fiue, to wit, Lucernates, Vrani, Suitenses, Vnternaldij, and Tugiani, who for hatred and de|spite, hanged vp the armes of the foresaid Cities vpon a Gal|lowes; beside many other iniuries and grieuances which they wrought against them. For the which cause the said Cities of Berne and Zurik raised their power, intending to set vpon the foresaid Switzers, as vpon their capitall enemies. But as they were in the field readie to encounter one Armie against the other, through the meanes of the Citie of Strous|brough and other intercessours, they were parted for that time, and so returned.
The fiue Pa|ges and the Bernates be|ing twise rea|dy to ioyne battell, are pated, and the third time the Bernates van|quished.After this, the old wound waxing raw againe beganne to burst out, and the Tigurines and Bernates by reason of cer|taine new iniuries, and contumelious words spoken against them, began to stoppe the passages and straits, whereby no corne not victuall should be conveyed to the fiue Pages a|foresaid. This second debate also was composed by meanes of the King of France, and certaine Townes of Switzerland, as namely the Glareans, Friburgians, Soloturnians, and some other laboured to set them at agreement vpon certaine conditions, which not being kept, and the fiue Pages not

obseruing the couenant, the warre brake vp of new againe amongst them. And the Tigurines and Bernates begunne againe to stoppe the passages, so that for lacke of victuall the fiue Pages were pinched with penurie. Who notwithstan|ding arming themselues secretly, set forward in warre-like aray towardes the borders of Zurike, whereas then was ly|ing a Garrison of Zurike men, to the number of a thousand and aboue. Whereupon word was sent incontinent to the Cittie of Zurike for ayde to their men. But their enemies approached so fast, that they of Zurike could hardly come to rescue them; fot when they were come to the top of the hill, whereby they must needs passe, they did see their fel|lowes at the foote of the hill in great distresse. Whereupon they encouraging themselues, made downe the hill with more hast then order, striuing who should goe fastest, by reason whereof they were discomfited and ouer-matched by their enemies. Amongst the number of them that were slaine,Zuinglius kil|led. was also Vlricus Zuinglius the blessed seruant of God, whose bodie after his death they most vildly abused by cut|ting it in pieces, consuming it with fire, and practising a|gainst it, all despite that malice and hatred could deuise. The Bernates were willing to come and reuenge their quarrell, but before they came, their enemies set vpon them the se|cond time, and had the vpper hand, yet would they of Zurik nothing relent in Religion.
At the last through mediation, a Peace was concluded, and thus the matter agreed, that the Tigurines, Bernates, and Basilians, should forsake the league which they lately made with the Citie of Strousbrough, and the Landgraue. Likewise, should the fiue Page men giue ouer the league and composition made with Ferdinanus;The occasion of the alterati|on of religion in England about Henry the eights marriage of his brother Arthurs wife. and hereof Obli|gations were made and sealed for the greater suretie and bet|ter keeping of the promises.
In this Emperours time, amongst other places, great alte|ration of Religion fell out in the Countrey of England vp|on this occasion. Henry the 7. King of England, had two sonnes, Arthur and Henry; Prince Arthur his eldest sonne

married Katherine, daughter to Ferdinand King of Spaine, but he soone after his marriage died without children. King Henry with advise of his Nobles to the end her dowrie might remaine within the Realme, thought meete to e|spouse Lady Katherine to Prince Henry, brother to King Arthur. This marriage seemed very strange and hard for one brother to marry the wife of another; but yet by dispen|sation of Pope Iulian the second, this marriage, which nei|ther sense of nature would admit, nor Gods law suffer, was concluded, approued, and ratified, and so continued as lawfull without any scruple or doubt the space of twentie yeares, till that a certaine doubt began to be moued by the Spaniards themselues of the Emperours Councell. Anno 1523. At which time Charles the Emperour being in Eng|land, promised to marry Lady Mary daughter to King Hen|ry the eyght, King of England, with the which promise the Spanyardes were not well contented; Obiecting, that the Ladie Mary was begotten of the King of England by his brothers wife. Whereupon, the Emperour forsaking the marriage, did couple himselfe with Ladie Isabell, daughter to King Emmanuel of Portugall, which marriage was done in the yeere of our Lord 1526. The King vpon this occasion casting many things in his minde, beganne to consider the matter more deeply, and finding that neither his conscience could be cleered in keeping his brothers wife, nor yet the estate of the Realme firme by the succession of a daughter begotten in such a marriage; he proposed the question to the chiefe Vniversities of all Christendome, whose censures all agreed in one, that the marriage was vnlawful. Yet would not the King proceed to the divorcement without the Popes consent. Who sent Campeius his Ambassadour with concurrance of the Cardinall of Yorke to be iudges in that cause. The Cardinall of Yorke, called Wolsey, at the first was verily bent to haue the divorceme~t set forward, but afterward finding that the Kings affection was bent towardes Ladie Anne Bulloigne, to take her in marriage, he changed his pur|pose,  sent advertisment to Pope Clement, that in case King

Henry the eight were divorced from Ladie Katherine, then should another infected with Luthers doctrine succeede in her place, to the great hurt of the Church of Rome. For this cause the Pope calleth backe his Ambassadour Campe|ius, before the Kings cause was decided. Neuerthelesse, the King proceeded in his purpose, and was divorced from La|die Katherine by meanes of D^r Cranmer.Hatred be|twixt the Pope and King Henry the 8. This was the ground of that great hatred that fell out betweene the Pope and King Henry; for on the one part, the Pope cursed King Henry, and the Realme of England for the divorcement. The King on the other part abolished in his Realme the Bishop of Romes vnlawfull tyrannie, with commandement, that he should be called no more Pope in his Country, but onely Bishop of Rome, and that the King should be taken and re|puted as supreame head of the Church of England,  haue full authoritie to reforme and redresse errours, heresies, and abuses in the same.
Now to returne againe to Germanie. The Emperour was so busied with Warres all this time, that he had no leisure to tarry in Germanie, and although many assemblies were ga|thered to suppresse the doctrine of Luther, he was onely present at two, to wit, at the first kept at Wormes,  the last kept at Auspurg. For this cause it seemed good to the Em|perour, to declare his brother Ferdinand to be King of the Romanes, and apparent successor to the Empire, to the end he might with greater authoritie gouerne the affaires of the Empire in his absence. He sent also letters to the Protestants, commanding them to acknowledge him King. Wherefore the Ambassadours of the Protestant Cities being gathered at Franckford, concluded with the Princes, that for their part they would not for this resist the Emperour,  for denying a title and a name only to his brother, to make him more ea|ger against their Religion. But the Duke of Saxonie,  other Princes, not agreeing thereto, writ to the Emperour, that be|cause it was done against the manner and liberty of the Em|pire,Warres be|twixt Ferdi|nand and the Protestant Princes. they could not allow it. This seemeth to be the first ground of the warres that after followed. For Ferdinand King

of the Romanes expelled Vlrich of Wirtenberge from his Lordship, and when no redresse could be had at the Empe|rours hands, the Landgraue of Hesse with his cousin Vlrich, gathered an Armie; at Lawferme by Wirtenberg ouercame their enemies, and put them to flight; recouered the townes of Asperge, Wrath, Tubinge, and Niphe, and tooke prisoner Philip, Prince Palatine and chiefe Captaine of Ferdinands ar|mie.
Shortly after, agreement was made on these conditions, that Vlrich should haue againe his Lordship of Wirtenberg,Agreement made betwixt them. but so that he should hold it by the benefit of Ferdinand, and the house of Austrich; that if issue male did saile in the house of Wirtenberge, that Lordship should returne to the heire of the Emperours house of Austrich: that the Landgraue and Vlrich should come to Ferdinand, and submit themselues to him. The Emperour foreseeing that this diversitie of Reli|gion that was in Germanie, would in the end burst forth into some bitter fruit, and great inconuenience, aduised with himselfe by what means reconciliation might be made, and all controversie might cease: and in the end appointed a Councell at Wormes, and communication of Religion, and for this cause sent Granuellanus thither. But the matter was so long delayed by the fautors of the Sea of Rome, vn|till Letters came from the Emperour againe to deferre the whole matter to the Councell of Ratisbone. To which came all the Princes of the Empire, except the Duke of Saxonie, who came not himselfe,A Councell held at Ratis|bone about the ending of controversies. but sent thither a noble ambassage, together with Melanchthon, and other Preachers. Vnto the same Councell also came from the Pope Caspar Conterane, a Cardinall. In this disputation, Fredericke the Palsgraue, and Granuellane were appointed moderators: Melanchthon, Bucer, and Pistorius, Disputers for the Protestants. Pflugius, Eccius, Gropper for the Papists. Vnto these six was offered a booke conteining the definition of most Articles in Controversie, which they were willed to ouer-looke, and either to allow or disallow those things that they could agree vpon. This booke was deliuered againe after a time to the Emperour; in

many points they could not agree, in some they did. The Protestants deliuered together with the booke, their opini|on concerning those controversies, and their arguments to proue the same. The Emperour deliuered the same to the Princes to be examined: but they being most part Popish, referred the whole matter to the Popes Ambassadour, who exhorting the Bishops to honestie of life, and suppressing of Luthers doctrine, thought good it should be deferred to a generall Councell. This convention which began in Aprill Anno 1541. was dissolued in the end of Iulie; after that the Emperour had decreed, that the communication begun, and whole controversie of Religion,The conclusi|on of the Councell. should be deferred to a ge|nerall or Provinciall Councell of Germanie: That the Pro|testants should teach no other points of Religion, then such as were agreed vpon: That Bishops should see amendment of life in their Diocesse: That there should be a Provinciall Councell within a yeare and an halfe, if they could not ob|taine a generall Councell of the Pope: That the Churches of Monasteries should not be pulled downe, but reformed: that the Church-goods should not be inverted: that the decree of Ausbrough, and all Proscriptions of the Protestants should be suspended: all those conventions of estates, dis|putations, promises of generall or provinciall Councels to be kept in Germanie, could not reconcile diuerse Religions, but at length lurking hatred behoued to breake out into o|pen hostilitie.
The first occasion whereof was offered by Henry,Warres be|twixt Henry Prince of Brunswick,  the Duke of Saxonie in name of all the Prote|stants, where|in Henries do|minions were subdued. Prince of Brunswick, who by often invasion of Cities, confederated with the Protestants in Germany, moued the Duke of Saxo|nie and the Landgraue, to make warre against him in name  quarrell of all the Protestants, confederated by the league of Smalcaldy. In this warre they subdued all his dominions, and compelled him with his eldest sonne Charles to flie for their safetie into Bavarie. Henry to recouer his dominions againe, first pursued the Protestants in the Chamber-court of the Empire, but the Protestants appealed and refused the iudgement thereof.
Next he made his complaint to Ferdinand, the Emperours brother; and last went into Italie to the Emperour,  there at Cremona grieuously accused the Protestants, to whom the Emperour sent an hard message, that if the Prince of Bruns|wick were not restored, he would take such order, whereby he should be restored whether they would or no. Notwith|standing all this, the Emperour at his returning into Ger|manie, after he had heard the declaration of the Protestants against the Duke of Brunswick, albeit, the Emperour was loath to giue out any grieuous sentence against him, yet at length he determined that all the Dukes lands should re|maine as sequestred in his hands, vntill that matter were en|ded.
A peace con|cluded betwixt the Emperour and the King of France, wherein was determined that both should ioyne against the Protestants.All this while the Emperour was busied in warres against the King of France; ut in the end a peace was concluded be|tweene them vpon certaine conditions. Amongst others this was one, that they should both ioyne in the restitution of the Romish Religion. The effects of this vnhappie agreement were soone felt, both in France and Germanie; for in France Minerius governour of Provance, by the Kings commande|ment went with an Armie against the Waldenses that dwelt in Merindol, Cabreire, and certaine other Townes of Pro|vance. The poore men of Merindol, fearing his comming, fled into the Woods and Mountaines with their wiues and children; he in the meane time spoyled and burned the townes being left voyde:The crueltie of Minerius. and in Merindol finding but one young man, bound him to an Oliue tree, and shot him thorow with guns. At Cabreire the Citie was yeelded vnto him, vpon promise that they should sustaine no harme, but he kept no promise, but shewed great crueltie, killing them euery one: some in the Churches, some in other places, and burned 40 women that were in a Barne full of straw. There were slaine, partly in that towne, partly abroad, aboue 800. beside other places. They which fled vnto the mountaines  woods, partly were famished, partly otherwise slaine, partly sent to the Gallowes. 25 persons that fled into a caue by the towne of Mussie, were smoothered to death with smoke.
Certaine of the Heluetians, sued vnto the king of France to faour the Waldenses, but no entreatie would serue: al|wayes this tyrane Minerius escaped not the iust iudgement of God,The miserable death of Minerius. for God striked him with a terrible disease, and hee felt like vnto a fire burning him from the navell vpward, and the lower parts were rotten and consumed a|way with vermine, with an extreame stinke, and profusion of blood in place of his vrine, and so with great torments hee ended his wretched life.
In Germanie like as it was harder to oppresse so great a number as had alreadie embraced the Gospell, so likewise the Emperour was compelled to doe his turne by craft, ra|ther then by force, for he sent letters to diuers cities of the Protestants as to Argentine,The Empe|rour vseth po|licie to sub|due the Prote|stants. Noriberg, Ausbrough, Vlmes, indeuouring to perswade them, that he entended not warre against them, but against certaine other traytours and re|bells, against whom hee doubted not but they would as|sist him. In like manner also he writ to the Prince of Witten|berg. Also when Palsgraue of Rhene writ to the Emperour to know against whom he prepared his war, he receiued the same answere that before was written to the cities with mani|fest signification that it was against certaine Princes of the Protestants, not so much for religion as for other things: and finallie the Heluetians who had receiued the Gospell, Tigure, Berne and Basile were circumuented with the like po|licie: for the Emperour had perswaded hem that he would not medle with religion: by this meanes hee had not onely diuers places quiet, but also vsed the helpe of many Princes and cities which fauoured the religion against the Duke of Saxonie and Lantgraue of Hesse. This war begun in the selfe same yeere wherein the Councell of Trent was gathered, to with. 1546.  the league between the Emp.  the Pope against the Protestants was openly pronounced at Trident. The Pope also laied in the Venetians hands for this war 200000. Crownes, and moreouer for the space of halfe a yeere did finde 10000. Italian foote, and 500. light horsemen.
Thus was their great preparation and deepe policie

vsed to suppresse two noble Princes whom they knew to be chiefe defenders of the reformed religion.
The Emperour being at Ratisbone and looking for his companies of Italians and Spaniards,The Empe|rour Proclai|meth the D. of Saxonie  Lantgraue outlawes. The causes alleadged. in the meane time by Proclamation proscribeth out-lawes, the Duke of Saxonie and the Lantgraue, alleadging these causes. That they had made warre against certaine Princes of the Empire. That they had spoyled them, and oppressed certaine Bishops. That they refused and subverted the iudgement of the chamber-court, and entered league against him, making no mention of religion. Shortly after hee sent a copie of this proscription vnto Maurice and August Princes of Saxonie, and commaunded them as being next of their kin|red to enter vpon the goods  lands that appertained vn|to them, threatning grieuous punishments except they so did. The Protestants hauing a copie of the proscription,The Prote|stants answere vnto the pros|cription. answer|ed vnto the same at large. And first whereas the Emperour pretended the fauour of religion and commonwealth, they declared by many arguments that it was dissembled  false. And as touching the causes of their proscription expressed they answered to euerie part, and cleered themselues prote|sting that they did not make warre vpon the Emperour, but repell that iniurie which he offered them.
The Bohemi|ans and Mau|rice invade and subdue th D. of Saxons lands.The Bohemians incited by their king Ferdinand first in|vaded the lands of the D. of Saxonie lying next vnto them: Maurice Prince of Saxonie sent advertisement to the Duke, that seeing he was heire to the Dukedome hee would take such order, as his heritage should not come into other mens hands, and immediatly by the helpe of Ferdinands armie subdued all the Dukes lands, except Viteberge, Isimake, and Goth:  perceiuing himselfe to be in hatred and displeasure with many for so doing,Maurice excu|seth by Pro|clamation what he had done. set forth a Proclamation to excuse himselfe, saying that hee could not lawfully re|sist the Emperour, seeing that he had assured him that hee would neither opresse religion, nor yet hurt the libertie of Germanie.
The Duke of Saxonie willing to recouer againe his

owne lands assaulted Lipsia,The Duke of Saxonie reco|uereth what he had lost. and departing from thence, did not onely recouer all that he had lost in Turinge and Misne but also wanne from Maurice all his cities except Lipsia and Dresta. Maurice and August on the other part ioyning with the armie of Ferdinand, were all minded to ioyne also with the Emperours armie, and so with all their forces to invade Saxonie. The nobilitie in the Countrey thinking it was dangerous to their libertie to bring so many Spaniarde and Italians into their Countrie, sent word to Maurice and August that they would depart with their bands of Ita|lians and Spainiards, otherwise such order and remedie should be found as the time and matter required. In this meane time many of the Princes of the Protestants  townes (with whom the Emperour was displeased, because of the aide they had sent to the Duke of Saxonie and Lantgraue) reconciled themselues to the Emperour and obtained their pardon after they had payed great summes of money. Of this number was Palsgraue of the Rhene Elector, and the Prince of Witemberg. Also earnest request was made to the Emp. for the Lantgraues pardon by the Marques of Bra~denburg. But the conditions were so grieuous, that the Lantgraue would rather venture the extremitie, then submit himselfe. The Emperour came forward to Misne by the riuer Albis, not farre from the Duke of Saxonie Campe. Wherefore the Duke made speed to Witemberg and burnt the bridge that the Emperour should haue no readie passage to pursue him, but the Emperour getting knowledge of a shallow ford in the riuer quicklie followed the Duke, and by the wood of Lothans ouertooke him,The Empe|rour discom|fiteth the D. of Saxonie  taketh him prisoner, and giueth all his his lands to Maurice.  ioyning battell discomfited him and tooke him prisoner, and although the Duke was con|demned to die, yet by the entreatie of the Marques of Bran|denburg his life was granted him with most grieuous condi|tions, amongst which this was one, that hee should submit himselfe to the old religion, but he chosed rather to die then so to doe. Wherefore the Marques of Brandenburg obtained also that condition to be remitted: but al his lands and goods were giuen to Maurice, except a pension of 50000. crownes

which the same Maurice paied him yeerely. Immediately herevpon Witemberg yeelded to the Emp. as also diuers o|ther Princes and Cities did the like. The Lantgraue was con|tent to yeeld al that he had to the Emp. pleasure so that hee might not be kept prisoner, which condition the Marques of Brandenburg  Maurice the new Duke of Saxonie, that had married his daughter, vndertooke to obtaine, and for the per|formance of the same bound the~selues to him in great bonds But when he came to the Emp. hee was commaunded to re|maine as prisoner:The Lant|graue detained prisoner by the Emperour. then he began to complaine grieuously say|ing that the Emperour kept not promise. And the next day the Marques of Brandenburg  Maurice went to the Emp. and intreated for the Lantgraue, but all would not serue: for the Emperour answered that he brake no promise, although he kept him 14. yeeres in prison. For his meaning was onely to pardon him perpetuall emprisonment. This matter after|ward turned the Emp. to great trouble. In the meane time hauing the principall chiefe Princes of the Protestants in Captiuitie, the Emp. thought meete to gather a conuention of the estates at Ausbrough to finish that matter which hee had intended long before.A convention at Ausbrough. All the Electors with other Prin|ces were gathered together in great number, but about the citie and in diuers places of the countrie, neere thereto was companies of Spaniards and Italians, and other soul|diers to the terrour of them that were present. The Prin|cipall matter purposed was concerning the Councell of Trident.
The Emperour required of the Princes, priuatlie of the Palsgraue Maurice Duke of Saxonie, whether they would submit themselues to the Councell of Trident or no. At the first they refused it, but afterward fearing the Emp. displea|sure they were co~tented to permit the matter to his will. The free cities also being demaunded if they would adde any thing to the answere of the Princes, answered it was not their part so to doe, and offered a writing to the Emperour, on what condition they would admit the Councell.
The Emperour as though they had fullie consented sent

to the Cardinall of Trident and the Pope desiring that the Councell which was remoued from Trident to Bononia, might bee againe revoked to Trident which was nee|rer to Germanie, vpon hope that the Germanes would come and submit themselues to the Councell. But for|asmuch as the Pope and Bishops assembled at Bononie, would not returne backe againe to Trident, but vpon such conditions as liked themselues best: the Emperour pro|tested by his Ambassadours that all such things that they should decree there to be vnlawfull and of no force, and that he himselfe would vndertake the care of the co~mon-wealth of Christendome which the Bishops neglected. Thus the Emperour perceiuing that there was no hope of a generall councell in Germanie consulted with the Princes about the agreement of Religion, and appointed Iulius Pflugins Bi|shop of Numburg, Michael Sidon and Iohn Islebie to draw out a booke for reformation of Religion,The booke called Interim vrged by the Emperour. which they called In|terim. This was the ground of a new trouble, for the Emperour strictly commaunded that the Princes would receiue and admit the manner of Religion set forth in the booke called Interim. The Duke of Saxonie that was kept prisoner, being earnestlie required to subscribe would not in any wise, and for that cause after was vsed more strictly, insomuch that his Preacher who was hitherto permitted, fled for feare of danger.
The Lantgraue hoping to obtaine fauour, and libertie receiued the Emperours booke, and submitted himselfe to it, but all would not helpe him. The Marques of Bran|denburge not onely receiued it himselfe, but also sent for Martin Bucer, whom partly with entreatie, partly with thret|nings he commaunded to subscribe the Emperours booke, but he constantlie refused, and with great danger of his life returned to Argentine.
Wolfangus Musculus Preacher at Ausbrough perceiuing the counsell of the towne not to stand constantly in defence of Religion, went to Berne in Switzerland. Brentius was compelled to flie from Hala a towne of Sueue and was

receiued of Vlrick Duke of Wirtemberg. Andreas Osiander, Erasmus Sarcerius, Erardus Schueffins, and other Preachers of the Dukedome of Wirtemberg, fled because they would not allow the Emperours booke. Martin Bucer and Paulus Fagius left Germanie and went to England, Ambrose Blaurer left the towne of Constance.
Mauricius Duke of Saxonie returning home from Ausbrough, Proclaimed the Emperours decree concerning Religion. Vpon that occasion the diuines and Preachers, of the vniuersities of Lipsia and Witenberg, diuers times assembled themselues, and at length concluded vpon these things (that they called indifferent) to receiue them as the Emperour had prescribed. This thing was by other Prea|chers in Germanie sore impugned, saying that by the inter|pretation of their indifferencie they had opened a way to the whole doctrine, and superstition of the Church of Rome taking those things for indifferent in which was manifest errour.
The foresaid booke hated of all men, both Pope, Papists, and Protestants.The tyrannie of this booke indured not long, for it was hated of all men, the Pope himselfe added his corrections vnto it: for albeit it established all the grounds of the roman Religion, yet because it tolerated the marriage of Priests and the vse of the Sacrament vnder both kindes, and tooke not so sharpe order for restoring of the Church goodes as hee could haue wished, for those causes and others such like the Pope would not giue his allowance to this booke without some corrections. This booke also was impugned both by Protestants and Papists. Of the Protestants Caspar Aquila a preacher in Turingia impugned it as a booke replenished with false doctrine, and on the other side Robertus Abrin|censis Episcopus impugned it for giuing libertie to Priests to marrie, and permitting the people to haue the Sacrament vnder both formes. While this great stirre and trouble was in Germanie, in England by the authoritie of a Parlia|ment the vse of the Masse was altogether forbidden,The Masse forbidden in England. and a booke made of an vniforme order of common prayers, and administration of the Sacraments in the English tongue.

Edmond Boner Bishop of London,Boner and Gar|diner depriued of their Bi|shoprickes. and Stephen Gardiner Bi|shop of Winchester, for obstinate defending of the Roman doctrine were depriued of their Bishoprickes, and cast in prison, where they continued all the time of king Edwards raigne.
But to returne againe to the troubles of Germanie, of all the Cities of the Protestants, there was none that more con|stantly beared out the Emperours indignation as the Citie of Magdeburg.Warre betwixt the towne of Magdeburg and Maurice Duke of Spaine. Their agree|ment. For neither would they acknowledge the councell of Trident, neither yet the Emperours booke of Interim, but fortified their towne against Maurice Duke of Saxonie, whom the Emperour made Captaine in that warre, vntill at last an agreement was made vpon easie con|ditions. When Maurice with his garrison entered into their Citie, hee grieuously blamed their Preachers, that both in their bookes and pictures they had done much to his re|proach, but yet he exhorted them to pray for the good suc|cesse of the Emperour, and the generall councell of Trident. To whom they answered that they could not pray any o|therwise for that Councell that was assembled to oppresse the truth, but that God would soone disturbe it, and breake it vp.
The end of the warre against the Citie of Magdeburg was the beginning of great warre,War betwixt Maurice Duke of Saxonie and the Empe|rour. and dangerous trouble against the Emperour. For Maurice Duke of Saxonie per|ceiuing the Emp. would not stand to his promise, consul|teth with forraine Princes how hee might by force deliuer his wifes father, the Lantgraue, and when hee found that all things were in readinesse, hee begun to muster his soul|diers,  shortly after set forth a Proclamation to the states of the Empire, in the which first hee lamenteth the discord of Religion, secondly he rehearseth grieuouslie the imprison|ment of the Lantgraue his wifes father, signifying that hee was so kept against all truth and honour, to the report of all Germanie. Lastly he bewaileth the pittifull estate of all Germanie, and oppression of their libertie, protesting that the cause of this warre was to restore the old dignitie and freedome.
Albert Marques of Brandenburge, maketh also his Pro|clamation, and after a long rehearsall of the miseries of Germanie, referreth the cause of all to the Churchmen, and therefore signifieth this warre to bee chiefely against them. William the Lantgraues sonne ioyned his power with Duke Maurice at Shuinforde. The king of Fraunce also ioyned in this warre and led an armie vnto Germanie. As they went forward, they caused the Cities to submit themselues, commaunded them to pay great summes of mo|ney, and displaced such as the Emperour had set in authori|tie, and restored their old Senatours, willing them to vse their priuiledges, and liberties that the Emperour before had forbidden.
The report of this warre and the good successe of Mau|rice, namely after the citie of Ausbrough was by him taken, made the councell of Trident to breake vp and dissolue. The Emperour, on the other part set at libertie Fredericke the olde Duke of Saxonie, as it were to signifie to Maurice that hee should claime againe the Dukedome of Saxonie, and Electorship that he enioyed, and thereby to put him in more feare. Albert Marques of Brandenburge, in this warre shewed great extremitie to diuers cities, and noble personages, against the mind of Maurice and the other con|federates.
The King of Fraunce led forward his armie to Straws|burge, and hearing that communication of peace was be|twixt Maurice and the Emperour, and that they were in good hope to haue their Princes deliuered, hee to gratifie them was content to returne to Fraunce, but was much displeased that Duke Maurice would enter in communica|tion of peace without his knowledge. In the end agree|ment passed betweene the Emperour and Duke Maurice vpon these conditions.The conditi|ons of Mau|rice his agree|ment with the Emperour. That the Lantgraue should be set at libertie. That their Religion should be quiet, vntill a cer|taine order were taken for the same in the next assemblie of of the Empire. That Maurice and the Princes confe|derats should suffer their souldiers to serue king Ferdinand

in Hungarie. That the Protestants should bee admitted Iudges in the Chamber-court, with diuerse such other like conditions.
The end of this warre was also the beginning of ano|ther cruell warre betwixt Duke Maurice and the Marquis of Brandenburg,Warre betwixt D. Maurice  the Marquis of Brandenburg wherein the Marquis was overcome. which fell out vpon this occasion. The Marquis being reconciled to the Emperour and in great fa|vour with him, did many iniuries in Germany, not onely to the Bishops (whom hee ever deadly hated) but also to diverse Princes and Cities, yea and that vnder the name of religion. Duke Maurice with certaine other went against him, and met at the river of Visurg, where Albert was over|come. But Duke Maurice was so stricken with a gun, that hee died within two dayes after.The death of D. Maurice. Strange sights seene in Ger|many. Popery em|braced in Eng|land by means of Q. Mary. Before this, in Germanie were seene drops of blood vpon the trees, and certaine other strange sights.
In England about this time, fell out a great alteration in religion, through the death of King Edward, of whom the world was not worthy: Lady Mary his sister succeeding to the kingdome. Shee ioyned her selfe in mariage with Philip sonne to Charles the Emperour, and restored not onely the Popes supremacie, dissallowed by her father King Henrie the eight: but also the masse, and all superstitions of the Romane Church, abrogated in the dayes of King Edward her brother.The Court of Parliament confesse their error in forsa|king it and are absolued. Also shee caused the Realme of England in the high Court of Parliament, to confesse their defection from the Catholike Church, and to craue absolution, ha|ving there in readinesse Cardinall Poole, the Popes Ambas|sadour to absolue them.
What excessiue cruelty was vsed in her time,Q. Maries cru|elty against Protestants. no tongue can expresse. The very name of Dioclsian begunne to bee lesse abhorred, when the name of Queene Mary came forth. Her cruelty beginning at Iohn Hooper Bishop of Glo|cester, Iohn Bradford, Laurence Saunders, Rowland Taylor, Iohn Rogers, Preachers: proceeded shortly after to Ferrar Bishop of Saint Davids, whose constant death amazed the people, and confirmed their mindes in the true doctrine

that they had learned of him. This persecution raged in all parts of the Land, but specially in Kent, Essex, and Norh|folke. Some of those parts were chiefe maintainers of her authoritie, and against the mind of the Nobilitie and Coun|cell, set forward her right to the Kingdome, but this re|ward they receiued in the end at her hands.A bad reward. The cruell mar|tyrdome of Cranmer Bishop of Canterbury, Ridley Bishop of London, Latymer Bishop of Worcester, Doctor Phil|pot, and many others, with the raising vp of the bones of the men of God, Bucer and Fagius, out of their graues, and the cruelty intended against her owne sister Lady Elizabeth: all these things being so well and amply discoursed in the Booke of Martyrs,A reference to the Booke of Martyrs. the godly Reader is to be remitted to the reading of the sayd booke.
Now to conclude this Historie of Charles, something is to be noted of his warres with the Turkes. In his time So|lyman the great Turke conquered the citie of Belgrade,Solyman con|quereth Bel|grade and the Isle of Rhods, killeth Lewis K of Hungary and Paulus B. of Collen, be|siegeth Vienna  is repelled. the most sure and strong garrison of the Christians, and vexed the countrey of Hungarie. He besieged the Isle of Rhodes and tooke it, to the great shame and rebuke of Christian men. who provided not support for the Rhodians, that re|sisted the common enemy so long and so couragiously. Af|ter this Solyman slew Lewis King of Hungarie, and Paulus Bishop of Collen, who more rashly then wisely, with a small power of foure and twenty thousand men, encountered the great Turke leading an army of 200000. souldiers. Also hee besieged Vienna, but was mightily resisted and repulsed with losse of a great number of his army: all this was done before the Emperour Charles began to stirre himselfe a|gainst the Turke: but when the matters of religion in Ger|manie were put to some point in the Councell of Ratisbon, the Emperour raised an army of eighty thousand footmen, and thirty thousand horsemen: and compelled the Turke to raise his siege from the towne of Gunza, and with speed to retyre backe to Constantinople.Charles resto|reth the K. of Tunis to his kingdome.
After this Charles sayled with an army vnto Africa, and restored the King of Tunis to his kingdome againe, whom

Barbarossa Admirall of the Turkes Navie in Africke had dispossessed and deprived of his kingdome. In this same voyage he delivered 20000. captiues out of servitude. Not|withstanding Solyman with vnsatiable ambition pnft vp to conquer all Europe, was ever subduing townes and Isles, as Corcyra, Zacynthus, Cythara, Naxus, with diverse o|thers, also the towne of Newcastle in Dalmatia,Solyman taketh Buda in Hun|garie. and Buda in Hungarie, which hee obtained by meanes of Frier Cog|dridge Tutor to Stephen, sonne to Iohn, Vaivod of Transilva|nia, and meanes of the relict widow of the sayd Vaivod. These two sent for aide to the Turke against Ferdinand, and the Turke not neglecting so good an occasion, came to Hungarie, discharged the Hoast of Ferdinand that was be|sieging Buda, and got the citie into his owne hands. Which done, hee prevailed mightily in Hungarie, and tooke the towne called Quinque ecclesiae, and Strigonium, Alba re|galis, and Vizigradum: and it was an easie matter for him to haue conquered all Hungarie, in respect the Emperour Charles was so busie in warres with the King of France, that the common enemy of all Christian people had leave to rage at his owne pleasure, and had it not beene the graci|ous providence of God, pitying the misery of Christian people, who stirred vp the Persian Sophie against Solyman, and droue him backe out of Europe for a time, and like|wise the murther of his owne sonne Mustapha, which stir|red vp a peece of a Tragedie in his owne house, the Chri|stian people had no doubt beene brought to greater extre|mities in Solymans dayes. The vnprosperous voyage of the Emperour to Argier, I passe by, and many conventions of Estates in Germanie, kept for quieting of religion and pre|paration for warre against the Turkes. In the end the Em|perour finding himselfe troubled with sicknesse, resigned the gouernment of the Low Countries into the hands of King Philip his sonne, and surrendred the Imperiall crowne vnto the Electors of Germany,  sayled vnto Spaine, where hee entered into an house of religion,Charles entreth into a religi|ous house and dieth. and gaue himselfe to meditation and prayer, and there concluded his life.



Ferdinandus.
AFter that Charles the fift had surrendered the Imperi|all crowne into the hands of the Electors of Germany, they assembled at Frankford, and there elected Ferdinand King of Bohemia, and brother to the forenamed Charles the fift to bee Emperour, who raigned seven yeeres. The ancient manner was that he should be crowned in the fore|noone at masse: but because diverse of the Electors would not in any wise come to masse, the coronation was solem|nized in the afternoone, and the masse with other like cere|monies omitted.
To this King before hee was elected Emperour, his No|bles in the countrey of Bohemia made earnest supplication that they might bee permitted to vse the Sacrament in both kindes, according to Christs institution: but he strict|ly commanded them they attempted no alteration in religi|on.The Bohemi|ans obtaine of Ferdinand the vse of the Sa|crament in both kinds. Persecution of the Protestants in France. Neverthelesse, the Nobility continuing constant in the purpose of their mindes, at last after many earnest suits ob|tained their desire.
In France about this time the persecution of the Prote|stants waxed hot, and King Henry the second was sore grie|ved, that the Parliament of Paris it selfe, could not be kept free of this new doctrine as hee called it. Wherefore hee caused Annas Burgeus, an honourable and wise Counsel|lor to be taken, to whom hee spoke in great wrath, that hee would stand by and see his body burnt for that new religi|on which hee favoured. But hee was wonderfully cut off before hee could get his heart satisfied with that pitifull spectacle of the burning of a noble Counsellor. For God so disposed the matter, that the King cloathed all in armour put a speare in one of his subiects hands, and compelled him against his will to runne at him, at which time the said speare broke, and a small splinter of it entring at the Kings

eye,The death of Henry the 2. K. of France. Francis the 2. having maried the Q of Scots seeketh to re|duce the Scot|tish Nobility to the popish religion: but his army was vanquished. pierced into his braine, whereby hee died. Yet by his death was not the foresaid persecution relented, but rather vehemently augmented for Francis the second, succeeding to his father Henry in the the kingdome, married Mary Queene of Scots, who was descended of the linage and stocke of the house of Guise. By this meanes the Guisians were in great credit and authority with the King, and pre|sumed to high things, not onely to suppresse the Gospell vtterly in France, but also in Scotland. For at this time a great part of the Nobility and people of Scotland had sha|ken off the yoke of the Romane Bishop, they had throwne downe Altars and Images, and had forsaken all the super|stitious ceremonies of the Romane Church.
The Guisians purposing to supresse the Scotish Nobility, sent out of France into Scotland an army of 4000 men, vn|der the conduct of Monsieur La Broch. This army assi|sted the Queene regent to reduce backe againe the king|dome of Scotland to the Romish religion: But the Scottish Nobility obtayned helpe of the Queene of Eng|land, and brought the Frenchmen to such extremity, that they were compelled to accept conditions of peace, and to retyre backe againe to France. So this first high attempt of the Guisians against the reformed religion in Scotland, was by the providence of God disappointed.
In France the King with advice of the Guisians had ap|pointed a nationall Councell to bee kept in Orleance,A Councell kept at Orle|ance. for the quieting the tumults which were like to ensue for religi|on in France: but all was done in hypocrisie and with de|ceitfull mindes as evidently appeared: so soone as the King of Navarre and Prince of Condie came to Orleance, and had saluted the King,The Prince of Condie taken by the Kings guard is in danger. the Captaine of the Kings guard layd hands on the Prince of Condie, and the King was in|formed that the Prince of Condie had conspired against his honour and life. Thus by the craft and deceitfull prac|tises of the Guisians, was the Prince of Condie brought in|to great danger and hazard of his life, and had assuredly died if the mercy of God had not provided timely reliefe:

But the Lord pitying the estate of his owne poore Church in France,The death of Francis. shortned the life of Francis the second, who dyed of a putrefaction of his eares. And thus was the second high attempt of the Guisians against the Gospell marvai|lously disappoynted by the sudden and vnexpected death of Francis the second. After whose death the innocency of the Prince of Condie, was declared by a decree of the Par|liament at Paris: and the government of the young King, Charles the ninth, was devolued in the hands of the Queen mother, and the King of Navarre. Those Gouernours with advice of the States of the Realme,A disputation at Poyssie. thought meet that a free disputation should be appointed at Poyssie a towne in France, neere to Saint Germane, wherein the controversies of religion should bee freely reasoned, in presence of the young King, the Queene mother, the King of Navarre, and other Princes of the royall blood.
This disputation began the ninth of September, anno 1561. For the Protestants part were appointed Theodorus Beza Minister at Geneva, Peter Martyr professor of Divi|nity in Zuricke, Nicholas Gelasius, Augustinus Marloratus, Iohannes Merlinus, Franciscus Morellus, Iohannes Malo, and Espineus, a man of great learning, who had lately forsaken the Romane Church, and embraced the true reformed religion. On the other part the Cardinall of Loraine, with many o|ther Cardinalls, Archbishops, and Bishops, to the number of fifty Prelates, besides many other Divines and Doctors were ready to pleade the cause of the Romish Church. In this disputation, after that Theodorus Beza had at length declared the summe of the Protestants faith, and the Car|dinall of Loraine had answered: In the end the Romane Prelats devised a pretty shift to cut off all further reasoning:The Papists policy to cut off further reasoning. for the Cardinall of Loraine produced the opinion of the Germans about the matter of the Sacrament, extracted out of the co~fession of Ausbrugh,  Jemanded of the Protestants whether they would subscribe to it or no, to the end that if they consented to subscribe, they might seem to haue con|victed themselues of errour in the matter of the Sacrament;

and if they refused to subscribe, then it might bee knowne to the Princes that were present, that the Protestants agreed not amongst themselues.
To this it was answered by Theodorus Beza in the next meeting, that if the confession of Ausbrough should be sub|scribed, then it was good reason to require a subscription of the whole confession, and not of one line thereof onely: also if they vrged the Protestants to subscribe that confession of Ausbrough, then let themselues first begin to subscribe the same: and when they haue yeelded to the whole con|fession of Ausbrugh, it will be more easie to finde out any way of agreement in matters of religion. After this the forme of disputation was changed, and a few in number, to wit, fiue onely on either side, were chosen to conferre in quiet and peaceable manner, who beginning at the matter of the Sacrament, seemed all to agree in this forme: that Ie|sus Christ by the operation of the holy Spirit, offereth and exhibiteth vnto vs the very substance of his body  blood, and wee doe receiue and eate spiritually and by faith that same body which dyed for vs, to the end we may be flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, and that we may be quick|ned by him, and receiue all things that are needfull to our salvation. And because faith leaning to the word of God maketh those things that are received to be present, by this faith indeed we receiue truely and effectually the very natu|rall body and blood of Iesus Christ, through the power of the holy Spirit. In this respect wee acknowledge the pre|sence of the body and blood in the Supper. The article of the Sacrament being conceiued in this forme, was presented to both the parties, and many of the Romane Prelates con|discended to the article aboue specified: but when they had conferred with the Doctors of Sorbon, they all with one consent refused the same: and finding that the com|muners that were chosen for their part did persevere in their opinion, they cryed out against them, and would giue no further power to them to reason in that cause. Thus the dis|putation of Poyssie broke vp the 25. of November, without

any agreement of the controversies in religion, but rather leaving in the harts of men a seed of greater contention and cruell wars, which afterward ensued. But before we speak of the warres in France for religion: somewhat is to bee spo|ken of the cruell persecution that the faithfull suffered in Pi|emont, in which countrey certaine townes had received the Gospell, and abolished the masse: namely, the townes of Angrona, Lucerne, Perose, Tallaret, with divers others in the convalles of Piemont: all which townes are subiect to the dominion of the Duke of Savoy, who hearing of the reformation that was made in the foresayd bounds of his dominion, sent out his Captaine Triniteus with an army of 500.The Duke of Savoy warreth against the Protestants within his do|minions. men, against them, to sack and vtterly destroy them, ex|cept they would receiue the masse againe, and put away from them their ministers. The towne of Angrona was first assaul|ted, and the people fled to the mountaines, but being strict|ly pursued they turned themselues, and with slings  stones defended their liues and put their enemies to the worse, in so much that Triniteus the Dukes Captaine was to deale with them by subtilty and craft,Triniteus by policy spoileth those of An|grona both their money and armour. rather then by open force, and therefore promised vnto the Convallenses that if they layd downe their armour, and sent messengers to the Duke to cuane his pardon, and would pay to him the summe of sixteene thousand crownes, then vpon those conditions they should haue peace.
The poore people glad to accept conditions of peace, performed all that was required, but no peace could be ob|tained of the Duke, except they would put away their Mi|nisters, and receiue the masse againe. Therefore being spoi|led both of money and armour, by the craft of their ene|mies, and a new army also sent against them, they were compelled in time of winter to flie with their wiues and children to the mountaines all over-layd and covered with snow and from thence to behold the pitifull specta|cles of the burning of their houses, and spoyling of their goods. But necessity compelling them to make some shift for their liues, they tooke the strict passage of the mountains

and resisted their enemies, committing the successe to God, who so prospered this poore vnarmed people,God prospe|reth the suc|cesse of the Protestants. that in few skirmishes there were killed a thousand of their enemies, and scarce fortie persons of their owne. Triniteus the Captain by the counsell of Truchetus, an expert Warriour, thought meet to besiege the Castles of Convallenses, but God fought against them in all their enterprises, and the Convallenses came vpon them suddenly as they were besieging a certaine Castle,The death of Truchetus. and slew a great number: and Truchetus himselfe was first sore wounded with stones,  afterward was slaine with his owne sword by a poore Shepheard, that was keeping cattell in the fields. In the end when Triniteus was out of all hope to subdue the Angronians and their complices, he ad|vertised the Duke of Sauoy how all matters went,Peace con|cluded with the Conval|lenses. and peace was granted to the Convallenses, with libertie to vse their owne Religion; providing they should render all due ser|uice and obedience to the Duke of Savoy their Soveraigne Lord and Master.
To returne againe to France. After the disputation at Rossie the number of the Protestants daily increased, and rumours of sedition  vprores were in the mouths of all the people. The Queene mother willing to prouide timely remedie for repressing of ciuill and intestine warre, assembled the estates of the land at S. Germane,The edict of Ianuarie in behalfe of the Protestants. where the edict of Ianuarie was made, bearing that the professours of the reformed Religion might assemble themselues together, to heare Preaching of the Word, provided those assemblies were kept without the towns  without armour. This edict was published through|out all the land, and sore grieued the hearts of the adversa|ries, namely, the Duke of Guise, the Constable Momme|raunce, and the Marescall Santandreus, who consulted toge|ther how they might haue this act vndone againe, but no way could be found out to bring this matter to passe, except first the King and Queene mother were in their hands, to the end that the force of the Lawes which they feared might be turned against their enemies, when as they had the Law|makers in their owne hands. This was also thought to be an

high attempt, and dangerous to be enterprised, so long as the King of Navarre was their enemie, and a fauourer of the reformed Religion; for this cause all meanes were sought out to divert the affection of the King of Navarre from his foresaid Religion. The Cardinall Ferrar being the Popes Ambassadour in France, put him in hope that by the Popes trauailes with Philip King of Spaine, the kingdome of Navarre should be restored to him againe, if he would turne to the Catholique Religion.The King of Navarre tur|neth Papist. Thus was the heart of the King of Navarre stolen away from his Religion, to the great en|couragement of the Duke of Guise and his complices, who without further delay put hand to worke.
The first fruits of his martiall deeds after he raised his ar|mie, was the cruell Massacre of poore vnarmed people, as|sembled to heare the Word of God at Vassiace, a towne in the borders of Champaigne, and neere vnto his dominion. Those poore people to the number of a thousand and fiue hundreth,The Duke of Guise killeth 1500 people at a Sermon. being occupied as is said vpon the Sabbath day, the Duke of Guise came vpon them suddenly, and compas|sed the Church wherein they were with armed souldiers, that none might escape; also the Duke himselfe stood in the entry with a drawne sword in his hand, and sent in his soul|diers, who most cruelly without compassion of sex or age, martyred the poore members of Christ, for hearing of his Word. After this, the Duke of Guise addressed himselfe to|ward Paris, where he was receiued with ioyfull acclamati|ons of the people: and from thence he marched forward to Fonteblew,The Duke of Guise taketh the King, and the Queene mother, priso|ners, for whose deliuerie the Protestants binde them|selues toge|ther. The first ciuill warre. where the King was, and seased himselfe of the King and the Queene mother, and for greater securitie transported them both to Paris. On the other part, the Prince of Condie went to Orleance, to whom resorted a great number of the Nobles of France, namely, the admirall Castilion, Andelot, Princeps Porcianus, Rupsfocald, with many others, who all bound themselues together, to set the King and the Queene mother at libertie from captivitie, wherein they were deteined by the Guisians; as also to defend the true professours of the Gospell of Christ, that according to

the act of Ianuarie they might without molestation assem|ble themselues to heare the Word of God.
The Prince of Condie was chosen to be their Chieftaine,The Prince of Condie cho|sen Generall for the Pro|testants. to whom the Queene mother sent many secret Letters, de|claring that she was deteined by the Guisians against her heart. And if the Prince of Condie could set the young King and her selfe at libertie, shee would neuer be vnmindfull of so great a benefit. Thus in the beginning of the Warres the Queene mother fauoured the Prince of Condie, and stirred him vp with many Letters and secret advertisements, to procure her and her sonnes libertie: for greater euidence whereof, the Letters themselues are inserted in the French Historie.
Many great townes in France were taken and fortified by the Protestants,Many townes taken and for|tified by the Protestants, whereof Bur|ges  Roane were recoue|red by the Pa|pists. The death of the Prince of Navarre. The death of Augustinus Marlorart. as namely, Orleance, Lion, Valence, Gra|noble, Roane, Bourgos, Towers, Poictiers, Montpellier, and Nimes. Many of those townes were recouered againe by the Guisians, namely, Bourges, and Roane. At the siege of Roane, the Prince of Navarre was slaine, and receiued a iust reward of his inconstancie and leuitie. And Augustinus Marlorart, a faithfull seruant of Christ, and Preacher of the Gospell, was taken by the Guisians, and afterward hanged. Many great cruelties were designed against those of the Re|ligion in this first Warre, namely in Tullus, Aurange, Burges, Roan, Sens, and diverse other places. In Montar|gis, belonging to the Ladie Rence, daughter to Lewis the twelfth, Dutches Dowager of Ferrar, fell out a very remar|keable matter.
This Ladie was a retrait to diuers families of the Religion,Note. notwithstanding the threatnings of the Duke of Guise, sonne in law to the said Ladie, who sent thither one Malig corne, a new Knight of the order, to sease vpon the Towne and Castle: who begun to threaten the Ladie with Canon shot, to batter her Castle, wherin were diuers of the Religion. But the Princesse answered him, that there was not any man in the realme, except the King alone, that had power to com|mand her. And if he would proceed to such boldnesse as to

batter her Castle with Canon shot, shee would first stand in the breach her selfe, to try if he durst be so bold as to kill the daughter of a King. Those words caused Malicorne, like a Snaile to pull in his hornes, and presently to depart.
Afeer this, the Prince of Condie perceiuing that great preparation was made against him, and the Queene mo|thers affection was turned away to the Guisians, thought meete to send for ayde to the Queene of England; and the Prince of Condie willing to ioyne himselfe with the English armie, marched forward to Normandie, but the Duke of Guise followed after him with so great celeritie,The battell of Dreux, where|in the Prince of Condie was taken by the Papists, and the Constable by the Prote|stants. that the Prince of Condie was compelled to ioyne Battell with the Guisians at Dreux in Normandie, before he was supported of the English armie.
This battell was fought with vncertaine victory, for on the one part the Prince of Condie was taken by the Gui|sians, and on the other part, the Constable was taken by the Protestants, and the Marescall Sanctandreus was slaine. The Duke of Guise after this battell renewed his Forces, and besieged the Towne of Orleance,The Duke of Guise his death. A new edict in behalfe of the Prote|stants. where he was slaine by a Souldier, called Portrot. This slaughter was the ground of a new Peace; for after the death of the Duke of Guise, a new edict was made the thirteenth day of March Anno 1563. although not so ample as the edict of Ianua|rie: Yet by it some libertie was granted to the Protestants to enioy their owne Religion without disturbance of any. This was the end of the first ciuill warre in France for Re|ligion.The end of the first ciuill warre.


Maximilianus the second.
AFter the death of Ferdinand, Maximilian his sonne King of Hungarie was made Emperour,  gouerned twelue yeares: he gaue his two daughters in marriage vnto two pu|issant Princes, to wit, to Charles the ninth: King of France,

he gaue Elizabeth, and to Philip King of Spaine he gaue his eldest daughter Anna. Great troubles for Religion fell out in his time,Troubles in the low coun|tries about Religion. namely, in the Low countries and in France. In the low countries, the number of them that professed the Gospell increased marueilously; and on the other part, the rage of the Popish Prelats causing the Spanish Inquisition to be severely executed, wrought great feare in the hearts of the professours of the Gospell.
Also Duke de Albe was sent with a great Armie vnto the low Countries,Duke de Al|baes crueltie against the professours of the Gospell. vtterly to extirpate and roote out the Gos|pell, who behaued himselfe most outragiously against the Nobilitie and Townes of the low Countries, in beheading Count Egmount, and count Horne, and permitting his soul|diers to vse all kinde of villanie against honest matrons, and the daughters of honest Citizens, and oftentimes compelled the husbands themselues to stand beside, and be eye witnes|ses of the vilde abusing of their owne wiues. Also with so great severity he executed the Spanish Inquisitio~ against the professours of the Gospell, that the people were compelled to take armes, vnder the conduct of William Nassaw, Prince of Orange, and Lodouicus his brother, to defend their liues, the libertie of their Countrie, and of their Consciences a|gainst the barbarous tyrannie of this Duke and his armie.
In this Warre although the Prince of Orange was often|times defeated, and his brother slaine, yet the Countrey so abhorred the crueltie of Duke de Albe, that the most part of Zeland and Holland was conquered by the Princes ar|mie, and was free from the tyrannie of the Spaniards.
In France the professours of the Gospell could not enioy the benefit of the Edict of pacification made in March,The Prince of Orange war|reth against the Spaniards. An|no 1563. except in a few parts where the authoritie of some noble persons fauouring the Gospell procured obedience to the foresaid Edict, as namely, the presence of Condie in Picardie, Andelot in Britannie, and the Queene of Navarre in Gascoigne. In other parts of the country, little regard was had to the Edict. The Cardinall of Loraine also a capitall enemie to the Gospell, had consulted with the fathers of the

Councell of Trent,The Cardinal of Loraine taketh coun|sell how to suppresse the Gospell. by what way the Gospell might be sup|pressed in France, and it was thought meetest that a coue|nant should be made amongst them that fauoured the Catho|lique Religion (which they called the holy league) to ex|tirpate and roote out them that professed the new Religion (for so they named it) and the two puissant Kings of Spaine and France in speciall should bee intreated to be of this league, and mutually to helpe one another to roote out the Gospellers. Now when King Charles the 9. was 14. yeares old, and declared to be Maior, it was thought meete that he should make a progresse through the bounds of his Domi|nions; pretending that it was expedient that the King should know the estate of his Country, and that he should heare the complaints of his people; but the cause indeed of this pro|gresse, was that the King of France might meete with the King of Spain in Bayon, for binding vp of the league afore|said. In this progresse was discharged all Preaching and ex|ercising of the reformed Religion in the Townes of France, wherein it should happen the King to be, during the time of his progresse. Also many new interpretations of the edict of March were invented and found out, whereby the libertie granted to the Protestants was vtterly infringed and impuni|tie granted to them that should doe them wrong. In the end the King came to Bayon, where he met with his sister Eli|zabeth, wife to Philip King of Spaine, who after she had de|clared certaine causes why her husband could not be present himselfe,A league made betwixt the Kings of France and Spaine, for the rooting out of the Prote|stants. bound vp in name of her husband a couenant with Charles, King of Spaine, mutually to helpe one another in rooting out the professours of the reformed Religion. The report of this league was not kept so secret but it came to the eares of the Prince of Condie, and the rest of the nobilitie of France, that professed the Gospell, who all thought meete that the Prince of Condie should in proper person addresse himselfe to the King (being for the time at Moncellium) and should exhibite to the King the supplication of the Protestants in France, pittifully complaining, that contrarie to the edict of March they were iniuried and cruelly slaine,

desiring redresse of the aforesaid iniuries, and that they might haue libertie to enioy their Religion according to the act of pacification aboue mentioned. But the King hearing of the Prince of Condies comming to him, and (namely because he was well accompanied with foure hundred men all in armes) fearing the malignitie and obstinate malice of his adversaries, left they should hinder his iourney or doe wrong to himselfe. The King (I say) hearing tell of the Princes comming, made hast to depart, and with all expedi|tion, to Paris in great feare, and caused the Parisians to giue thankes to God, as though he had beene deliuered from a great perill and imminent danger.
After this,The second ciuill warre in France. without further delay, the second warre for Religion in France broke vp. The Prince of Condie ap|proached with an armie to Paris, and so beset it about in all quarters, that this populous Towne soone began to be grieued for want of foode, and issued out of the Towne vn|der the Conduct of the Constable, and came by S. Denis, where the Prince of Condies armie lay. In this Battell the Admirall set vpon the Parisian souldiers, and disturbed their rankes and put them to flight. The Constables troope also was greatly perturbed by their flying, and the Con|stable himselfe refusing to be taken by M. Stewart, was shot by a Scottish Souldier, whereof hee soone after died.
The Constables sonnes,The Parisians ouercome by the Prince of Condie. Anveil and Momerance, being carefull for their Father, succoured him, and the battell was renewed againe, and cruelly fought, vntill night compel|led them to make an end. The morrow after, the Prince of Condie came with his Forces againe to the place where the battell was fought, but none of the Parisians came forth to encounter him.
After the battell he marched toward Loraine, of purpose to ioyne with the Germane Armie, which was to be sent for his support from the Count Palatine of the Rhine, vn|der the conduct of Cassimire, his owne sonne. This armie of the Germanes ioyned with the Forces of the Prince of Condie at Pontamonssou, a towne in Loraine on the riuer

Mosell, and from thence marched forward without battell offered to them by the adversarie partie, vntill they came to Chartresse,The Prote|stants besiege Chartresse. a famous Towne within two dayes iourney to Paris.
This towne the Prince of Condie and the Germanes be|sieged, and when it was fore battered, and not able to in|dure the siege any longer, the Queene mother according to her wonted manner, thought meete to compasse them with faire and deceitfull promises, whom she could not get ouerthrowne by force. And therefore sent to the Prince of Condie, desiring him to require of the King conditions of peace, such as himselfe liked best, and they should be granted.
The Prince of Condies ar|mie dismissed,  the townes by him subdu|ed deliuered into the ene|mies hand through the policie of the Queene mo|ther.The Prince of Condie being euer more bent to peace then prouident to foresee the deceitfull snares of his adver|saries, required of the King, that the edict set forth in March Anno 1563. should be precisely kept, all new additions and interpretations of the said act being disanulled, and that the iniuries done to the Protestants should be seuerely puni|shed, and not passed ouer with silence as they were accusto|med to be. All this was granted, and the edict of pacifica|tion was proclaimed. The townes also which the Prote|stants had conquered with great paines and effusion of their blood, were all deliuered into the hands of their enemies, the Germane souldiers were dismissed, and euery man re|turned to his owne house. But in the very time of their re|turning, it was knowne that this pacification was but a sub|tile snare to entangle them withall; for the professours of the Gospell were compelled to lay downe their armour when they entred into the townes where they dwelt, and strictly commanded to remaine in their houses, so that they had not libertie to visite one another.
Euery where crueltie vsed against the Protestants.In all the parts of the Countrey great crueltie was vsed, and many cruelly massacred, so that within the space of three moneths, moe then three thousand were reckoned to be killed by the sword. Besides this crueltie committed a|gainst the inferior sort, all meanes were sought out to inter|cept

the Prince of Condie, the Admirall, Andelot, Rupeso|cald, and other principall personages; for this counsell was giuen by Duke de Albe (whose aduise was often craued in this turne) that one Salmond head was better then an hun|dreth paddle heads,Simile. signifying thereby, that it was most needfull to cut off the principall Noble-men of the Prote|stants. The Prince of Condie, and the Admirall, after ma|ny advertisements, that their liues were directly sought, be|gan to remoue, and the Prince came to Nucetum, a Towne in Burgundie, the Admirall lodged at Tauleum, in a place pertaining to his brother Andelot, not farre distant from Nucetum, where they receiued new advertisements, that the companies that were appointed to take them were with great celeritie approaching alreadie to Nucetum.The Prince of Condie  the Admirall flie towards Rot|chell. Thus was the Prince of Condie and the Admirall compelled in all hast to flie with their wiues, young children, and families, and commending themselues to the prouidence of God, entered into a long and dangerous iourney from Noyers to the Towne of Rotchell. The good prouidence of God so conducted them, that albeit, all the bridges and passages were strictly kept, yet God prouided a foord in the river of Loyre,Note. neere to Sanser, which was not knowne before, neither was any passage found to be there two dayes after. By this way they passed very safely, and in the end came to the Towne of Rochell, although through many dangers and infinite perils.
In the meane time, the Prince of Condie had sent Let|ters to the King, heauily complaining of the Cardinall of Loraine, who so wickedly abused the Kings name and au|thoritie, and so maliciously sought the liues of his innocent Subiects for their Religion, expresly against the Kings edict of pacification, which was sealed with the Kings own hand|writ, and his great oath solemnly made.The third ci|uill warre in France for Religion. To those Letters no answere was made, but all the Countrey was inflamed with wrath, and bent to warre, and the Duke of Aniou, brother to the King was made generall commander of the armie. The Queene of Navarre, on the other part, adioyned her selfe,

and her Forces to the Prince of Condie, and from Britanny came Andelot and his Forces, who had passed the river of Loyre by a certaine foord vnknowne before, and vnpassable afterward,Note. no lesse miraculously then the Prince of Condie, and his familie had done in another place of the same river before. After whose comming, Angolesme, a Towne of great importance in those parts, was besieged and taken by the Prince of Condie. Likewise Acierius brought with him to the Prince, a great companie out of Delphine, Pro|vance, Languedok, and other parts fauouring the Gospell, to the number of twentie three thousand men.
On the other side, the Duke de Anion was come with his armie to Poictou, and pitched his Campe at Castellerault, a Towne of Poictou neere to the river Vienna. The Prince of Condie and the Admirall daily provoked him to fight, but he was admonished by frequent letters from the Queene mother, that he should beware to hazzard the cause in bat|tell, but should prolong time to abate the fierie courage of the Protestants,Note. and to take his advantage when he could see it.
In the meane time, both parties waited for supplyment of new Forces out of Germanie, and Duke de Aumald was sent to Loraine to meete the Dukes who came to support the Kings armie; as also to hinder the progresse of the Duke of Bipont, who was marching forward to support the Prince of Condies armie.
The Papists receiue sup|port from Germanie.The first support came to the Kings armie the Count of Tend, brought three thousand footmen, Bingrane and Bos|sempeire brought two thousand and two hundreth horse|men out of Germanie to the Duke. This supplyment so en|couraged the Kings armie, that they enterprised to recouer the Towne of Angolesme againe, and for recouering of it, it was needfull that the towne of Iarnaque should be taken for the commoditie of the bridge, to transport his armie o|uer the river of Charence, but the Admirall prevented the Duke, and fortified the Towne of Iarnaque, and disap|pointed him of the commoditie of the bridge.
The Prince of Condie marched forward to Iarnaque, and the Admirall to Blansack, where he vnderstood, that a tymber bridge was set vp neere to the stone bridge that was at Casteaneur, for the greater expedition in transporting of the Dukes armie ouer the riuer of Charence. This great celeritie of the Duke (who transported all the armie ouer the riuer in one night) put the Prince of Condie and the Admirall in great feare, because their Forces were farre behinde them. Therefore it was thought expedient to re|tire backe in time to their Forces. But the Duke pursued so strictly,The Battell of Blansack. that before they had marched backe halfe a myle from Blansack, they were compelled to turne and fight.
In this battell the Prince of Condie was taken and slaine,The death of the Prince of Condie. and two hundred of the Protestants more, and fortie taken prisoners. The rest of the armie the Admirall led backe to Saint Iande-angeli: Soone after this, Andelot dyed at Sainetes, to the great griefe of all the armie: his body being opened was found to be poysoned.
The Queene of Navarre comforted the armie of the Protestants,The King of Navarre and young Prince of Condie go|verne the ar|mie of the Protestants. and the King of Navarre her sonne, with the Prince of Condies sonne, tooke vpon them the govern|ment of the armie, and sent Count Mongomrie to sup|port the Towne of Angolesme, which was then besieged by the Dukes Forces, by whose comming the towne was so refreshed and encouraged, that the Duke was com|pelled to raise his Siege and depart from the Towne.
About this time the Duke of Bipont with his Germane Forces were entred into France,The Duke of Bipont com|meth from Germanie to support the Protestants, taketh the towne of La charitie, and within two dayes dieth: having ap|pointed Vel|rad Count of Manfelt to be Generall in his roome. to support the Princes of the reformed Religion, and tooke the Towne of La cha|ritie in Burgundie, a Towne of no small importance, for the passage of the river of Loyre. The Princes of the Pro|testants marched forward to meete the Duke of Bipont, and by the way killed two hundred Hagbushers, who were appointed by the Duke of Andion to stoppe the pas|sage of the river Vienna, in the river of Limosin, and so the passage being opened, they came the day after to the

Campe of the Germanes, and receiued them with great gladnesse; but through the sudden death of the Duke of Bipont (who died two dayes after their meeting) their gladnesse was mixed with great heauinesse. Notwithstan|ding, the Duke before his death exhorted all his Captaines valiantly to debate that cause of Religion; For the which they were entered into France, and placed in his roome, Wolrad, Count of Manfelt, to be generall Commander of the Germane armie. In which were reckoned to be seauen thousand and fiue hundred horsemen, and sixe thousand footemen, besides two thousand French horsemen, who came in their companie, and ten Ensignes of footemen. The Prince of Orange with his brother Lodowick and Hen|ry were also in this armie.
In the Countrey of Poictou, the Princes had taken ma|ny Townes, and the most part of the Countrey was al|readie subiect vnto them. And it was thought meete to besiege the Towne of Poictiers it selfe,Poictiers be|sieged. and the Towne was willing to render to the Princes, vpon reasonable con|ditions, if the Duke of Guise had not come to support the Towne. But the comming of the Duke altered their mind, and the Towne was strongly fortified, and valiantly indured a strict Siege.
The Admirall although he had lost two thousand men at this Siege, and great sicknesse, and penurie of victuals was felt in the armie, yet was he very vnwilling to raise the Siege, till at length the Duke of Andum strictly be|sieged Monsieur Loe in Castelleralt,The admirall raiseth his siege from Poictiers. whom the Admirall willing to relieue, left the siege of Poictiers.
Soone after this, the armie of the two Princes being at Moncontuire, in the Country of Poictou, was purposed to march toward Niort; and the armie of the Duke in like manner was purposed thither.The battell of Moncontuire, wherein the Protestants were discom|fited. Through this occasion the two armies ioyned in battell a little space from Mon|contuire, and the Duke of Andium had the Victorie. The footemen of the Germanes were cruelly slaine in this Battell, without all commiseration; some greater fauour

was showne to the French Souldiers. The Admirall fore|seeing (as appeareth) the euent of this battell, had caused the two Princes of Navarre and Condie to be conveyed out of the Hoast.
The number of those that were slaine at this battell, are supposed by some to haue beene sixe or seauen thousand men; by others, twise as many. The report of this losse so discouraged the Protestants, that all the Townes which they had conquered in Poictou, were incontinent reco|uered by the adversaries;S. Ian Dangely besieged and taken. and S. Ian Dangely after it was besieged two moneths, was surrendered to the adversarie, vpon certaine conditions. At the siege of this Towne Mar|tiques, Governour of Britanie, a great enemie to those of the Religion,The death of Martiques, go|vernour of Britanie, an enemie to the Protestants, and a blasphe|mer of the name of God. was slaine, wherein is to be noted the iust iudgement of God, punishing the pride of those that blas|pheme his blessed name. This Martiques perswaded La Matpinolis, to yeeld the Towne to the King, and desired the towne to remember the battell of Moncontur
e, where|in their strong God had forsaken them, and said it was time for them to sing, Helpe vs now, O God, for it is time. Not long after, this proud man felt that the strong God was liuing, able to helpe the weake, and to confound the proud.
The Princes with the Admirall consulted in what part of the Realme it were meetest to sustaine the hazzard of the Warrefare;By a new edict of pacification the third ciuill warre endeth. and it was thought meetest in Languedok, be|cause the Towne of Nimes was lately surprised by the Protestants, and many townes in that Countrie fauoured their Religion.
While new preparations are made by the Princes to su|staine the Warre, behold, a new edict of pacification is for forth, granting libertie of Religion to the Protestants a|gaine, and granting to them for their further securitie, the keeping of foure Townes during the space of two yeares, to wit, Rotchell, Cognack, Montallan, and Caritea. This edict being proclaimed in both th Campes, the people were in great ioy, being wearied with long and perillou

Warres, and being desirous to visite their owne houses and families. Thus was an end put to the third ciuill warre in France.
The King marrieth.After this pacification, the King married Elizabeth, daughter to Maximilian the Emperour: and the rumour went thorow the Countrey, that the King was inclined to peace. Likewise the apparent hatred betwixt the King and the Duke of Aniou his brother confirmed this rumour: for it seemed to the people, that the King was offended, be|cause the Prelates of France depended more vpon his bro|ther then vpon himselfe, and paied to him yeerely 200000 Frankes, to be a patron and defender of their cause. Where|fore it seemed to many that the King would incline his af|fection toward the Protestants, to abandon the power of his brother. But all this was deceitfull treacherie, to colour the intended malice of his heart.
Also the edict of pacification was better kept then it had beene at any other time before, except in a few places. And when the Queene of Navarre sent messengers to the King, to complaine of the violation of the edict in the Townes of Roane and Aurenge: the King returned backe againe to her a very pleasant answere, that he would not onely punish most seuerely the transgressours of the edict,The King of|fereth his sister in marriage to the King of Navarre, that thereby he might insnare the Prote|stants. but also for a further confirmation of a stedfast bond of Peace with the Protestants, he would bestow Mar|garet his sister in marriage to the King of Navarre her sonne.
The King himselfe passed to Bloyes, and sent for the Queene of Navarre, whom hee receiued so courteously, and conferred with so louingly, that the Queene was fully perswaded, that this marriage would be a sure pledge and bond of constant peace.
The Admirall also was sent for, and met the King at Bloyes, whom the King seemed to reuerence and honour out of measure; in so much that the Admiralls heart was betwitched with the Kings faire speeches, supposing that he meant vprightly, to bind vp indeed a bond of con|stant

Peace with the Protestants. Specially for this, that the King seemed to prepare an armie for support of the Prince of Orange, and the Admirall was appointed to be generall Commander of the armie.
The time of the celebration of the marriage drawing neere (which was appointed to be solemnized in Paris by the Cardinall of Burbone) the Queene of Navarre ad|dressed her selfe toward Paris,The Queene of Navarre being empoy|soned, dieth. to make preparation for the marriage, and the Admirall with many earnest requests of the King was sollicited to bee present at the marri|age; As also all the principall Noble-men of the Prote|stants.
The forerunners of the lamentable Tragedie that after followed began soone to appeare, if the hearts of men had not beene setled in a deepe securitie. For the Queene of Navarre, as she was busied in making preparation for the marriage, died hastily being cut off by empoysoned Gloues, which shee receiued from an Italian the Kings Vnguentarie.
But the King seemed to be in such heauinesse for her death, and the matter was so finely conveyed, that all suspition was incontinently quenched and buried,The King of Navarre mar|ried to the Kings sister. and the marriage was celebrated the eight-teenth day of August Anno 1572. Soone after, to wit, the twentie two day of August appeared a cleere presage of the future Tragedie: for the Admirall as he went from the Loover to his house was shot with two or three Bullets in the arme.The Admirall shot in the arme. This was taken in very euill part by the King of Navarre and Prince of Condie: who desired libertie to depart from Paris, wherein they saw so euident danger to themselues and their friends. But the King with so many attestations, protested the miscontentment of his owne minde in that matter: and that he would diligently search and seuerely punish the au|thors of that deed, that in some part he quieted the hearts of the complainers.
Likewise, the King himselfe came to visit the Admirall, with pittifull words, lamenting the chance that was fallen out,

and affirming the dishonour to be done to him, although the Admirall had receiued the hurt. Also he desired that the Admirall would be content to be transported to the Loouer of Paris for his better securitie, in case any popular commotion should fall out, vntill he should be trying and punishing the authors of that fact. And when the King perceiued that the Admirall made excuse of his infirmitie, that he could not suffer to be transported, the King appoin|ted some of his owne Guard to attend vpon the Admiral house,The Admirall attended vpon by the Kings Guard. and the Protestants were commanded to prepare their lodgings neere to the Admirals house, to be a guard vnto him, in case any commotion should happen in the Towne.
All this was done vnder deepe dissimulation, to put the Protestants in securitie, that they should not once imagine of the Tragedie that was to come. And the Admirall sent his Letters to all parts of the Countrey where the Prote|stants were, that they should make no stirre for that which was done vnto him, for the wound was not deadly, and God and the King would see the authors thereof punished. The night after,The Massacre of Paris the 24. of August Anno 1572. was the appointed time for the horrible Massacre of the Protestants that were in Paris. The Duke of Aniou and the Duke of Guise having their souldiers ready armed in the streets, were waiting for the signe that was to be giuen to beginne their bloudie Enterprise: which being once giuen out of the Church of S. Ger|mane, the Duke of Guise set first vpon the Admirals house; Those of the Kings guard (of whom we spoke be|fore) that were appointed for defending of the Admirall now euidently declared the true cause wherefore they were placed in that roome;The Admirall killed. for they rushed in violently, and killed the Admirall, and threw him downe out of a window into the close, where the Duke of Guise was awai|ting for that spectacle, and for ioy would scarcely beleeue that it was he, vntill he had wiped the blood from his face.
Then he encouraged all his companie,The Duke of Guise encou|rageth the companie to murther the Protestants. and sayd. This is a good beginning, goe to, goe to: it is the kings will, it is the kings commaundement. What bloodie crueltie fol|lowed, without all commiseration, slaying men, women and children, no tongue is able to expresse, the sounding of bells, the shouting of the pursuers, and the pitifull cries of the slaine, all concurring together made the spectacle of that day to be verie terrible. Also the Duke of Guise with Mompensier and many others passed thorow the streets, en|couraging the people and augmenting their furie and mad|nesse, saving that the wicked seede of the Protestants should be vtterlie rooted out.
The like outragious crueltie was also practised in the Lower where the king was.The compa|nies which at|tended the king of Na|varre and Prince of Condie, slaine For the whole companie that were attending vpon the king of Navarre and Prince of Condie were commaunded to lay downe their armour, and goe without the Palace, where they were most cruellie slaine by armed Souldiers attending on their out|comming. The king of Navarre and Prince of Condie themselues were brought before the king and threatned that except they would renounce that religion which they professed, they should surely die.
The king of Navarre humbly requested the king to re|gard that new bond of friendship that was bound vp be|tweene them,The king v|geth the Prince of Condie and king of Na|uarre to be come Papists. Their resolute Answere. and for his religion not to vrge him so, strict|lie incontinent to forsake that religion wherevnto hee had beene trained vp from his very youthward.
The Prince of Condie added moreouer that his life was in the kings hands, to dispose of it as it plea|sed him but as for his Religion hee had receiued the knowledge of it from God, to whom also hee behoued to render account of the same, and hee would not renounce it for any feare or danger of this present life.
Some of the Protestants then lodged in the Fobers of S. Germane, as Count Mongomrie  diuers others, for intercep|ting of whom the king had giuen commandement to the

Dean of Gild of Paris to haue in readinesse 1000. armed souldiers, but through the prouidence of God those souldi|ers were not in readinesse, and that by the ouersight of an in|feriour captain to whom the Dean of Gild had giuen charge to execute the kings Commaundement.
This matter being signified to the Duke of Guise, hee tooke with him a Companie of armed men to inter|cept in time,Note. Mongomrie and his complices. But when hee came to the Port deuiding the towne from the Fobers, hee was compelled to stay a while, because in hast the wrong Keies had beene brought out in stead of the right keies of the Port.
Count Mon|gomrie and diuers others escape.In this meane time Count Mongomrie, Carautensis, and others that were in the Fobers had beene aduertised of the cruell Massacre that was in the towne, and scarce|ly would credit that the King could be partakers of so foule a treacherie.
But when they saw the Heluetian souldiers making hast by boates and shippes to crosse the water, and to come ouer to the Fobers of S. Germane to cut them off, they made hast and fled. The Duke of Guise with Duke De Aumald and the Count of Angolesme pursued them to Montfort which is eight leagues distant from Paris, but could not ouertake them and so returned backe againe to Paris. In this Massacre were slaine many noble men such as the Admirall, Telignius, Rupefocald, Renelius, and many learned men, amongst whom were Petrus Ramus and Lambinus: and of others moe than 10000. persons whose bodyes were layed on heapes vpon cartes, and cast into the riuer of Seane which was coulered red with the blood of the slaine. The like crueltie was practised in Lions, and the bodyes of the slaine were cast into the riuer of Rhene, and the heapes of the slaine were carried downe to the sight of those of Delphin, Provance and Languedok that dwelt nigh vnto the riuer, whose harts were compelled to detest the spectacle of so Barbarous crueltie, the like wherof was scarce|ly to be found amongst the Turkes and Infidels.
Likewise in many other townes the rage of the like cruel|tie was felt,In this Massa|cre were killed 30000 per|sons in France so that within the space of a moneth moe then 30000. persons were reckoned to be slaine. To all this Tra|gedie was added the defection of Rozarius a Preacher at Or|leance who by his vilde Apostasie so brangled the King of Navarre and Prince of Condie,By the exam|ple of Rozari|us, the King of Navarre and Prince of Condie fell away for a time. that they were induced by his example and perswasions, to fall away from their religion for a time, yet afterward this same Rozarius being grauely admonished of the vildnesse of his Apostasie departed out of France to Germanie; and writ letters to the Prince of Condie, wherein hee acknowledged his errour and begged mercie of God for that he had beene a snare and stumbling blocke to him.
The report of the Massacre was so detestable in the eares of all men that heard it that they were forced to beare out that matter with forged lies which they had begun with cru|eltie:The repen|tance of Roza|rius. The Papists defend their crueltie by lies  to the end this Massacre should be the lesse odious in the eares of strangers, they alleadged that the Admirall  his complices were purposed to cut off the king  all the blood royal, (yea and the king of Navarre himselfe although he was of the same religion)  to set vp the Prince of Condie in the throne of the kingdome, to the end the Admiral might haue the gouernment  administration of al himself. And for this cause they tortured two noble men of the Protestants whom they had take~ to wit Canagnius Briquemald to drawe out of them by torturing a co~fession of the fore alledged co~spiracie. But the noblemen died constant in the true faith,Note.  w
ithout confession of any such treason as was alleadged. Notwithsta~|ding they were not ashamed after their death to publish in their names a co~fession of horrible treason which they neuer confessed while they were aliue. After this pitifull disaster it seemed that the religion in France was vtterlie quenched, for the noble men were slaine, some had made defection, and o|thers for feare had left the land. Only a few towns were in the Protestants hands such as Rochell, Montalban, Nines, Sauserr and some others of small account. Yet the Lord so wrought by those small beginnings that the force of the ad|uersaries

was more wonderfullie resisted by this small hand|full,The fourth ciuill warre in Fraunce for religion. Rotchell besie|ged. God miracu|louslie proui|deth for the poore, during the siege of Rotchell. then it was by forces of so many noble men with con|currance of strangers in the former warre.
The towne of Rotchell was the towne of greatest im|portance of all the rest, and the king thought meete to be|siege it both by sea and land with a mightie armie, which siege began in the moneth of December, Anno 1573. and indured vntill the moneth of Iune next following. The maruelous prouidence of God was felt in this siege, for God sent a number of fishes called Surdonnes to the support of the poore during the time of the siege, and when the siege was loosed the fishes departed away, and were found no more in that coast.
Conditions of peace offered to the towne of Rotchell.In the moneth of Iune the Ambassadour of Poland came vnto the Kings Campe to the Duke of Aniou the Kings brother, whom the Polonians had chosen to be their king, and immediately after conditions of peace were offered to the towne,  libertie to exercise their religion within their own bounds, and in this peace were contained their associats of Montalban and Nimes. The Rotchellanes had required that those of Sanfarre and all others of their Religion should bee comprehended in this bond of pacification, but no speciall mention was made of the towne of San|sarre, onely a generall clause of their associats was cast in.
The towne of Sansarre besie|ged and (some conditions of peace being granted) at last surrendered.The towne of Sansarre likewise was besieged, but it was so strongly fortified, and the Protestants within the towne so couragiouslie repulsed the enemies that they were compel|led to retire backe from battring of the walles, and to be|set them round about on all quarters, that they might by long famine compell them to render whom they could not ouercome otherwise. This siege indured from the moneth of Ianuary vntill the moneth of August, so that the famine within the towne was so great that the famine of Samaria and Saguntum seemeth not to haue bin greater. In the end con|ditions of peace were granted, and the towne was rendered to Castrius the kings Lieutenant in those parts.
The townes of Montalban and Nimes was not besieged as yet, to whom and to all the rest of the Protestants dwelling in Lauguedok, Delphine  Provance was offered those same conditions, which the Rotchellanes had embraced. But they craued of the king  his brother liberty first to assemble the~|selues together before they should giue their answere, which being granted  the assemblie conveened at Miliald,An assemblie of the Prote|stants at Mili|ald. it was thought meete with common consent to craue more ample co~ditions  liberties then were contained in the peace of the Rotchellans: namely that in euery Province of Fraunce two townes might be granted to the Protestants for their further securitie,The conditi|ons which they required of the king.  those townes to be kept by the guardes of their own souldiers,  to haue their pay out of the kings treasury, and that libertie should be granted to al that were of their re|ligion
to exercise the same freelie, without any exception of places. Also that all those that should be found guiltie of the horrible murther co~mitted at Paris the 24. of August might be seuerely punished. Many other conditions were required, very amply  freely. Order was taken in like manner in this assemblie how the warre might be maintained in case those conditions of peace were not granted.
The Queene mother when shee had read the conditions that were required, said with great indignation; that if the Prince of Condie had beene in the midst of Fraunce with 20000. horsemen, and 50000.footmen yet would hee not haue required the halfe of those conditions. This great bold|nesse of the Protestants in crauing so great liberties put the enemies in suspicion and feare that the Nobles of Fraunce had secretlie banded themselues with the Prote|stants.
About the same time Count Mongomry had returned out of England,Count Mon|gomrie besie|ged in Don|front, taken,  sent to Paris.  had taken some townes in Normandy; but soone after he was besieged in Donfront a town of Norman|dy, by Matigonus the kings Lieutenant in those parts; to who~ he yeelded himself vpon certain conditions which were not kept vnto him, but he was sent immediatly to Paris to the king. The Duke of Aniow had departed from France to the

kingdome of Polonia,Duke Aniow chosen king of Poland depar|eth thither.  the king of France was fallen sicke: also many noble men in the land were highlie offended at the ambition, pride, and crueltie of the Queene mother, who had not onely cut off the noble men of the Protestants, but also intended the like crueltie against many other noble|men in Fraunce, whose names were insert in the bloody roll of the Massacre, albeit they professed the Roman religio~. The Queene mother knowing that she was vehementlie hated in the land and fearing left this matter should tend to her vtter disgrace and abandoning of all her authoritie thought meete to prevent all the deuices of the nobilitie of France against her,The Queene mother impri|soneth diuers of th nobilitie who were dis|content with her. and begun to lay hands on those of the Nobilitie whom she most suspected, and cast them in prison: such as D. Alauscone her owne son whom she knew to be discontent with her forme of gouernment, and the king of Navarre, also Monmerance, and Cassens Marescallis. The Prince of Con|die also was to be taken, but he conveyed himselfe away se|cretly vnto Germanie.
The death of King Charles.In the meane time the king died in the moneth of May Anno. 1574. with greateffusion of blood from many parts of his body. And the Queene mother had all the gouernment in her owne hand vntill the returning of her son out of Po|lonia, whom shee aduertised of the death of his Brother Charles, and desired him without all delay to returne againe to Fraunce.
Count Mon|gomrie con|demned to death by the Queene.In the meane time the cruell heart of the Queene mother thirsting for blood procured that Count Mongomrie should be condemned to death. This is that noble man who had slaine king Henry the father of Charles with a speare, whom king Henry would not suffer to be harmed for that cause, it being done in game and against Mongomries heart. Neuerthelesse when he came in the hands of this mer|cilesse woman he must die. Before king Henry returned out of Poland vnto France, the Prince of Condie had sent from Germanie to France, Messengers to declare to the Prote|stants the great care of his minde to advance the Religion, and to procure the peace and libertie of his countrie,

who also was chosen to be generall commaunder of all the Protestants.The Prince of Condie chosen the Protestants generall. Many Catholikes were associate with him, who being of a contrarie religion, notwithstanding tooke armes with the Prince of Condie to restore the countrie to the owne libertie. In the moneth of December Anno 1574. the king came to Lyons where the Queene mother acco~panied with Alauscon her son, and the king of Navarre, and Duke of Guise were awaiting for his co~ming. In this towne they ad|uised what was most expedient to be done, whether they should prosecute the war, or they should quiet the countrie with new edicts of pacification. The Queene mothers aduise was, that the king should assault the townes of Languedok  Delphine that were kept by the Protestants, because the pre|sence and terrour of the king would so astonish the peoples hearts that incontinent they would yeeld and giue ouer the townes into the kings hands.The fifth ciuill warre in France for Re|ligion. Libero besie|ged in vaine by king Henry. This aduise was followed and the king besieged the towne of Pusinum in Viuaret,  tooke it, also the towne of Libero in Delphin was stro~gly besieged, but the king was co~pelled to leaue his siege  to depart from the towne, which according as the name of it foretokened re|mained free and vnconquered by the aduersaries: during the time of this siege the Cardinal of Loraine died vpon this oc|casion. The king being in Avinion some Paenitentiaries for|tuned to scourge themselues in a cold winter season,The death of the Cardinall of Lorain pro|cured by him|selfe. the Car|dinall would ioyne himselfe to their fellowship, and walked barefooted in the companie of those Paenitentiaries, wherby he contracted a deadlie disease, and soone repented this repe~|tance. The king himselfe was content to afflict his body after the same forme,King Henry scourgeth him selfe, after the manner of the penitentiaries. Many Ambas|sadors sollicit the king for peace, but in vaine. which was expou~ded by many to be an euil presage that he should not conquer that little towne of Libe|ro, but should be scourged from the towne,  leaue the siege of it with shame, which truly came to passe. From thence the king went to Paris to his Coronation, where many Ambassa|dours came to the king; not only from the Prince of Condie who as yet remained in Basile, but also from the D. of Sauoy and the Cantons of the Switzers, and from the Queene of Engla~d to treat for peace, but al their trauels were ineffectu|all:

for the conditions of the peace could not be agreed vpon, so the war continued  waxed hote. In Languedoke Anvillius although he was of the Romane religion, yet had ioyned himselfe to the Protestants, and tooke Agnes Mortes a towne of great importance in those parts with many other townes. In Delphin Mombruniris was chiefe commaunder,Mombruniris taken and exe|cuted by the Queene. and had so good sucesse in all his attempts that he was a great terrour to the aduersaries. In the end he was sore wounded and ta|ken, beside Dia a towne in Delphine, and by the commaun|dement of the king and Queene mother, was carried to Grenoble and there was executed in the sight of the people. This war was much different from the former warres, where|in those that were of one religion were also on one side, but now the Catholikes were mingled with the Protesta~ts which thing albeit it seemed for a time to augment their num|ber, yet in the end it turned to euill, as shall be declared here|after, God willing.
Cassimire the sonne of Count Pala|tine promiseth to aide the Protestants.The Prince of Condie had required helpe of Cassi|mire the sonne of Count Palatine, who also had condis|cended to support the distressed Church of Fraunce, and very strict obligations of mutual duties were passed between them, as these namely, that they should not dissolue their armes vntill that libertie were obtained to the Protestants fullie to enioy their owne Religion. And likewise that Cassimire should haue the townes of Metis, Tullion, and Verdum, in his hands; besides other townes in all the Pro|vinces of France which the Protestants were to require for there further assurance, and as pledges of the Kings fidelitie  faithfulnesse towards them. While this armie of Cassimire was marching forward towards Loraine, Alauscon the kings brother departed from Court, and many of the nobilitie of France resorted to him, all pretending that they could not suffer the countrie to be exhausted with ciuill warres, and the people to be vexed with exorbitant and vnnecessarie tax|ations.Alauscon the kings brother ioyneth him|selfe with the Protestants.
All those tumults were found in the end to be the subtile policies of the Q. mother by the meanes of Alauscon her son

to dissolue the army of Cassimire. Notwithstanding the ar|my of the Germanes and French-men, entered into France vnder the conduct of the Prince of Condie and Cassimire; and came forward to Charossium, a towne in Borbon, not farre from Molins: where Alauscon the Kings bro|ther ioyned with them, and the whole army being muste|red was found to bee of horsemen, and footmen thirtie thousand. The King of Navarre about the same time departed from Court and returned to his owne countrey, whereby the feare of the King and Queene mother was greatly encreased. In conclusion the army approached dayly neerer and neerer to Paris, yet no battell was fought, because the Queene mother listened more to the instruc|tions shee had given to Alauscon her sonne, then to the doubtfull successe of battell, and force of armed men, and indeed a more sure way to obtaine their purpose. For messengers being sent to the King to treate for peace, the Queene mother perceived that all other conditions how ample soever they had beene, might bee easily eluded and broken, but if the townes of Metis, Tullion, and Ver|dum, were in the hands of a potent stranger, it would be a great abandoning of the Kings power in all time to come. Therefore the matter was so brought about, that Cassimire was content to receiue from the King a great summe of money, in stead of those townes which should haue beene put in his hands, and libertie was granted to the Protestants to exercise their owne religion openly and freely, without exception of places, the Court and the towne of Paris, with a few leagues about, one|ly excepted. Also they were declared to bee capable of places in Parliament, and places of Iustice Courts: all iudgements which were made against them for any enter|prise whatsoever was declared voyd: The cruell day of Sant Bartholomew disavowed, and for better assurance and performance of the conditions, they had eight townes de|livered vnto them, with the conditions of their govern|ments, Aques Mortes, Bencaire, Perigneux, Le mas de ver|dun,

Nons yissure,By an edict of pacificatio~ the fift civill warre ended. La grand tour. Thus was the edict of pacification proclaimed through the countrey, in the mo|neth of May, 1576. and an end was put to the fift civill war in France for religion.
In this Emperours time Solyman being now stricken in age,Solyman the Turke besie|geth Zigeth. came notwithstanding into Hungarie againe with a great army, and besiedged Zigeth: In the meane time of the siege Solyman dyed,Solyman dieth, the towne ta|ken, Selim sent for  proclai|med Emp. but his death was so secretly con|cealed, that the siege continued after his death, and the towne was taken by force. Likewise Selim the sonne of Solyman, was in haste sent for to come from Constanti|nople to Hungarie: all this was done before the death of Solyman was knowne, either to his owne army, or to the Emperour Maximilian.
Selim taketh Famagusta from the Ve|netians. The battell of Lepanto, wherein the Turkes recei|ved a great o|verthrow by the Christians.This new Emperour of the Turkes Selim, tooke Fama|gusta, in the Isle of Cyprus, which belonged to the Ve|netians: and did fight a cruell battell by Sea against the Christians, in the gulph of Lepanto, of olde called Sinus Corinthiacus: in the which the Turkes Navie was overcome, and Haly Bassa the chiefe Governour of the Turkes was slaine, and his head was set vp vpon the top mast of his owne shippe, to the great terrour and astonish|ment of the Turkes. This battell was fought the seventh day of October, Anno 1571. Don Iohn de Austria was Generall commander of the Navie of the Christians: the number of the Turkes that were slaine, is supposed to haue beene fifteene thousand men, and thirteene thousand Christians were delivered from the captiuity of the Turks. Onuphrius writeth, that an hundred and seventeene shippes were taken, with thirteene gallies, and thirty two thousand Turkes were slaine in this battell.



Rodulphus.
AFter the death of Maximilian, Rodulphus his sonne was made Emperour. In his time the warres in France, which seemed to be well quieted by the last edict of pacification, began to kindle vp againe with greater flame. For the adversaries of religion besought the Kings Maiestie to restraine the pernitious liberty of the edict of peace: but perceiving him not to bee sufficiently moved to breake the peace, and to take knife in hand, they began to assemble at Perone,The league of Peron 1576. for the extirpa|tion of the Protestants. Anno 1576. and to binde vp a league amongst themselues for the extirpation of the Protestants, and for the revocation of the edict of peace, wherein they swore obedience and service to the Generall tha hould bee appointed over this fellowship, ingaging their liues and honours, never to seperate themselues for any commande|ment, pretence,The causes moving the Leaguers to proceed in their associa|tion. excuse, or occasion whatsoever. There were two things that greatly animated the Leaguers to pro|ceed in their association, to wit: First, that the Protestants yeelded not vp the townes which they had gotten for their assurance, for the space of sixe yeeres. The sixe yeeres be|ing ended, they complained to the King that conditi|ons were not kept vnto them, and that for the abolishing of warres, and setling of peace in France, it was needfull that they should haue those townes a longer time in their main|tenance, whereto the King condiscended.
This grieved the Leaguers: but another thing grieved them more, that Alauscon the Kings brother for griefe of the hard successe of his affaires in the Low Countries, died at Chasteau Thierry. And the King himselfe having no children, the feare that they conceived of the King of Na|varres succession to the Kingdome, caused the Leaguers rage. While the flame issued out of this furnace, the King of France easily perceived that the drift of all the Leaguers

enterprises was against his life and crowne,The drift of the Leaguers enterprise a|gainst the K. and crowne. and to set vp a|nother whom it pleased them in his place. For the Lea|guers pretended warre against the Hugonots, and yet they seazed vpon the best townes of the Catholikes, in all the Realme. The religion was preached in Guyen, and they went to driue it out of Picardie. The Hugonotes were in Rochell, and the Leaguers army marched straight to Paris. They are at Montpelliere, and the league set vpon Marseille. Likewise the pasquells and libells without names, dayly throwne downe in the towne of Paris, and the disdainfull speeches dayly vttered of the King, speaking of him as a Sardanapalus, and a Prince drowned in his pleasures and de|lights, and for his third crowne which hee looked for in heaven, promising him one made with a rasour in a Cloy|ster: all these things presented to the Kings minde a suf|ficient vnderstanding of the resolution and purpose of the Leaguers Notwithstanding feare so possessed his minde, that in stead of couragious resisting of the Leaguers in due time,The King for lacke of cou|rage maketh himself a slaue to the appe|tites of he Leaguers. hee made himselfe a slaue to their appetites. The ar|my of the Duke of Guise (who was made Generall of the fellowship of the league) at the first rising, exceeded not the number of a thousand horsemen, and foure thousand foot|men: which company might easily haue beene dispersed, if the valorous courage of the King had not beene vtterly abashed: who in stead of commanding with authority, de|sired the Queene mother to procure that the Duke of Guise might leaue off armes, and to assure him of his favour, and that he would giue him what part of his Realme hee would aske to let him liue in peace.
This their enterprise succeeding so well, farre aboue their owne expectation, mooved them to set forward, and to de|sire of the King that hee would make and sweare an irrevo|cable edict of extirpation of Heretikes: To take by force the townes holden by those of the new religion: To re|nounce the protection of Geneva, to authorize their warres, to reconcile them vnto him, to bee of their league, and of a King to become a participant. Wherevpon followed an

edict prohibiting the exercise of the new religion,An edict a|gainst the Pro|testants. and re|voking all other edicts that favoured it, commanding all the Ministers out of the Land, and all subiects in France within six moneths after to make profession of the Catho|like religion, or to depart out of the Realme. Dispersing al|so the tripertite chambers of Parliaments, likewise orday|ning that the townes given in hostage to those of the reli|gion, should be yeelded vp, and approving the warre which the Leaguers had begun, acknowledging it to be done for his service.
And not content with this, they asked of the King for their further surety, the townes of Chalon, Thoul, Verdi|um, Saint Desier, Rhems, Soissons, the Castle of Dyon, the towne and castle of Beaume, Rue in Picardie, Dinan and Con in Brittaine, to be delivered vnto them.
The King of Navarre all this while kept himselfe quiet, being solicited by the King so to doe. But when hee saw the King had rendered himselfe to the appetite of the Lea|guers, hee set forth a declaration of the cause, why the Lea|guers had taken armes, of the vanity of their pretences, and of the fruits which the Estates in France might reape by the conclusions of Peronne,The King of Navarre and the Prince of Condie with diverse others, oppose them|selues to the Leaguers. Nemours, and Nauty, (for in those places the Leaguers had bound vp their league) with pro|testation that with him, the Prince of Condie his cousen, the Duke de Mommerencie, with Lords, Gentlemen, Pro|vinces, and Townes, both of the one religion and of the o|ther, so many as would concurre with him, should oppose themselues to the authors of these troubles.
In the meane time, while the King of Navarre is so bu|sied with the King and the Leaguers, who were now as it were incorporate in one bodie: the third assault commeth on,The Pope ex|co~municateth the King of France. and Pope Sixtus the fift, with his thunderbolts of ex|communication setteth vpon him, declaring him to be vn|capable of the crowne of France, abandoning his person, and his countrey for a prey to such as should obtaine them. At the same time also, the Electors of Germany, who in all the former warres had beene so helpfull to the Protestants

of France, was not vnmindfull of them at so strait a pinch, but sent Ambassadours to the King,The Prince of Germany send Ambassodors to deale for the Protestants helpe. desiring him to heare the requests of his neighbours, and to pity the case of his poore subiects, and not to keepe backe the edict of peace, that hee had lately graunted vnto them. The King answe|red that hee thought strange that forrain Princes should meddle with his affaires: and that he would doe nothing a|gainst the honour of his conscience, nor the fatherly care he had vnto his people. With this answer the Ambassadours returned, not well pleased.
The Duke of Guise being advertised of the dislike the Ambassadours of Germany had touching their answere,The sixt civill war in France for religion. counselled the King to set vpon the Protestants before the Rutters entred into France, so that in lesse then eighteene moneths the King of Navarre saw himselfe assayled by fiue Camps royall, vnder fiue severall Generals. Neverthelesse very few exploites worthy of remembrance were done by those armies, vntill the army of the Germanes entred into France,An army of Germans en|ter France in behalfe of the Protestants. vnder the conduct of the Baron of Othna, a man of greater courage then experience. The Duke of Bulloigne in the name of the King of Navarre, ioyned with the Baron of Othna, to leade this great army, wherein were moe then thirty thousand Switzers, Rutters, and French-men. They marched from Loraine to Cheaumont in Bassigny, and passed the river of Marne, also they crossed l' Anbe at Mon|tigny and Seine aboue Casklion, and Cure aboue Vermen|tone and Yome, hard by Crenaunt, and so made haste to|wards the river of Loire. There began the complaints of the Switzers and the mutinies of the Rutters, because the King of Navarre came not to them, and the King of France was at the side of the river Loire, either to fight with them, or to stay their passage. At this time the King vsed a stra|tagem, which was the cause of his victory, and of the dis|sipation of the army of strangers. For hee considered that the onely meanes to breake their army, was to impeach their ioyning with the King of Navarre. Therefore he comman|ded the Duke Ioyense to keepe the King of Navarre in

Poictou, and rather to hazard battell, then suffer him to passe the river of Loire, as hee determined at the head there|of: to the which end the Duke de Ioyense that had an army fortified, both with men, munition, artillery, and meanes marched to Coutras, to passe la Drogne at Que, and vpon tuesday the twentith of October, Anno 1587. he stayd with all his forces betweene la Rotch,The battell of Coutras be|twixt the Kings army  the Protesta~ts. Chalais, and Coutras. The King of Navarre made toward him, fully resolved to fight, and about eight of the clocke in the morning, the King of Navarres artillery began to play, and that of Duke de Ioy|ense to answer them, but not very fortunately, for that ei|ther the ignorance or malice of the Canoners had placed it so low, that the mouth of the canon, shot right vpon a lit|tle hill of earth, wherein the bullets stayed without pier|cing any further. The battell was so soone decided, that in ten houres this great army of the Kings (that had the van|tage both for place and number) began to retyre and was sooner broken then fought withall.
The King of Navarre, the Prince of Condie, and the Earle of Soissons behaved themselues most valiantly, exe|cuting the offices both of Captaines and souldiers, and gaue thankes to God in open field.
In this battell Duke de Ioyense and Monsieur de S. Sau|ueur his brother were slaine,The death of D. de Ioyense. and fiue and twenty other Gentlemen of name: all their cornets were taken, with their artillery and baggage, and fourteene Gentlemen of account were taken and put to ransome. That done, the King of Navarre being eased of so many nets that were set vp to catch him, marched forward to ioyne with the forraine ar|my, and to passe the river Loire. The King on the other part to impeach the meeting of the two armies of his ad|versaries, caused the ditches betweene Povilly and Dony to be broken vppe, filling them with thousands of trees, stones, and chaines to entangle the feet of the Rutters horse that should passe: and in truth the letting of that passage, was next to the helpe of God, the second cause the King had of the victory. For the Rutters being disappointed of their

passage were compelled to recoile, and having failed of their enterprise at la Charitie, they entred in the way of Beauce, drawing towards Montargis. From this time forth a great mutinie began in the army of the strangers, being mooved with impatience, because they could neither haue money nor sight of the King of Navarre: whereof the King being then at Bonevall had intelligence, and thereupon vsed all the meanes hee could to sound the hearts of the Switzers, and perswaded them to separate themselues from the rest of the army, and retyre home: whereunto the Switzers con|discended, and vpon agreement of 400000. crownes payed to them in ready money, they returned backe againe to their owne countrey. The Duke of Guise perceiving the army of the Rutters to be as a body dispersed, hauing nothing left but the armes and legges, tooke boldnesse to set vpon them as they camped at Aunew,A skirmish be|twixt the D. of Guise and the Rutters. and entred with his footmen in|to the streets, about the time that the carts and baggage were ready in the morning to issue out, and so couragiously sur|prised the Rutters at their breakefast: when the trumpets began to sound a chivall, having no meanes to issue out, they were constrained to retyre into their lodgings, at the pleasure of the assaylants. The booty was great, being 800. chariots, iewels and chaines of gold, and two thousand horse, both for the field and waggons. The gates being seazed vpon, and the streets chained, there was no meanes to saue themselues but by the walles, which the Generall leaped ouer.
Notwithstanding of this surprise, the army of the Rutters was in such estate, that by reason of some small assurance they had of the King of Navarres arrivall, it was likely to haue overcome the Duke of Guise forces. And as it was at point to retyre backe againe, the Prince of Condie, the Duke of Bulloigne, and the Lords of Chastilli|on and Cleruant, promised to pay them all their wages, if they would march forward. The hope of their pay made them to march in a time not very convenient, to|wards the Forrest of Orleance. The King perceived that

the longer the armie kept the fields, the greater would be the ruine of his Countrey, and that, being ioyned with the king of Navarre would doe great hurt, caused the Sienrs of the Isle of Cormont to certifie the Coronels that if they would yeeld vp their colours, and sweare to beare no armes in Fraunce without the expresse comman|dement of his Maiestie hee would giue them assurance to retire in safetie. They on the other part perceauing themselues to be farre from the king of Navarre, hardlie handled by the Frenchmen, beaten by the league, pursued by the king, and forsaken of the Switzers, assembled them|selues together at Marsigni:The Rutters retire out of France. and accepted his Maiesties of|fers sent by Monsieur D' Esperno, and retired out of France toward Geneua.
The Marques Du pont, eldest sonne to the Duke of Loraine, and the Duke of Guise, against their faith giuen, followed the miserable troupe of the Rutters to the moun|taine at Saint Clande, where they gaue thankes for the good successe of their companie: and from thence to please their hungrie troupes they trauersed the Countrie of Bour|goundie, entering into the Countries of Mombeliard and Hericourt, where his men vsed diuers great cruelties and spared not the lands of the Bishop of Basile.
After the bloodie ceasing of so lamentable vengeance vpon a poore innocent people, which as yet doe feele the losse and destruction of two hundred villages, the violence vsed to a number of women and maids, the Massacre of so many old men, and the furious and beastlie inhumanitie of the League, they beare the signes of their spoyles into Loraine.
Neuerthelesse after this exploite of the Duke of Guise,The Duke of Guise hono|red by the Pope, and ex|tolled by the Preachers of France for his crueltie. so full of crueltie, falshood  inhumanitie, the Roman Church extolled him aboue all measure. The Pope sent vnto the D. of Guise a sword engraued with burning flames in token of his valiantnes, accompanied with burning zeale towards the Roman religio~. The Preachers of France adva~ced him aboue the king, saying that Saul had slaine his thousand, but Dauid

ten thousand,The assemblie at Nancy of the Leagners a|gainst the King. and so the Duke of Guise puft vp with winds of popular praise, seeing also that the greatnesse of the Soueraigne maiestie was embraced, and that the Prote|stants were retired vnto the Rotchell, also that England had a proud Spaniard embarked on her backe (meaning the great Spanish Nauie by Sea) hee assured himselfe to take the king without danger: and to this effect aduertised the Cardinall of Burbone not to neglect so good an occasion, but to gather his principall friends at Nancie there to ad|uise the meanes to passe forward, and to constraine the king as it were to make his will,The conclusi|ons agreed vpon, by the assemble at Nancie. and so that assemblie concluded that the King should be summoned to ioyne his forces to the league: to refuse the Counsell  amitie of such as should be named vnto him: to establish the inquisition in euerie towne: to publish the Councell of Trent euen touching the things that derogated the priuiledge of the French Church: to consent to the restitution of the goodes that had bin alie|nated and sold, for the charges of the warres: to giue them townes wherein they might place men of warre,  to make such fortifications as the necessity of the time would require: ordaine the sale and confiscation of Hugonits goodes, also the disabling of their persons,  entertaine an armie vpon the Fronteris of Loraine: against the returne of the Germans that would come to haue some recompence, for the cruel|ties by the league committed in the countie of Montbeliard.
The Duke of Guise came to the King at Soissons to constraine the King either to bow or breake, and to con|firme the articles drawne, and deuised at Nancie and Dy|ion.
The King on the other part, by Mousieur de Bellieure gaue the Duke to vnderstand, that he should doe him a pleasure if he would abstaine from comming to Paris in so trouble|some a time, wherein so many factions raigned: and if hee came thither against his will: hee would lay the cause of all the troubles that might arise by his presence vpon him.
But the Duke of Guises heart, as it were attainted with a

burning feauer could find neither appetite nor pleasure,The Duke of Guise contra|rie to the king commande|ment arriueth at Paris and is of the peo|ple receiued with ioyfull acclamations. but in that which liked his stomach, would needes for the loouer or die by the way: and therefore mounted on horse|backe with eight Gentlemen, about nine of the clocke at night, leauing the Prince de Iumueille his sonne at Soissons, and desiring the Archbishop of Lyons to follow him in the morning, and so arriued at Paris.
This maner of arriuall together with the peoples fauour vttered by their ioyfull acclamations at the Duke of Guises lighting increased the distrust of the kings heart, so that hee resolued to preuent the enterprises intended against him, and commanded the Marescall Biron to cause foure thousand Switzers to enter into the Towne and to lodge them in diuers quarters thereof, who seased incontinent vpon the bridges of Nostredame and Saint Michael.The fearefull day of Barri|cadoes in Paris But the Parisians being abashed at the sight shut vp their shoppes, and tooke their weapones in their hands, and brought forth their Barricadoes (which was a sediti|ous invention of the league) each one distant from another thirtie foote, and reached almost to the Sentinell of the Loouer.
The Switzers were set vpon and they yeelded, crying Viue Guise, and Monsieur de Brissac caused them to be disarmed: and Sienre de S. Paul caused the kings guarde to retire, hol|ding down their armes with hatts in hand. The Queene mo|ther got into her Coach in great feare, and went to seeke the Duke of Guise to appease the commotion. The D. although he layed the fault vpon the people, yet neither would hee stay the commotion, neither goe the Loover to the king.
The Queen marking the stubbornnesse and resolution of the Duke of Guise, caused the king to be aduertised, who desiring not to stay any longer in that trance, issued out of Paris by the new-gate, and so happily eschewed the Trage|die of Chilperic,The king fli|eth out of Paris. and the new crowne of the razour pre|pared for him by the Leaguers: from Paris hee went to Chartresse, and from thence to Roane, fretting in heart

for the indignation hee had sustained in Paris, and being determined, one way or other, to be auenged on the Duke of Guise; the chiefe Captaine of the league, and the author of the Barricadoes. The chiefe thing that hindred this reso|lution for a time was the two extremities wherewith hee found himselfe beset: for either he must make peace with the Protestants, or strengthen himselfe with their forces; or else of new againe adioyne himselfe to the league, because hee was not able to match them both at one time.
In the end hee resolued to ioyne with the league againe and by a new edict set forth in Iuly Anno, 1588.An edict pub|lished against the Prote|stants. he ratefi|ed the decrees of the leaguers at Nemours which they had made, Anno 1585. containing in effect  substance the same things that were afterward decreed in Nancy.
Moreouer hee remitted and excused the fact done a|gainst him in the towne of Paris: acknowledging it was done by them for the zeale of the Catholike religion. And lest he should seeme to foster in his minde some secret cho|ler against the leaguers: he bestowed his liberalities and fa|uours vpon the principall heads thereof. To the Duke of Guise hee gaue the office of Lieutenant Generall ouer all the forces throughout the Realme of Fraunce. To the Cardinall of Guise his Brother hee promised to procure the Pope to giue him the office of Legat of Anignon. To Duke De Maine was giuen a faire and great armie in Dolpkin.
He gaue the Duke Nemours the government of Lyons. Hee forgot not the Archbishop of Lyons, but made him one of his priuie Counsel, before being only of the counsell of estate: and finally declared the Cardinall of Burbon to be the chiefe Prince of the blood royall, thereby whollie to ex|clude the king of Navarre from the crowne, The leaguers on the other part haue the wind in their saile  fearing that this great goodnesse of the king would not continue, ceased not vntil they had procured all his wise Counsellers to be remo|ued, and two armies to be leauied against the Protestants, the

one in Poictou vnder the conduct of the Duke of Neuers, the other in Dowphine vnder the Duke De Maine: all this contented them not except the edict aforsaid were christned with the name of a fundamentall law, and because it could not be done but by the three estates in Fraunce, they be|sought the king to hold a Parliament which was kept in Bloyes,A Parliame holden in France. The death of the Duke of Guise. Anno 1589. There they played subtilie one with an|other, and hee who was deceiued, thought vpon nothing else but to deceiue: for the Duke of Guise was slaine at this Parliament, and the Cardinall of Guise, the Arch-bi|shop of Lions was arrested, and Ianueille the Duke of Guises son, and the Cardinall of Burbon were deteined prisoners.
The Queene mother tooke this suddain alteration so grie|uouslie that she tooke bed,The Queene mother dieth.  in the moneth of Ianuarie fol|lowing, died. The two armies that were sent against the Pro|testants, the one staied in Lions awaiting on the issue of the Parliament, the other arriued into Poictou and had taken the Townes of Montagu, and Ganach lying in the Frontiers of Poictou and Brittannie: while the Parlia|ment was at Bloyes the assemblie of the Protestants was gathered in Rotchell, which beganne the foure|teenth day of Nouember, the king of Nauarre being pre|sent (now the Prince of Condie was dead in the moneth of March,An assemblie of the Prote|stants at Rot|chell send a request to the states at Bloyes. Anno 1588. being poysoned by one of his owne seruants) and deputies from all parts of the Countries, by whose aduise and resolution came the request presented to the states at Bloyes, vnder the name and title of the Frenchmen exiled for the Religion: beseeching the King to restore them to the libertie of the first edict which was called the edict of Ianuarie: to ordaine that a nationall Councell might bee assembled where the Doctors of both parts with good securitie in presence of his Maiestie, and all the assemblie might debate those differences, and whollie decree and resolue vpon the same: to grant them the free libertie of possessing their goodes: and to permit the registring of their supplication: to the

end that nothing might be done in that assemblie to pre|iudge them. But the Deputies of the Parliament, being for the most part, composed of men that were taken out from among the passionate aduancers of the League, not onely refused to agree to the foresaid petitions, but also ceased not, vntill both from the king himselfe and all the assemblie, they had procured a declaration of the per|petuall disabilitie, of the king of Nauarre to the succession of the Crowne.
But let vs see what successe followed vpon the death of the Duke of Guise. Two daies after the execution at Bloyes the sixteene Arch-leaguers of Paris, as Furies issu|ing out of hell, displaced the choler of their minds against the king, crying out murther, fire and vengeance. They presentlie made a collection of money to maintaine warres; the poorest artificer amongst them was content at least to import six crownes;The rebellion of the league against the king. gold ranne like a Riuer a long the streetes; they eleuated the Duke of Guise to the hea|uens and with open mouth spoke euill of the king, detesting his actions, abhorring his life, and accounting the execution done at Bloyse as most cruell, barbarous and inhumane. Many other townes followed the example of Paris, namely Amiens, Dijon, Orleance, Tullose. The Doctors of Sorbon published their decree, importing that the people of Fraunce, were freed and absolued from the oath of fidelitie and obedience made to Henry the third; and that the same people might lawfullie and with good con|science arme and vnite themselues together for defence of the Roman Church against the king or his adherents whatsoe|uer.
The report of those vprores, hastned the dissolution of the Parliament, which was dissolued in Ianuarie, 1589. and the king made for warre to suppresse the rebellious insurrection of the league: and immediatlie hee tran|slated to the towne of Tours such exercises of Iustice, as were accustomed to bee performed in his Court of Parliament of Paris, and depriued Paris with the townes

of all offices, charges, dignitie and priuiledges what|soeuer, as guiltie of rebellion, fellonie, and high trea|son against his Maiesties estate, and Person. Now the king was brought to that pinch by the insolencie of the league, that hee behoued to take truce with the king of Nauarre, and to fortifie himselfe with the assistance of his forces, and hee gaue to the king of Nauarre Sau|mure for securitie of his passage ouer Loire, by meanes whereof the king of Nauarre caused all his troupes to passe ouer on this side of Loire, to ioyne with the forces of Nor|mandie, Maine, and other places which attended him with intention to approach the leaguers.
The Duke De Maine,Duke De Maine sendeth men to sur|prise the king but is preuen|ted. on the other part being chiefe commaunder of the Leaguers armie, made a selection of their resolutest men, and marched into Vendesmois with an intention to surprise the king, in Tours where hee was not verie stronglie guarded; but the king was eased of this feare by the sudden arriuall of the king of Nauarre for his reliefe.
In Normandie Duke Monpensier with forces for the king, besieged Salaize a Towne that held for the league, and Count Brissac, accompanied with two or three hundreth, gentlemen leaguers, and with them fiue or six thousand men came to support the towne. Duke Mont|pensier hearing of those newes left the siege of the towne and set vpon Count Brissac and his armie, being lodged in three villages, and slew of them more than 3000. men; and tooke 1200 prisoners amongst whom were 30. Gen|tlemen of the chiefest. This was a bad presagement for the League.
In like manner at the siege of Senlis (a Towne of Fraunce lying betweene Paris and Picardie) which the Parisians besieged, because it was a Towne of great im|portance, the Duke of Longoveille came with support to the Towne; vpon which, battell ensued: wherein, 1500. of the assailants were slaine and all their artillerie and baggage was taken.
The king encouraged by those prosperous beginnings determined to goe forward, and to besiege the Towne of Paris with his armie of 45000. men.
The Duke De Maine and other principall Leaguers in Paris ercued their faction tending to a ruine,The leaguers procure a Ia|cobin Monke to kill the king. but found no ued except they executed some notable villanie by procuring the kings death. And they found out a young Iacobine Monke called Frier Iaques Clement, who for a kinde of Dextcritie obserued in him was found meet to strike so great a stroake. The Monke departed from Paris, and being presented to speake to the king the first day of August, said that he had letters from the president of Harley and credence on his part. The king caused him to be cal|led into his Chamber, where there was none other but the  Belligard chiefe Gentleman of the same, and the procuror generall, whom hee procured to retire a part more priuatlie to giue are vnto him, who adressed him|selfe (as it seemed) with a countenance verie simple and demure.
It is affirmed that in the selfe same chamber the massa|cre of Paris had beene concluded, Anno 1572. the king himselfe that was then Duke of Aniou being one of the chiefest. The Monke perceiuing himselfe alone, and op|portunitie offered him drew out of one of his sleeues a paper which hee presented to the king, and out of of the other a Knife which hee violently thrust with|in the kings small ribbes, hee being attentiue in r|ding.
The king perceiuing himselfe wounded plucked the knife out of the wound wherewith he stroke the Monke aboue the eye, and therevpon some gentlemen came ru|ning in; who moued with the indignitie of so execrable fact, could not containe but killed the murtherer with their swords,The death of Henry the third. who went to the place appointed for him, and was canonized and adorned by the league. The king be|ing carried to his bed, died about three of the clock in the morning the day following. A little before his

dparture, hee named the King of Navarre his brother in law, lawfull successor to the crowne, exhorting his good subiects to obey him, and to referre the difference of religi|on to the Convocation of the Estates generall of the Realm, and to pray to God for him, vpon these words he gaue vp the ghost.
After the Kings death, the image and portraiture of the traiterous Monke,The Iacobin who killed the K. canonized. who killed the King by the commande|ment of the chiefe of the league, was most artificially framed in brasse,  other paintings, wherewith they garnished both their houses and their Churches. Then was hee canonized, and amongst the superstitious prayed vnto as a martyr, whom they called by the name of Saint Iaques Clement. The Leaguers had with all their might endeavoured in the former Kings dayes to disappoint the succession of the King of Navarre, to the crowne of France. Now therefore they caused that title by proclamaton to bee given to the Car|dinall of Burbone,The Cardinall of Burbon proclamed K. by the Lea|guers. being then prisoner, whom they cal|led King Charles the tenth, and Duke de Maine was decla|red Lieutenant generall to the Estate and Crown of France, thereby disguising and colouring his vsurpation to the Crowne.
But King Henry the fourth, after he had buryed the corps of his predecessor, tooke his first iourney to Normandy, where the Pont to Larch was yeelded to him:K. Henry the 4. declared K. by K. Henry the 3. opposeth him|selfe to the Leaguers. Then hee came to Deepe, wonne Caen vnto his side, and constrained Neuscastle to be rendered into his hands. And hauing made a show to besiege Roane, it caused Duke de maine being called to the succour by Aumalle and Brissac, to set himself in the field with more then 3000. horsemen, and 5000. foot|men, who promised to the Parisians, at that time to make an end of all warre, and to bring their enemy bound vnto them both hand and foot. The King marching toward his enemies, encamped at a certaine village called Arques, a|bout two miles from Deep, and so entrenched it about on all sides, that hee might easily ouerrunne the enemy at all times.
The Duke de Maine lay about Arques, from the end of August vntill the midst of September, gayning nothing but losse of his best approoved souldiers, and nine or ten of their Captaines.
This first enterprise against the King did truely presage vnto them what successe they were like to haue in all their attempts to come, wherof followed nothing else but shame and sorrow. This done, the King by easie iourneys drew nigh to Paris, and entred by force the suburbs of S. Iaques, and being advertised that the Duke de Maine was come forth of Picardie, and with all his forces had entered into Paris, hee stayed foure long houres in battell, to see if any of the Leaguers would issue out to fight. Afterward hee departed from Paris, and tooke the townes of Ven|dosme, and Mans, and Falaize, wherein Count Brissac was taken prisoner: also hee recovered Honfleur, a towne vp|on the Sea coast in Normandie, and compelled the Duke de Maine to raise his siege from the towne and fort of Meu|lan. In the beginning of March, the Duke de Maine with all his forces passed over the bridge of Maule, which is a|bout eight miles from Dreux: whereof the King being advertised, provided for his affaires, and the twelfth of the same moneth, set himselfe on the way to goe against his e|nemies. On the thirtith day the King after hee had ordered his army,The battell of Dreux, where|in the Lea|guers were discomfited. made an earnest prayer to God, and looked for battell, but there were nothing but skirmishes, wherein the Leaguers had the worst. The next day the battels ioyned neere to the towne of Dreux, wherein the King obtained a great victory, and overthrew all the footmen of the Lea|guers, which were counted to the number of twelue thou|sand men. Onely the Switzers who cast downe their wea|pons, and yeelded to the King, together with the French|men who were mingled amongst them, had their liues spa|red: also fifteene hundred horsemen of the Leaguers were slaine and drowned, and foure hundred taken prisoners. The Duke de Maine fled towards Dreux, and when he was entred the towne, broke vp the bridge before his owne

people were all come, which was the cause of the death of a great number of his army, especially of the Rutters, of whom a great sort were drowned. In this battell the army had their ioy mixed with sorrow, at the first: for they saw not the King returne, but within a while after, they espyed him comming all stained with the blood of his enemies, not having shed one droppe of his owne (whom they dis|cryed onely by the great plume of white fethers, which hee had in his creast, and that which his palfrey had on his head) all the army gaue hearty thankes to God for his safe|tie, crying with one voyce, God saue the King.
The Duke de Maine and other Captaines of the league being frustrate of their hope, and seeing their army thus spoyled; betooke themselues to their ordinarie shifts, which was to feed the Parisians with fable and lyes: publishing that in the battell they had almost eqall losse, and that the King if hee was not already dead, hee was neare vnto it. But the people being every day more and more ascertained of the truth, began to grudge, and to be desirous of peace, so that the Duke of Maine tooke his iourney towards the Duke of Parma, to obtaine support from him.
The King drew nigh to Paris,The King be|siegeth Paris. and shut vp the passages of the river of Seane, being master of Mance and Poyssie on the one side, and Corbell Melum, and Monterean on the other side of Paris; so that neither from aboue, nor from below, could any provision bee carryed to Paris by the river of Seane: likewise by taking of Lagnay, and the fort of Gonrey, hee stopped the passage of the river of Merue, and by taking Compienge, Creil, and Beaumont, hee stopped the passage of the river of Oisso, or Ayne.
In that populous towne the famine was soone felt, and within the space of three moneths, moe then an hundred thousand dyed in the towne: yet the most part of them stir|red vp by the seditious Preachers, were content rather to en|dure an hundred deathes, then to acknowledge their owne soveraigne King, whom they called an Heretique, and a favourer of them.
The Duke de Maine having obtained promise of support from the Duke of Parma, returned from Beuxellis, whom the King pursued from Laon to Meux, where hee inclosed himselfe betweene two rivers, waiting for the comming of the Duke of Parma. The King hoped for battell so soone as the Duke of Parma was ioyned with the Duke de Maine, but the Duke of Parma got vp to an hill to view his ene|mies army, and after hee had throughly noted it, hee tooke resolution not to fight,The Duke of Parma entreth France for the eliefe of Paris. but to fortifie and entrench his army within a great marrash, and so by meanes of his intrench|ments, hee eschewed the hazard of battell, and came to Pa|ris, and named himselfe the deliverer of it. But after he had stayed a while in Paris, the principall Captaines of the league, began to giue the Duke of Parma thankes for his good will, and entreated him to goe with his people to Breuxelis againe.
This request or secret command, fell out very well for the Duke. For on the one part, his army was seene by all men dayly to waste, and himselfe did plainely behold that hee stood in the midst of an inconstant multitude. There|fore hee dressed himselfe homeward with all possible speed,The Duke of Parma retur|neth home. and the king pursued him to the very frontiers of Artoys. The Duke of Parmaes comming, serued to none other pur|pose but to fill their purses with the gold of Peru, and to entangle and bring their affaires vnto a remedilesse end: for in the beginning of the yeere 1591. the King conti|nued his siege, and the Parisians were fallen into their won|ted distresses, as before. But we leaue for a while, and marke the estate of the rest of the countrey.
In the countrey of Dauphein, Francis de Bonne, Lord of Diguireres,In all other places of France the Leaguers went to ruine. chased the Leaguers out of that part, and be|came master of Grenoble. In Normandy the Duke of Montpensier, wonne Honfleur, and forced the Leaguers to forsake field. In Poictou the Vicount dela Guerche, com|manding over certaine regiments of footmen, and horse|men, and finding about a thousand of naturall borne Spa|niards, newly come from Brittaine to doe some great ex|ployt,

they were all charged by the Baron de la Rotche Pose, and others of the Kings chiefe servitors. In this con|flict la Guerche was compelled to see 300. Gentlemen of his most assured favourers, slaine, and lying on the ground, at the which sight hee was so abashed, that hee fled to the next river, where finding the boat, and thinking to goe over ea|sily, the throng was so great, that the boate and all the pas|sengers sunke to the bottome: La Guerche was there drowned, with a great number of others. There perished in the water and in the fight, moe then seven hundred Spainards: some supposed this losse of the Leaguers to be little lesse then that of Coutras, by reason of the great num|ber of the Nobility that dyed therein. Likewise the Lord Digners overthrew in the plaine of Portcharre, the Duke Savoyes army, commanded by Amedio, the Dukes bastard sonne, and Don Pleneres, a Spanish Captaine, and the Marquis of Treuic, and others. There were slaine vpon that plaine, 2000. and 500. of the Dukes army, and a great number were taken prisoners, being for the most part Gentlemen of command. The booty which was got|ten, amounted to the summe of two hundred thousand crownes.
The next day two thousand Romanes and souldiers of Millaine, who with their Commander, the Earle of Galcot of Belioyense, were saved within the Castle of d' Analon, at length yeelded themselues to the Kings mercy: but the fury of the souldiers could not bee quenched, till they had slaine sixe or seven hundred of them. The rest having white roddes in their hands given them in stead of pasports, were sent home to Italy.
In the meane time the King handled his affaires so bu|sily, that hee had taken the townes of Chartresse and Noy|on, and taken order that Paris should still bee inclosed on every side: so that the great tribute and taxes which were gathered for the bringing in of victuals to the Parisians, and for the maintenance of their troopes, did gleane away their money peece after peece, and brought the people to great

poverty. Likewise the King after the taking of Noyon, sent som of his troops to Normandie, to tame those of Roan, who shewed themselues no lesse obstinate then the Parisi|ans. The Leaguers had none other shift, but againe to cry for ayde of the Duke of Parma: who entred into France the second time,The Duke of Parma entreth France the 2. time in behalfe of the Lea|guers, but with bad successe. with foure thousand footmen, and three thousand horsemen, besides some Italians conducted by S. Fondrat Earle of Mont Martian, and three thousand Switzers. At this his approaching to Roane, the towne of Candebec was yeelded to him, howbeit he did not keep it long: and hee entred into Roane, but made no tarrying there, because his purpose was to set forward to Paris.
The King on the other part, sent to all the neighbour townes, such as Louviers, Mance, Menlan, Vernon, and o|thers, where his garrisons were, that they should march to|wards him, which was speedily performed: so that in sixe dayes, his army grew to more then three thousand horse|men, and six thousand footmen. With this companie the King followed the Duke of Parmaes army, and charged diverse times so roughly, that at one time they lost six hun|dred of their number, another time, two thousand and fiue hundred, and so fled shamefully towardes Paris, and from thence to Brie, and last they came to Artoys: where within few moneths the Duke of Parma with his troopes melted, like waxe in the Sunne. S. Fondrat saw his people also con|founded.
The Kings fa|vourites in di|verse places prosper against the Leaguers.Besides this good successe, the Kings favourites in ma|ny other parts of the Land, still continued prevailing a|gainst their enemies. The Duke of Bouillone Mariscall of France, accompanied with foure hundred horse, and two hundred hagbuziers, onely overthrewe before Beaumont, the Lord of d' Amblise, high Mariscall of Loraine, and the Dukes Lieutenant generall, accompanied with two thou|sand footmen, and eight hundred horsemen. Amblize was slaine in the field, with more then seven hundred others: his artillery wonne, all his corners and ensignes taken: and 400. Lance-knights sent away vnarmed.
In Languedocke Duke de Ioyense, the brother of him who was slaine at Coutras, had besieged Montaban, and Vil|lemure, but Thimenes issuing out of Villemure, constrai|ned the Duke to forsake the held, with the losse of three thousand men, three canons, and two culverines. The bridge which the Duke had builded over Tie was cut vp, and was almost the cause of all their deaths. Ioyense him|selfe overcome with dispaire in this distresse, was heard to vomit out these desperate words. Farewell my great canons, ha, I renounce God, I runne this day an high fortune: and therewith desperatly hee plunged himselfe horse and all in|to the river Tae.The death of D. Ioyense. This was the miserable end of this cruell, proude, and blasphemous young Duke, who was much la|mented of the Leaguers: for whom hee had done many great exployts.
The Kings army in that part consisting of fiue hundred horsemen, and two thousand and fiue hundred hagbuziers, besides those that were within the towne of Villemure, withdrew themselues in good order vnto their garrisons, after they had given thankes to God, for so prosperous a victory. After all those successes which God granted to the King,The defection of the King from religion. followed his defection from his religion, in the moneth of Iuly, Anno, 1593. The Archbishops, Bishops, and Doctors of Sorbon, were appointed to meet at Mance, the fifteenth of Iuly, without any mention of the Prote|stants Ministers, who were before put from the King. By whose perswasion the King was induced to heare and see masse sung, in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Denise, the fiue and twentith day of Iuly. All this asswaged not the fu|rie of the Leaguers, who still continued in their wonted malice against the King, and stirred vp a wicked man, cal|led Peter Burrier,Peter Burrier stirred vp to slay the King. alias, Bar, borne at Orleance, to slay the King. This man was committed to prison at Melun, the sixe and twentith day of August, where hee confessed that hee was seduced by a Capushan Fryer at Lyons, and by a Curat and Vicar of Paris, and also by a Iesuit, closely to fol|low the King, and to murther him with a two edged knife,

which also was found about him: He was drawne through the streets of Melun, where then the King was; they cut off his right arme holding the murthering knife therein, and after burned the same: also his armes, legs, and thigh|bones were broken vpon a wheele, where he languished cer|taine houres till hee dyed.
The King seeing that the malice of his enemies still con|tinued, resolued no longer to beare the same, wherefore hee caused a declaration to be imprinted and published in the beginning of the yeere,The K. oppo|seth himself to the Leaguers. 1594. containing an Oration of the mischiefes and vnfaithfull practises of the Leaguers. Prescribing a moneths liberty as well to the chiefe of the Leaguers, as to the clergie, cities, townes, communalties, yea, and to all men generally within the same, to ac|knowledge him their King, and to submit themselues to his gouernment. The time once past, hee would revoke his grace  favour, accounting them to be rebells, and guilty of high treason, for contempt of his Kingly offer.
The report of this declaration, and the preparations which the King made to chastise their stubborne opini|ons: amazed the very principall of the league, and the most part of the rebellious townes and commons. The towne of Meux in Brie,Diuers towns yeeld them|selues to the King. a small iourney from Paris, yeelded thems|selues to the King, the eleventh of Ianuary: and by a pithy letter, exhorted the Parisians to follow their example. Soone after the cities of Orleance, Lyons, Roane, Poicters, Bourges, Haure de grace, Pontean de Mervernueil at Perche, Pointoise, Riome in Anergne, Peron, and mondidier in Picardie, were received in favour: and those of Annens and Abeveil, after they had remained neuters a while, short|ly after acknowledged their soveraigne King. Last of all, the towne of Paris yeelded to the King, in the moneth of March. Wherein it is to bee noted, that the Kings troopes entred so peaceably into the towne, that within two houres after, the shops were all set open, and the towne appeared so peaceable, as if there had never beene any change. In Pi|cardie the towne of laon was fortified against the King, by

the Spaniards forces,  yet was compelled to yeeld Soissons and La Fere, which were possessed by the Duke de Maine, and the Spaniards would not yeeld: and the towne and fort of Blauel in Britannie was also fortified against the King. But now seeing the League inclined to an hastie ruine, the last refuge was by horrible treason, to cut off Henry the fourth,Iohn Castill stirred vp by the Leaguers to murther the King, is disappointed of his purpose as they had done Henry the third before. To this ef|fect they stirred vp a young stripling, named Iohn Castill, a|bout 18. or 19. yeeres of age, to slay the King as he was re|turning from Picardie to Paris. Thus vpon the 27. day of December, Anno, 1584 as the King was readie booted and spurred to returne from Picardie to Paris, within a chamber at Lououre, this stripling went into the chamber amongst the presse, and as the King was busily occupied in receiuing his Nobles, and in a princely manner kissing them for his farewell, suddenly he would haue stricken the King in the bodie with a knife he had in his hand. But by reason his Maiesty was very readie to take vp the Lords which were on their knees before him, in his stooping he strucke him in the face on the vpper iaw on the right side, therewithall cutting out one of his teeth. Presently this miserable caitiue was ta|ken, and after examination, vnderstanding that he was a scholler of the Iesuites, the King said, And must it needs be that the Iesuits must be confounded by my mouth.
This parricide being brought to prison, freely declared all the circumstances of his euill intent, discouering many of the Iesuits secret practises. Amongst many other things he remembred he heard the fathers of that holy societie say, that it was lawfull to kill the King,Note. that he was excommuni|cated out of the Church, that he was not to be obeyed nor taken for their King, vntill such time as he was allowed by the Pope. The Court of Parliament condemning this Ca|stile of Treason in the highest degree, caused him to be brought naked in his shirt before the principall part of the Cathedrall Church in Paris, holding in his hand a taper of waxe, lighted, there to confesse his haynous sinne, asking forgiuenesse of God, the King, and the lawes, which done,

he was conveyed to the place of execution, carrying in his hand the murthering knife,The Parlia|ments decree about the exe|cution of Ca|still, and the Iesuits of Clermonts banishment wherewith he intended to mur|ther the King: the which was there first cut off, his flesh pul|led off with hot burning Pincers, both from his armes and thighs; after that, his bodie was drawne in peeces with foure horses, and cast into the fire and consumed to ashes, and the ashes scattered in the winde. Likewise the said Court of Par|liament ordeined, that all the Priests and Schollers of Cler|mont colledge, and all other of the same societie of Iesus, to be holde and reputed as corrupters of youth, disturbers of the publique peace, enemies to the King and State: and to avoyde within three dayes after the Proclamation of this edict, out of Paris and all other townes and places where their Colledges are, and within 15. dayes after, out of the kingdome, on paine, if being found after the time prefixed, to be punished as guiltie of the said crime of treason.
Besides these horrible troubles that were in France in the dayes of this Emperour Rodulph, the King of Spaine prepa|red a great armie to invade the Realme of England. This ar|mie was counted invincible, and of most admirable prepa|ration,The prepara|tion of the Spanish nauie Anno 1588. it conteined an hundreth and thirtie Ships, wherein were as many Regiments, having an hundreth seuentie two Ensignes, and 20000. fighting men, besides the number of 1000. moe that had nothing to doe with armes; also their furniture and provision was exceeding great, for they had 11000. Quintals of Biscat. 14170. Pipes of Wine. 6500. Quintals of Bacon. 3433. Quintals of Cheese. 8000. Quin|tals of dried fish of all sorts. 6320, Bushels of Beanes and Pease. 11398. Roues and Measures of oyle. 23870. Roues of Vineger. And 11850. Pipes of fresh Water: besides the victu|als and necessaries of houshold, that were in great number, and of all sorts. The armes reserued for store were 7000. Caleeuers,  their furnitures, a 1000. Muskets, a 1000. Lan|ces, a 1000. Partisants and Halbards. 6000. Pikes. More Pick|axes, Payles, and other instruments then would serue for 700. Pioners. With this number and in this manner being prepared, the armie departed out of Lisbone, vnder the con|duct

of the Duke de Medina Gidonia, assisted with 22. Lords, of estate, councell, and experience. But it had searce entred into the sea, sailing toward the Gnongnes in Gallicia, but there arose a storme with so great force,A storme co|traineth the nauie to put to land. that the Navie was constrained to put to land, and there to stay till winde and weather serued: hauing lost in that storme three Gallies of Portugalls, and many of them so scattered and bruised, that they were not seruiceable for that Voyage. The storme be|ing calmed and the weather good, about the 22. of Iulie, the Generall caused them to set saile so fortunately, that in lesse then fiue dayes after, they descryed the point or end of Cornwall, and at the same time they were seene from Plim|mouth by the Admirall of England, and S^r Francis Drake, Vice admirall,The Spani Navie ouer|throwne. who made them turne their faces, and gaue them such a skirmish, and that so neere, that the Ships were in disorder, and a great Gallion lost, wherein was found a part of the treasures that the Armie brought with it, and all the instructions which the Duke de Medina had, and what he should doe, having Conquered England. At the last the Navie got as farre as Callis, where it should haue ioyned with the Duke of Parma; but the Armie of England that fought to impeach it, followed it, and that so nie, that it was forced to leaue her Anchor-hold,  confusedly to flie away. Their principall Gallias, among other Vessels, was by the streames cast vpon the sands hard by the hauen of Callis,  there with his Ordnance was left for the governor of Callis. After this, it made toward the North seas, passing betweene Norway and Scotland, and so toward Ireland, where those northerne seas, being as then risen according to the time of yeare, were very tempestuous, and vsed the rest of the armie very hardly, for it drowned and sunke 17. great Vessels vpon the coast of Ireland, and spoyled, broke, and ouerthrew diuers others, in such manner, that of 130. Shippes, there were scarcely 30. that returned to SPAINE.
Here endeth the first Booke.






THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF the Church, Containing a briefe Ca|talogue of the beginnings, proceedings, and deaths of all the Bishops, Popes, Patri|arches, Doctors, Pastors, and other learned men in Europe, Asia, and Africa, since Christs dayes vntill this present.

CENTVRIE I.

Of Apostles.
_AFter the Lords resurrecti|on,Apostles. his twelue Apostles were in|dued with grace from aboue, and sent forth to convert all people to the obedience of Christ: whose travels the Lord so wonderfully blessed, that within a short time many thousands of all Nations  Languages, whom God had ap|pointed to eternall life, were converted to the faith of Christ.

This conquest that Christ made by the Ministrie of twelue poore and contemptible men,Note. is more worthie to be called a Conquest; then all the valiant exployts of Cyrus, Alexan|der, Caesar, and other Conquerours. For he made this con|quest by a small handfull of poore and infirme Disciples; also he conquered not onely the bodies of men, but also their hearts to his obedience: and finally, he made this con|quest, not by shedding of peoples blood, but by Preaching of his owne death, and bloodshed for the redemption of ma|ny. Neither conquered he free men, to make them slaues, as other Conquerours had done: but they who were slaues indeed to Sathan, vnto them he gaue the libertie of the sonnes of God.
Now these twelue Apostles the more faithfully they la|boured in the worke of their ministrie, the worse were they entreated by the vnthankefull world,Ioh. 16. according as Christ had foretold. The most part of them were put to death, the rest were not free of many painefull sufferings and rebukes, which they willingly sustained for the name of Christ. Pe|ter and Paul are supposed to haue beene martyred at Rome: Andrew to haue beene crucified in Achaia: Mathew behea|ded in Ethiopia: Iames the brother of Iohn was beheaded by Herod in Iudea:Act. 12. Iames the sonne of Alpheus, called Iustus, was throwne downe headlong from the Pinacle of the Tem|ple:Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 32. Ierom. Cat. srip. eccles. Simon of Canaan was crucified in the dayes of Traianus, being an hundreth and twentie yeeres old, when he suffered Martyrdome. Bartholomew is said to haue beene martyred in Armenia: and Simon Zelotes, to haue beene crucified in Brittaine: Iohn died at Ephesus: Philip in Hierapolis, Functi|us calleth the Towne Hierosopolis:Ierom. catl. sr. p. eccles. Iudas Lebbeus, at Edessa: Thomas in India: and Matthias in Ethiopia.



Of Evangelists.
AS concerning the Evangelists,Evangelists. they were fellow-labou|rers with the Apostles in the worke of Christ, and were also partakers with them of Christs sufferings. The Evange|list Marke died in Alexandria.Func. chron. Ierom. Luke in Bithynia, others say in Constantinople. Philip, who first was a Deacon, and afterward an Evangelist, died in Cesarea. Barnabas in the Isle of Cyprus. Where Timothy and Titus did compleate their dayes, it is not certainly knowne. Chytraeus opinion about Timothy I haue alreadie declared. Ierome supposeth that Titus died in Candie. The successours of the Apostles and Evangelists, are not to be reckoned as the successours of Emperours: because he who next obtaineth the Emperiall Diadem and place of gouernment,The true suc|cessours of the Apostles. is counted the successour of the last Emperour: but he who obtaineth a faithfull Pastors chaire, and teacheth a doctrine contrarie to that which a faithfull Pastor hath taught, is to be counted a grieuous Wolfe stepped vp into his roome.Act. 20. And Nazian|zenus calleth such a man an adversarie, standing vp in the place of a faithfull Pastor, darkenesse succeeding to light, a tempest succeeding to calme weather, and madnesse ob|teining place where right reason was wont to be.Nazia. in orat. in laudem A|thanaf. And therefore those Bishops and Doctors following, who keepe inviolably that forme of wholesome doctrine which they receiued from the Apostles, these, I say, alone are to be counted true successours of the Apostles.


Bishops of Rome.
OF this number,Linus. was Linus Bishop of Rome, who after the martyrdom of Peter Paul governed that Church

ten yeeres, three moneths, and twelue dayes. Eusebius thin|keth this is that same Linus, of whom the Apostle Paul wri|teth in the last Chapter of his second Epistle to Timothy: Eubulus  Pudens  Linus,Euseb. l. 3. c. 2. and Claudia salute thee.
After him succeeded Anacletus, and gouerned nine yeeres, three moneths, and ten dayes; and after him Clmens ruled eleuen yeeres; Eusebius also thinketh, this is that Clemens, of whom the Apostle Paul writeth to the Philippians,Chap. 4. ver. 3. Yea I be|seech thee faithfull yoke-fellow, helpe those women that laboured with me in the Gospell, with Clement also and with other my fel|low labourers,Ignatius. whose names are in the booke of life. Ignatius Bi|shop of Antioch, had his heart so inflamed with the loue of Christ, that when his dissolution was neere approaching, he said to the Romanes: now doe I begin to be the Disciple of Christ, I couet for nothing that can be seene with bodily eyes, to the end that I may enioy Iesus Christ: let the fire, the crosse, the beasts, the breaking of bones, convulsion of members, and bruising of the whole bodie, and the tor|ments of the Deuill sease vpon me, prouided I may be par|taker of Iesus Christ. He was deuoured with beasts in the dayes of Traianus, and so patiently indured death for the Name of Iesus, that he allured the deuouring beasts to ap|proach neere vnto his bodie, that it being ground with the teeth of beasts,Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 36. Papias. he might be found as fine flowre in the house of his Father.
About the same time also flourished Papias, Bishop of Hierapolis, who was a man of great authoritie, because of his neerenesse to the Apostles dayes: yet leaning more to the report of the doctrine of the Apostles, then to the certaintie of their owne writings, he fell into the errour of the Chilia|stes, who imagined that Christ should raise the godly first, and liue with them a thousand yeeres in this earth, in all kinde of delicate pleasures.Euseb. l. 3. c. 39.




CENTVRIE II.

Bishops of Rome.
_IN this second Centurie the Bishops of Rome for the most part proued faithfull and worthie seruants of Christ.Bishops of Rome. A great number of them were baptized with the Baptisme of Christ, and dranke of the cup that Christ dranke of, and were drenched with their owne blood, and they watered the Church of Rome with the streames of their blood, as Egypt is watered and made fruitfull with the invndation of Nilus; men of blessed remembrance: Damasus writeth that from Saint Peter to Telesphorus, all the Bishops of Rome were Martyrs.Note. Others added, that vntill the dayes of Sylvester, who liued in the time of the raigne of Con|stantine, all the Bishops of Rome had the honour of martyr|dome. But in these hyperbolicke speeches, neither hath the distinction betweene a Martyr and a Confessour beene rightly considered, (albeit well marked by Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 5. cap. 2.) neither hath the history of the raigne of An|toninus Pius beene rightly pondered, in whose dayes Hygi|nus and Pius liued, and were not slaine for the testimony of Christ. Alwayes it is an envious minde that holdeth backe from worthie men their due prayse and commendation, both in doing of good and patient suffering of euill for Christs sake.
In rehearsing the names of the Romane Bishops, I thought meete to follow Ireneus and Eusebius rather then Platina. In the first Centurie after the martyrdome of Peter and Paul, Linus, Anacletus, and Clemens, were teachers of the Romane Church. In the second Centurie, follow Evaristus,

Alexander 1. Xistus 1. Telesphorus, Hyginus, Pius 1. Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherius, and Victor. This Victor must needes be called the 13. Bishop of Rome, if Eleutherius be the 12. ac|cording to the computation of Ireneus lib. 3. cap. 3. Onuphri|us according to his owne custome, giueth more credite to olde parchments, that he hath found in the Vatican Biblio|theke, then to any auncient Father. He beginneth earely to distinguish Cletus from Anacletus, that by taking libertie to thrust in one moe in the first Centurie, he may haue the greater boldnesse to thrust out another of the feminine sexe in another Centurie. For it grieueth him to the heart to heare this thing so vniversally affirmed, and to see the penne of Platina blushing, when he writeth of Iohannes the eight, he maketh little contradiction to that setled and receiued o|pinion of the feminine Pope. But I leaue Onuphrius spor|ting with his owne conceits, as a Pleasant doth with his owne fingers, when no other body will keepe purpose with him. Euaristus finished the course of his ministration in eight yeeres.Alexander martyred. Euseb. eccles. hist. lib 4. c 1. Xistus marty|red. Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 5. Telesphorus  martyr. Euseb. l. 4. c. 10 Alexander who is in expresse words called the fift B. of Rome, after the death of Peter and Paul, gouerned ten yeeres, and suffered martyrdome in the dayes of Adrian, as Platina writeth. After him Xistus 1. continued ten yeeres, and died a martyr, Platin. Telesphorus the 7. Bishop of Rome after the dayes of the Apostles liued in that ministration e|leuen yeeres, and was honoured with martyrdome. Hygi|nus An. 4. And Pius the 1. ministred 11. yeeres. These two suffered not martyrdome, because their lot was to liue in the calme dayes of a meeke Emperour Antoninus Pius. Anicetus ministred in that office 11. yeeres,Anicetus a martyr. Euseb. l. 4. c. 14 with whom Po|lycarpus B. of Smyrna, conferred at Rome concerning the obseruation of the festiuitie of Easter day. He concluded his life with the glorious crowne of Martyrdome. To him suc|ceeded Soter, An. 9. After him Eleutherius, An. 15. In whose time Lucius King of the Britons desired that he and his people should be baptized and receiued into the fellow|ship of Christians: to whom Eleutherius sent Fugatius and Damianus, who satisfied the desire of the King, and his peo|ple,

so they were baptized and counted Christians.Platira de vi|ta Eleuthij. The rasnsse of Victor. After him Victor, An. 10. He intended to haue excommunicated all the Churches of the East, because they kept not the festi|uitie of Easter day, conforme to the custme of the Church of Rome, but rather vpon the day wherein the Iewes were accustomed to eat their Paschall Lambe. But this rashnesse of Victor was somewhat abated by the graue and prudent counsell of Ireneus, B. of Lyons, who admonished Victor, that there was no lesse discrepance of customes concerning keeping of Lent, then was concerning the keeping of Easter day, yet was not the vnitie of the Church violated nor rent asunder for this discrepance. And when Polycarpus B. of Smyrna came to Rome, in his conference with Anicetus nei|ther of them could perswade the other to change the cu|stome of keeping of dayes which they had receiued by tra|dition of their predecessours. Notwithstanding they kept fast the bond of Christian fellowship,Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 5. cap. 26. and Anicetus admit|ted Polycarpus to the communion of the Romane Church, and they departed in peace one from another.
Quadratus B. of Athens,Of other Do|ctours and Preachers. liued in the dayes of Adrian. This Emperour vpon a certaine time wintered in Athens, and went to Eleusina, and was , that is to say, initiate into all the mysteries of Grecia. This fact of the Emperour gaue encouragement to those who hated Christians without allowance of the Emperours commandement to vexe the Christians. Concerning his apologie for Christians giuen into the Emperour, together with the apologie of Aristides, a learned Philosopher and eloquent Orator in Athens,Ierom. Catal. scrip. eccles. wee haue spoken already in the description of the life of Adrian.
Agrippas Castor,Agrippas Ca|stor. a very learned man answered to the books of the Heretique Basilides, who with the noueltie of barba|rous and vncouth words, troubled the hearts of rude and ig|norant people, talking of a god whom he called Arbraxas, and of his Prophets Barcab and Barcob, words inuented by himselfe to terrifie simple people. Such delusions of Satan Quintinists in our dayes,Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 7. an ignorant race of braine sicke fel|lowes haue vsed. And so the blind led the blind, and both fell into the ditch.
In this age,Hegesippus. Euseb. l. 4. c. 11 Hegesippus of the nation of the Iewes was con|verted vnto the faith of Christ, and came to Rome in the dayes of Anicetus, and continued vntill the dayes of Eleu|therius. But for what cause he came to Rome, or in what part of the world he bestowed the trauels of his ministrie, no mention is made, neither by Eusebius, nor by any other an|cient Writer, no not by Ierome himselfe, a most accurate explorator of all antiquities.
Melito,Melito. Euseb. l. 4. c. 13. B. of Sardis, a famous towne in Lydia, wrote an apologie for the Christians to the Emperour Antoninus Phi|losophus, whom Eusebius calleth Marcus Aurelius Verus. His apologie was written with Christian freedome and courage: for he was not afraid to declare to the Emperour what good successe Augustus Caesar had, in whose dayes Christ was borne, and what vnprosperous successe, Nero and Domitian had,Hist. Magdeb. Euseb. l. 5. c. 24. who persecuted the Christians. Eusebius calleth him an Eunuch.
In the fourth persecution died Iustinus Martyr,Iustinus a martyr. accused and delated by Crescens. He was converted to Christs Reli|gion by the trauels of an old man, whom he supposed for his grauitie to haue beene a Philosopher, but he was a Chri|stian.The manner of Iustinus his conversion. This ancient man counselled Iustinus to be a diligent reader of the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, who spake by diuine inspiration, who knew the veritie, and were not couetous of vaine glory, neither were they dashed with feare, whose doctrine also was confirmed with miraculous workes, which God wrought by their hands. Aboue all things willed him to make earnest prayers to God to open vnto him the ports of true light, because the truth cannot be comprehended,Iustin Dialog. cum Trepb. except the Father of light, and his sonne Christ Iesus giue vnto vs an vnderstanding heart. He wrote two bookes of apologie for Christians to the Emperour Antoninus Pius, and to his sonnes, and the Senate of Rome. In the second booke of his apologie he declareth that Chri|stians were put to death, not for any crime they had commit|ted, but onely for their profession. In witnesse whereof, if a|ny of them would denie his Christian profession, straight

way he was absolued,Iustin. apol. 2. because there was no other thing wherewith he was charged.
In this same persecution also suffered the holy martyr of Christ,Polycarus martyred. Polycaryus, B. of Smyrna. He was willing to haue remained in the towne of Smyrna, but by the earnest sup|plications of friends, was mooued to leaue the towne, and lurke secretly in the countrie.Polycaryus his dreame be|fore his ap|prehension. Three dayes before hee was apprehended by his persecuters, he dreamed that his bed was set on fire and hastily consumed, which he tooke for a diuine aduertisement, that he behooued to glorifie God by suffering the torment of fire. His conference with the Ro|mane Deputie, and how he refused to deny Christ, whom he had serued fourescore yeeres, and euer found him a gra|tious Master: also how he refused to sweare by the fortune of Caesar, and how patiently he suffered death for the name of Christ,Eusb. lb. 4. cap. 15. Ieneus. Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 5. this history is set downe at large by Eusebius.
Ireneus B. of Lyons in France, and successour to Photinus, a martyr and Disciple of Polycarus in his youth, flourished in the dayes of the Emperour Commodus, whose meeke con|uersation and peaceable carriage answered to his name , that is, peaceable,  made his name to be in great account amongst Christians. How he pacified the furie of Victor, B. of Rome, and the pernicious schisme springing vp in the Church of God vpon very small occasion, it hath beene alreadie declared. He lacked not his owne infirmities and errours,Iren. lib. 5 con. Valen. euen in doctrine. He was intangled with the errour of the Chiliasts. He supposed that as Christ being thirtie yeere old was baptized, so likewise he began to teach when he was fortie yeere old, and suffered when he was fif|tie, because he came to saue all, and therefore he would taste of all the ages of mankinde.Iren. l. 2. c. 34. Yet is this opinion repugnant to the narration of the foure Euangelists.
Clemens Alexandrinus liued in the dayes of the Emperour Commodus.Clemens Alex|andrinus. He was the disciple of Pantenus. These two seeme to be the authors of Vniversities and Colledges: For they taught the grounds of Religion, not by Sermons and Ho|milies to the people, but by catecheticall doctrine to the lear|ned

in the schooles.Bcolc. chron. Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 11. This Clemens esteemed too much of tra|dition, like as Papias did, of whom we spake in the former Centurie, whereby it came to passe, that he fell into many strange  absurd opinions, directly repugnant to the written word of God: affirming that after our calling to the know|ledge of the truth, possibly God may grant to them that haue sinned, , but if we sin ofter then once or twise, there is no more renuing by repentance, or pardon for sin,Strom. lib. 2. but a fearefull expectation of iudgement. And in his 4. booke of Strom. as it were forgetting his own rigorous sen|tence against those who sinne ofter then once or twise after their illumination with the light of God, he saith, , that is to say, whether here or els-where (viz. creatures do repent) no place is void of the mercy of God. In which words he would insinuate, that those who repent either in this world or els-where, (that is in the world to come) may possibly ob|taine fauour at Gods hand: nothing can be written more re|pugnant both to the word of God, and also to his own fore|mentioned opinion. Many other worthy Preachers and learned men flourished in this Centurie, whose names of purpose are pretermitted. In Athens, Publius  Athenagoras: In Corinth, Primus, Dionysius, and Bacchilus: In the Isle of Candie, Philippus and Pinytus: In Antiochia, Hieron, Theophi|lus,Hist. Magdeb. Maximus, Serapion. In Ierusalem before the daies of the Emperour Adrian, the Bishops of Ierusalem were of the na|tion of the Iewes. But after the daies of Adrian who banished the Iewes from their natiue soile, Christian Preachers of o|ther nations were Bishops in Ierusalem, such as Marcus, Cas|sianus,Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 12. Publius, Maximus, Iulianus, Capito, Valens, Dolichianus, Narcissus: the most part of all these liued in this Centurie, but Narcissus with some others, are knowne to haue liued in the dayes of Seuerus the fift persecuter, and some space after him.Euseb. lib. 6. cap. . But to write of all other worthy Preachers  Doctours in particular, it were an infinite labour, and far surmounting the abilitie of these ecclesiastick Writers, who wrote in anci|cient times, and much more our abilitie who liue in a latter age.




CENTVRIE III.

Bishops of Rome.
_TO Victor succeeded Zephyrinus the 14.Zephyrinus. Platin. Euseb. 6.21. Bi|shop of Rome, who liued in that charge eight yeeres, seauen moneths, ten dayes. Eusebius attributeth vnto him 18. yeeres, so vncertaine is the computation of the yeeres of the gouernment of the Bishops of Rome. Eusebius writeth nothing of his decretall Epistles, and these that are forged by late Wri|ters are foolish and ridiculous. Consecration of the holy cup to be in a vessell of glasse onely. A Bishop to be accused before honest Iudges, twelue in number, whom the Bishop himselfe shall chuse if need be. Honest and vnspotted wit|nesses to be heard in this cause no fewer then 72. conforme and aboue the number of those 70. Disciples whom Christ adioyned as fellow-labourers in Preaching with his Apo|stles. And finally, that no definitiue sentence should be pro|nounced against a Bishop, vntill the time his cause were heard of the Patriarch of Rome. This is but a mocking of the Church of God, to attribute such smelling pride, such vnaccustomed formes of Iudicatory, such defencing armour fencing  guarding vnrighteous men against iust deserued punishment, to the simplicitie of an ancient Church, hum|bled vnder the crosse, and fighting vnder the yoke of heauie and long-lasting afflictions. These false and forged decretall Epistles, altogether vnknowne to the Fathers, who liued be|fore the dayes of Constantine,Note. will procure one day a decree  sentence of wrath against those, who haue giuen out new in|tended lies, vnder the names of ancient and holy Fathers.
The canons of the Apostles (albeit a booke falsely attri|buted to the Apostles) doe agree better with Scripture, then

the constitution of Zephyrinus; for the scripture saith, That by the mouth of two or three witnesses, euery word shall be confirmed.Mat. 18.16 The canons of the Apostles say, , that is, Let not an Heretique be admitted to beare witnes against a Bishop, neither yet one witnesse onely, albeit, he be faithfull:Canon. Apost. cap. 74. because that by the mouth of two or three witnes|ses, euery word shall be confirmed. The writer of the canons of the Apostles, had some remembrance of the words of Scripture: but the forger of the decretall Epistles of Zephy|rinus is like vnto a ship-man, who hath hoised vp his saile and aduanced his ship so far into the sea, that he hath lost the sight of land and townes, as the Poet speaketh, Provehimur Pelago, terraque vrbsque recedunt. Surely this lying fellow, who euer he hath bin, that hath written this supposititious decretall Epistle of Zephyrinus, he hath hoised vp his saile, and is so bent to lie, that he hath lost both sight  remem|brance of the words of holy Scripture.
Callistus the 15.Callistus. Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 21. Bishop of Rome continued in his charge fiue yeeres. Platina saith 6. yeeres, 10. moneths, 10. dayes. The fable of Pope Damasus, who affirmeth that Callistus builded a Church to the honour of the Virgin Mary, be|yond Tyber, is reiected by Platina himselfe, because the hy|storie of the time cleerely prooueth,Note. that in the dayes of Se|uerus, and his sonnes, the conuentions of the Christians could not haue beene in magnificke temples, but rather in obscure chappels, or subterraneall places, so that the multi|plied number of lies written of the Bishops of Rome, who liued in this age, and the decretall Epistles falsly attributed vnto them, plainly proue, that the garment of antiquitie, vn|der the lap whereof Papists would so gladly lurke, is altoge|ther wanting to them.
Vrbanus 1. was the 16. Bishop of Rome.Vrbanus. Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 22. He continued in his office 8. yeeres. Platina 4. yeeres, 10. moneths, 12. dayes. Of his martyrdome Eusebius maketh no mention. Others who record his martyrdome, are not certaine in what Em|perours dayes he was martyred.
I proceede to his successour Pontianus the 17. B. of Rome. He continued in his charge 9. yeeres,Pontianus. Platin. 5. months, 2. dayes. Eu|seb. saith 6. yeeres. He was banished to the Isle Sardinia where he died. Of the two decretall epistles ascribed vnto him, the second is general written to al men who feare and loue God,  the very first words of it proue it to be false  forged: Pon|tianus sanct  uniuersals Ecclesia Episcopus, c. that is, Ponti|anus B. of the holy vniuersal Church, to al them who feare  loue God,Tom. 1. Cncil. wisheth welfare. Such magnificke stiles as these were not as yet in vse,  when they crept into the Church af|terward, they were giuen by persons who admired the ver|tues of some singular and rare men, such as Cyprian and Athanasius and Eusebius: but no man did vsurpe such proud  arrogant ti
tles of dignitie in his owne writings directed to other Christians, and therefore the learned reject this epistle as composed by some late vnlearned and flattering fellow. After Pontianus succeeded Anterus the 18. B. of Rome,Anterus. Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 29. to whom Eusebius assigned but one month of continuance in his ministrie: Damasus assigneth to him 12. yeeres: Platina 11. yeeres, 1. month, 12. dayes: and this diuersitie of counting cannot be reconciled.Fabianus. Next to Anterus succeeded Fabianus the 19. B. of Rome, vpon whose head a doue lighted when the people were consulting concerning the election of a B. therefore with full consent of the whole co~gregation he was declared to be their B. The people at this time were so farre from being secluded fro~ giuing their consent to the election of him who should be ordained their Pastour, that the con|sent of the people had the sway
in the election of Pastours, Func. Chron,  Commentar.Func. Chron.  Commentar. Platin. de vitis He suffered martyrdom vnder the raigne of Decius the 7. great persecuter, after hee had continued in his office 14. yeeres, 11. months, 11. daies: Many constitutions made by him are cited by Gratianus and inserted Tom 1. Concil.Tom. 1. Concil. One of them I cannot passe by. We constitute that vpon euery Lords day the oblation of the altar shall be made by euery man  woman both of bread  wine,Note. to the end that by these oblations they may be deliuered fro~ the heapes of their sinnes. First marke in this constitution that the bread and

wine which the people brought with them vpon the Lords day, for the ministration of the holy communion is called the oblation of the altar, the table whereupon the bread and wine were laide, was called the alter: the bread and the wine are called the offering or the sacrifice, because part of it was distributed in the holy communion, to keepe a me|moriall of the Lords death, and the rest was giuen to the sustentation of the poore, and in that respect also it was cal|led a sacrifice as he scripture speaketh,Heb. 13 16. To do good  to distri|bute forget not, for with such sacrifices God is pleased. The last part of the decreet is blasphemous and falsly attributed to Fabian: because the sinnes of men and women, who beleeue and repent, are forgiuen onely for the merite of that bloodie sacrifice which the Lord Iesus offered vpon the Crosse for our sins. But our furnishing of elements to the co~munion,  sustentation of the poore cannot merite forgiuenes of sins.
The successour of Fabianus was Cornelius the 20.Cornelius. A councel at Rome against Novatus Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 43. Bishop of Rome. He had a great strife against Nouatus and his com|plices. He assembled a Councell at Rome of 60. Bishops, be|sides Elders and Deacons, by whom the heresie of Nouatus was condemned: and the Nouatians were separated from the fellowship of the Church. Cornelius was ba~ished from Rome by the Emperour Decius, and sent to a towne in Hetruria called Centum-cellae where hee had great comfort by the mutuall letters that passed betweene him and Cyprian Bi|shop of Carthage. When the Emperour got knowledge of this, he sent for Cornelius, and accused him as a man who not onely despised the worshipping of the gods,  was disobedi|ent to the Emperours commandement, but also that he was a trafficker against the estate of the empire by receiuing and sending letters beyond sea. Cornelius answered that he wrote matters pertaining to Christ,  the saluation of mens soules, and not of matters belonging to the estate of the empire. Notwithstanding the Emperour Decius commanded that hee should be scourged with plumbats (this was a sort of grieuous whip) and afterward that hee should be led to the Temple of Mars with commandement to put him to

death,The martyr|dome of Cor|nelius. Platin. de vita. Euseb lib. 7. cap 2. Lucius. if he refused to worship the image of Mars. Thus was Cornelius beheaded for the name of Christ, after hee had go|uerned. 2. yeeres, 3. daies. Or as Eusebius writeth, 3. yeares.
Lucius the 21. Bishop of Rome was successour to Corneli|us,  continued in the gouernement of the Church of Rome 3. yeeres, 3. months, 3. daies, Platin. Euseb. 8. months, lib. 7. cap. 2. One decretall epistle is assigned vnto him, written vnto the Bishoppes of France and Spaine,Platin. Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 2. Tom 1. Concl. wherein hee braggeth that the Bishops of Rome cannot erre in matter of faith: but the ineptitude of a barbarous Latine stile, wherein the Epistle is dited, declareth it hath beene written by an vnlearned Asse, and not by Lucius Bishop of Rome.
Stephanus 22. Bishop of Rome ruled that Church 2 yeeres Platin. 7. yeeres,Stephanus. Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 5. 5. months, 2. dayes. He was greatly commo|ued against Cyprian B. of Carthage, because that by his opi|nion of rebaptizing those who were baptized by Heretikes,Platin. in vit Lucij. the vnitie of the Church of Christ was perturbed and rent, Platina writeth that Cyprian before his martyrdome forsooke his opinion of rebaptizing and was content by imposition of hands according to the custome of the Romane Church to receiue such as had beene baptized by Heretikes. The con|stitution concerning consecrated garments that men in spiri|tuall offices should weare in the Church, and no where else, lest they incurre the like punishment with Baltasar,Dan 5. who a|bused the holy vessels of the house of God, in my opinion is not judiciously attributed by Platina vnto this B. Stephanus: because the ordinance smelleth rather of Iudaisme then of Christian religion, and the reason subioyned to the constitu|tion is altogether impertinent. It was sacriledge indeed and a proud contempt of God in the person of Baltasar, to drinke common wine with his harlots in the vessels of gold dedica|ted to the holy seruice of God, but an holy preacher to walke in the same apparell in the streete wherein he preached and ministred the communion in the Church, this is no sinne nor a thing forbidden by any Apostolike precept. But Pla|tina is dreaming when he ascribeth such sriuolous constituti|ons to a Bishop, preparing himselfe for death: for Platina sup|poseth

that he was martyred in the dayes of Galliexus. Let the reader marke vpon what sandy ground of friuolous con|stitutions (and falsely alledged) Popish faith is grounded. The decree of Stephanus concerning marriage,Tom. 1. Concil.  Gratia no. bearing that the Priests, Deacons,  Subdeacons, of the Oriental Church were coupled in matrimonie, but in the Roman Church no person in a spiritual office from the Bishop to the Subdeacon had libertie to marrie; if it were true, as it is assuredly false, the Orientall Church hath a great commendation, because they would not be wiser then God, and they would not lay the yoke of the ordinances of men vpon the consciences of their Church-men: but prohibition of marriage (which I haue prooued to be a doctrine of deuils) cannot be referred to so ancient a beginning.
The Romane church desirous to be masked with a shewe of antiquitie, they haue attributed Canons to the Apostles which are not found in their writings. Yet it is a shame to the forgers of these canons to be found the principall im|pugners and transgressers of them,cap. 5. , that is to say, A Bishop, elder, or deacon, who vnder pretence of religion putteth away his owne wife, if he cast her off, let him be ex|communicated: and if hee perseuere in so doing, let him be depo|sed. How can this constitution of Stephanus agree with the Canons of the Apostles? Heere I appeale to the consciences of honest and vpright men if they finde not that the lie is not onely repugnant vnto the veritie, but also vnto it selfe. The supposititious Canons of the Apostles, and the sup+posititious constitutions of Stephanus cannot both con|sist. I know what they answere, viz. that the Canons of the Apostles speake of those Bishops, Elders, and Deacons, who had wiues when they were admitted to ecclesiasticall offices, these should not put away their wiues vnder pretence of religion: but concerning others who were vnmarried in the time of their admission the 25. Canon declareth otherwise. ,

that is, to vnmarried men who are promoted to the clergie, we command that if they please they shall marrie, but onely readers and singers, to wit, shall haue this priuiledge. It is an vnsufferable thing to heare such leuitie and inconstancie imputed to the holy Apostles, that they debarred no man from the office of a Bishop, Elder or Deacon, because he was a married man. O but if any man enter vnmarried to be a Bishop, Elder, or Deacon, then hee must not marrie. If marriage had beene an vncleane thing it might haue debarred men from entering into holy offices, but if it be a cleane thing, it cannot exclude them after they haue entred.
The other decreet alledged out of Gratian, dist. 79. Opor|rebat ut haec, c. that by the constitution of Peter and his successors it was ordained, that one of the Cardinall Elders or Deacons should be consecrated to be Bishop of Rome,  no other. Such stiles of preheminence are vnknown to scrip|ture,Xistus. 2. and to the antiquitie of this time. Xistus or Sixtus the 2. of that name, and in number the 23. Bishop of Rome suc|ceeded to Stephanus, and gouerned 2. yeeres, 10. months, 23. dayes.Euseb lib. . cap. 27. And Func. Chron, 11. yeeres, such vncertaintie is in counting the yeeres of their administration. The chaire of Rome through the vehemencie of persecution was vacant without a successour 1. yeere 11. months, 15. dayes, as Dama|sus granteth, and Onuphrius the corrector of Platina cannot denie.Note. If the Bishop of Rome be the head of the Church, then was the Church headlesse almost for the space of two yeeres.
To Xistus 2 succeeded Dionysius 24.Dionysius. Bishop of Rome, and continued in his ministration 9. yeeres, according to the computation of Eusebius. Damasus assigneth vnto him 6. yeeres  2. months, Marianus 6. yeeres and 5. months: such certaintie is in the cheife and principall ground of the Ro|mane faith, concerning the succession of the Romane Bi|shops, that scarse two writers doe agree in one minde concer|ning the time of their succession.
To Dionysius succeeded Felix 1. the 25. Bishop of Rome,Felix 1. Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 32. and gouerned 5. yeeres. He liued in the dayes of Aurelian

the 9. persecuter,Platin. and obtained the honour of martyrdome. In the three supposititious decretall epistles assigned to him, the second epistle written to the Bishops of the Prouinces of France, very sollicitously careth for Bishops that they be not accused by secular men, but with so many caueats, as in effect exempteth them from all accusation. The language wherin the epistle is indited, cannot agree with the ornat stile of the Latin tongue in this age, he being a Romane borne, as, Plati|na writeth. Post quam ipse ab s charitativ conventus fuerit. Ad summos primates causa ejus canonic defertur. Conciliu~ regulariter convocare debebunt, c. The Galilean language manifested not more euidently that Peter was a man of Galile: then the first of these 3. phrases manifesteth that the foresaid epistle was compiled in a time of great barbaritie.Mat. 26.73.
Eutychianus. seb lib 7. cap 2. caius. Euseb lib. 7. cap. 32. Func. chron.Eutychianus the 26. Bishop of Rome followed after Felix 1. Hee~ continued scarce ten months in his ministrie.
Caius the 27. Bishop of Rome succeeded to Eutychianus and continued 15. yeeres. He liued in the dayes of the perse|cution of Dioclesian, and lurked for a time in subterraneall places. In the end he was found out by the persecuters, and put to death, and with his brother Gabinius and his brothers daughter Susanna suffered martyrdome.Platin. de vita. Here it is to be mar|ked that many martyrs died before the edict of horrible per|secution was set forth in the 19. yeere of Dioclesians raigne. For Marcellinus succeeded to Caius,Func. Anno 298. but the cruell edicts of persecution of Dioclesian were not set forth before the 308. yeere of our Lord. Whereby it appeareth eui|dently, that many Christians were put to death before the e|dicts of horrible persecution were renued by the Emperour Dioclesian. So hard was the outward estate of Christians, that they were put to death vpon the warrant of the edicts of Va|lerian and Aurelian, before the edicts of Dioclesian and Maxi|mian came forth. To Caius is attributed the constitution of ecclesiastical orders and degrees, by which men must mount vp to the dignitie of a Bishop.Platin. Dect. Cai. x lib. Pent. Dm. First he must be Ostiarius, next Lector, 3. Exorcista, 4. Acoluthus 5. Subdiaconus, 6. Diaconus, 7. Presbyter, and last of all Episcopus.
This order of ascending by degrees to the dignitie of a Bishop is confidently referred to the constitution of the A|postles: but I say, Beatus qui non credit, that is, happie is he who beleeueth it not.Note. Like as within scripture there is no lie, so likewise without scripture there is no truth in mat|ters of faith, ordering of maners, and appointing of ecclesia|stical offices, all that is necessarie is contained in the written Word of God. But now to performe a part of that which I promised in the end of my treatise of Antiquitie, and to let eue~ry man see what vnlearned Asses they haue been who haue set foorth the fained. decretall epistles of the fathers of this age. In the epistle written by Caius to the Bishop Felix aboue-mentioned, hee saith, If any man, of what dignitie so euer he be, delate such persons (viz. Bishops, Elders, Deacons) for faultes that cannot bee proued, let him vnderstand that by the authoritie of this constitution hee shall be counted infamous. This constitution hath three parts: First, that no ecclesiasticall  1 person should be accused before a secular Iudge. Secondly if  any accusation be intended against Bishop, Elder, or Deacon, it should be qualified by sufficient probation. Thirdly if the accuser succumbe in probation, hee should be counted infa|mous how eminent so euer his dignitie and estate shall be.
The compiler of this supposititious decretal epistle had no consideration of the time wherein Caius liued. It was a time of persecution, Christian Bishops were continually drawne before secular Iudges,  accused of odious crimes whereof they were most innocent: and Caius himselfe was compelled to lurke a long time in a subterraneall caue. At this time to bring in Caius, as it were sitting in a throne, commanding that no Bishop should be accused before a se|cular Iudge,Note. c. what is this else but profusion of words without judgement and vnderstanding? If this decretall e|pistle had beene attributed to Bonifacius 8. Gregorius 7. Alex|ander 3. it had bin a more competent time, and the constitu|tion had seemed more probable to the reader. Moreouer the language is like vnto the matter it selfe. Intelligat jacturam in|famiae se sustinere, in place of, jacturam fam.
Marcellinus. Platin. Func. Chron.Marcellinus the 28. Bishop of Rome succeeded to Caius and ruled 9. yeeres: he fainted in time of the persecution of Dioclesian, and sacrificed to idols, but afterward hee repented as Peter did, and gaue his life for the testimonie of Christ. He who accuseth himselfe, closeth all other mens mouths from accusation of him: hee who truly repenteth, by his repen|tance is restored to all the dignities of the children of God which were lost by sinne: hee who suffered martyrdome for Christ, and he whose body lacked the honour of buriall for the space of 30. dayes, for the cause of Christ onely (I say) his name should be kept in reuerent remembrance as if hee had not fallen.
After Marcellinus succeeded Marcellus the 29. B. of Rome who continued in that Ministration 5. yeere.Marcellus. 6. months 21. dayes. He liued in the dayes of Maxentius, by whom he was enclosed into a filthie stable, to the end that lacking the salu|britie of wholsome aire, he might be destroyed with the filth  stinke of the dung of beast: which thing also came to passe indeed, for he died in the stable. This holy martyr, so long as he liued, he made the stable lik vnto a sanctuarie: for he ne|uer intermitted the holy exercises of prayer,  fasting: and the church when peace was granted to them by the mercy of God, builded a temple in that same place where the sta|ble had beene,Platin. de vitis. wherein Marcellus died. The name of Mar|cellus is pretermitted by Eusebius.
Eusebius.After Marcellus succeeded Eusebius the 30. Bishop of Rome and continued 6 yeeres, 1. month, 3. dayes. In his time Pla|tina writeth that Helena the mother of Constantine found the crosse of Christ. But Onuphrius himselfe is compelled to grant that both Damasus and Platina erred in that narration, because Constantine at this time had no dominion in Syria,Note. neither was he as yet conuerted to the faith of Christ. But the tyrant Maximinus with great crueltie oppressed the Church of Christ in the boundes of Syria and Iudea. And therefore such as read the historie of the primitiue Church, let them read with judgement: because it is an easie thing to erre, if any man giue such vndoubted credit to ecclesiasticall writers as he giueth to sacred scripture.



Of other Preachers and Doctors.
TErtullian a learned Preacher of the African Province,Tertullian.  of the citie of Carthage, a man of a quick  pregnant wit, flourished vnder the raigne of Severus, the fift persecu|ter. When hee came to Rome, hee was not free of the envie and reproaches of the clergie of the Romane Church, and mooved with anger, hee declined to the opinion of the he|retique Montanus, and wrote books against the true Church, such as the volumes following, De pudicitia, De persecutione, De iiunis, De monogamia, De exsasi, lib. 6. and his seventh booke against Apollonius.
This lamentable defection of Tertullian, may bee an ex|ample to all men of great vnderstanding and excellent lear|ning, not to bee puft vp, nor to be high minded, lest they fall into the snare of the divell. For Tertullian wrote learned apologies for the Christians,Ierom. catal. scrip. eccles. Hist. Magd. cent. 3. cap. 10. and mightily confuted the er|rour of Marcion: notwithstanding of all this, hee was high minded, and ioyned himselfe to the opinion of Montanus. If hee had kept himselfe free of this foule spot, hee was wor|thie for his gifts to haue beene counted amongst the most famous Doctors of the Church, after the dayes of the A|postles.
Origen the sonne of Leonides an Egyptian,Origen. was a young man of seventeene yeeres of age, when his father was mar|tyred, in the persecution of Severus. His wit was so preg|nant in his youth, and so capable of all kinde of instructi|on, that his father would often vncover his brest when hee was a sleepe,Hist. Magd. cent. 3. cap. 10. and kisse it, giving thankes to God, who had made him father of so happy a sonne. After his fathers death, hee sustayned himselfe, his mother, and six brethren by keeping a Schoole, for all his fathers goods was confis|cate, for his confession of Christ.
When Origen had spent his young age, the description

of his life, in Greeke saith; , that is, when hee was in his mid-age, the Churches of Achaia vexed with heretiques, sent for him: and as hee was vpon his iourney to Athens, hee went through Palestina, and was ordained to be a Presbyter or Priest, by Alexander Bishop of Ierusa|lem, and Theoctistus Bishop of Caesarea. This fact offended Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria, so highly, that he was full of rage against Origen: and wherefore? because he being a man of Alexandria received ordination to an Ecclesiasticall office, from the Bishops of Ierusalem, and Caesarea.
Note.When Bishops become serious in trifling matters, and haue a greater regarde to their owne glory, then to the ad|vancement of the kingdome of God: then that may bee spoken of them, which Ierome writeth of Demetrius, Qui tanta in eum debacchatus est insania, vt per totum mundum su|per eius nomine scriberet, that is, Hee was so full of rage a|gainst him, that hee replenished the world with writings mentioning the name of Origen. But consider what fault was in Origen, who was craving no ordination: And what fault was in Alexander and Theoctistus, men whose names shall be had in everlasting remembrance. They did nothing of intention to grieue the heart of Demetrius Bishop of A|lexandria, but onely being carefull of the advancement of the kingdome of God, they endeavoured to strengthen the hands of Origen, against the heretickes of Achaia, by con|ferring vnto him, the calling of a Presbyter. No man can iustly offend against me, if I cast in this sentence, as a com|mon admonition to all Preachers, , Let vs not bee ouer serious in ridiculous matters. The name of Origen was so famous, that not onely the Bi|shops of Achaia, sollicited him to come to their bounds for stopping the mouthes of Heretickes, but also hee was sent for at two diverse times to be present at the Councels con|vened in Arabia, against heretickes. Some Heretickes af|ffirmed that the soules of men perish with their bodies, and are raised vp againe in the day of the resurrection,Coment. Func. in Chron. l. 6. with the bodies, whom Origen mightily refuted. Likewise, hee

was present at the Councell in Arabia, gathered against Be|rillus Bishop of Bostra, who denyed that Christ was existent before his manifestation in the flesh, and by the travelles of Origen, Berillus was reclaimed and reduced to the true faith: therefore I reckon him not in the roll of heretickes.Euseb. l. 6. c. 33. Fir|milianus Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, invited Origen to come to Cappadocia, where hee detained him a long time. Likewise Mammea the mother of Alexander the Emperour, sent for him, to come to Antiochia, and had him in reve|rent regard. Likewise hee wrote to the Emperour Philip, and to his mother, who was the first Emperour that professed the name of Christ.Ierom. catal. script. Eccles. Hee studied to bee acquainted with the Hebrew language, farre contrary to the custome of his owne Nation: and hee conferred the Hebrew text with the Greeke translations, not onely the Septuagints, but also the translations of Aquila,Euseb. l 6. c. 17. Theodosion, and Symmachus, and he found out the fift, sixt, and seventh editions.
Notwithstanding all these excellent gifts and renowned fame of Origen, hee wanted not his owne grosse errours, and foolish facts. In expounding of Scriptures, he became a curious searcher out of allegories. Yet this father of alle|gories Origen, mistooke the words of Christ spoken of Eu|nuches,Mat. 19.12. There bee some chaste, which haue made themselues chaste for the kingdome of heauen: these words, I say, spoken in an allegorcoll sense, hee tooke in a simple and vnfigurate meaning,Euseb. l. 6. c. 8. and gelded himselfe, to the end hee might liue without all suspition of vncleannesse. No learned man hath commended this fact of Origen, so farre as my reading can extend, for if a man might lawfully dismember his own body, to the end hee might liue chastely, why might not a man in like manner cut off his owne hand, to the end he should not in hastie motion of anger kill his neighhour? But the obedience of the commandements of God is seated in the heart, and more commended for voluntary subiecti|on, then for necessity of abstinence of committing evill, be|cause there is not an instument in the body able to commit transgression.
Finally, by seeking of divinity without the bounds of the holy Scriptures of God, in stead of true divinity, he was entangled with foolish errors: concerning the creation of many worlds, one succeeding to another: concerning the paines of divels and wicked men, after long torments to be finished: and concerning the possibility of nature to keepe the whole law of God. For which opinions, long after his death he was excommunicate in the fift generall Councell, holden Anno, 551. Concerning his weakenesse in offering to Idols, rather then to suffer his chaste body to be abused, I haue spoken in the historie of the seventh persecution. Hee lived vntill the dayes of Gallus and Volusianus, and died in 69. yeere of his age, in the towne of Tyrus, where hee was buried.
Cyprian was an African, borne in Carthage, in his youth altogether given to the studie and practice of Magicall arts. His conversion was by the meanes of Cecilius, a Preacher, whose name after hee bare, and through occasion of hearing the history of the prophet Ionah.Ierom. catul. script. eccles.  coment in Iona. Ierom. ibid. Nazian. in lau|dem Cypriani. After his conversion hee distributed all his substance to the poore, and became first a Presbyter, and afterward Bishop of Carthage. Hee was banished in the persecution of Decius, and martyred vnder Valerian. The worthy D. I. Foxe thinketh that Nazianzen commendeth another Bishop of that same name borne in Antiochia, and Bishop in Antiochia, who suffered martyr|dome in the dayes of Dioclesian.
This Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, was a man full of loue, a great comforter of Cornelius, Bishop of Rome. He suffe|red martyrdome, as Ierom writeth, that same day, albeit not in the same yeere,Ierom. catal. script. eccles. that Cornelius concluded his life by glo|rious martyrdome. Hee had great strife against two contra|rie Sects, viz. againsh Novatus, who was excessiue rigorous against those who had fallen in time of persecution: and against Novatiaus and Felicissimus, who by the contrary would haue had both Heretiques and Apostates received without all forme of Ecclesiasticall discipline.Hist. Madg. cent. 3. cp. 10. He esteemed much of those who suffered rebuke for the Name of Christ:

and hee sayd of the metall mynes, that those that were con|demned for Christs sake to worke in them; that whereas they were wont to deliver gold,Note. and silver, and precious things vnto the world; now by the contrary, the mynes re|ceiue gold, and siluer, and the most precious things in the world: counting the Confessours and Martyres of Christ the rich treasures of the earth, of whom the world was not worthy.
His opinion concerning rebaptizing such as were bap|tized by Heretiques, albeit it was erronius, yet his modesty in not damning them rashly, who were of a contrary opini|on, is greatly praised by Saint Austen, who saith that the modestie of Cyprian in his error, was more to be regarded, then a sound and right opinion concerning baptisme, with|out humility and modesty.Aug. de Baptis. contra Donat. lib. 5. cap. 17. Hee was a faithfull builder of the house of God, not by word onely, but also by writing, and his bookes remaine to this day, as a precious treasure in the Church of Christ. The booke de Revelatione capitis Iohannis Baptisiae, is supposititious, because in it mention is made of the reverence that Pipinus King of France did to the head of Iohn Baptist, when it was transported from Constantinople to France; and it is knowne that Pipinus was not borne 300. yeeres after the martyrdom of Cyprian: how then could Cyprian write of a fact done so long time after his death?
The Church of Christ was multiplyed vnder the perse|cutions of Sverus, Maximinus, Decius, Valerian, Aureli|an, and Dioclesian. All these sixe persecutions are compre|hended in the third Centurie.


Bishops of Ierusalem.
IN Ierusalem was Narcissus,Narcissus. against whom wicked men combined themselues together, with forged accusations and false testimonies, sealed vp with oaths and imprecations,

to grieue the heart of Narcissus, in so much that hee left his calling, and fled to the wildernesse, where hee lurked a long time. But the false witnesses who bare testimony against him,Examples of Gods iustice against false witnesses. escaped not vnpunished by the hand of God: One of them and his whole family and substance was burned with fire: another of them was stricken with an heavie dis|ease, such as hee himselfe in his imprecations had wished vn|to himselfe: the third was terrified with the sight of the iudgements of God, that lighted vpon the other two, and hee repented, and poured out the griefe of his dolorus heart in such aboundance of teares,Euseb. c. 6. l. 9. that hee became blinde. All these false witnesses were punished, and he who was peni|tent, albeit the Lord pardoned his sinne, yet hee chastised him with temporall punishments.
The Bishops of the next adiacent Churches, because they knew not what was become of Narcissus, they admitted ano|ther called Dios,Dios. Germanion. Gordius. who continued but a short time. To him succeeded Germanion: and after Germanion, Gordius, in whose time Narcissus manifested himself to the Church of Ierusa|lem, who requested him to take his office againe: for they reverenced him as a man raised from death to life againe, and the punishment of God inflicted vpon his accusers, increa|sed their reverence toward him. Hee was old, and not able to discharge the weighty office of a Bishop: therefore A|lexander a worthy man,Alexander. was ioyned as fellow labourer with him. Eusebius writeth that he was admonished by a celesti|all vision of the will of God, that hee should bee Bishop of Ierusalem with Narcissus (for hee had beene Bishop of ano|ther paroach before, in Cappadocia): by the like celestiall vision,Ierom. catal. script. Eccles. Narcissus and other of the Clergie were admonished, that the day next following, a Bishop should enter into Ie|rusalem, whom God had appointed to be an helper to Nar|cissus. Hee defended Origen against the fury and madnesse of Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria, who set both himselfe and others to great busines for a matter of no importance, as is sayd.Ierom. ibid. In the persecution of Decius, he was carryed to Cae|srea, closed in a darke prison, and dyed a Martyr, as hath

beene declared. Alexander is supposed to haue been the 35. Bishop of Ierusalem.Euseb. l 7. c. 14. Func. Chron. Mazabanes, Hymeneus Lebdas, Ther|mon, all these followed Alexander.


Bishops of Alexandria.
IN Alexandria to Philetus and Demetrius, succeeded Hera|clas the twelfth Bishop of that towne.Heraclas. Hee was disciple to Origen, and a fellow labourer with him in gouerning the Schoole of Alexandria, in the end hee was chosen to bee Bishop of Alexandria:Dionysius. whose successor was Dionysius, the thirteenth Bishop, whom God delivered miraculously from the hands of persecuters, in the dayes of Decius, by the sud|den assault of a number of people, who had beene at a ma|riage feast. When they heard that Dionysius was taken by souldiers, and led away to Taposiris, they arose from table and followed with a speedy pace,  with a tumultuary voice, so that the souldiers who had Dionysius in keeping, were a|fraid and fled: and so Dionysius by the great providence of God, was delivered out of the hands of his enemies. After him Maximus,Euseb. l. 6. c. 40. Func. chron. Theonas, Petrus, a Martyr vnder Dioclesian and Achillas, were Bishops of Alexandria.


Bishops of Antiochia.
AFter Serapion,Asclepiades. succeeded Asclepiades the ninth Bishop of Antiochia: of whom Alexander Bishop of Ierusa|lem (being the prisoner of Christ in Caesarea) wrote vnto the people of Antiochia, that it was a comfort to him, and it made his imprisonment and bonds the more easie, that hee heard it reported that Asclepiades, a man well exercised in the true faith,Euseb. l. 6. c. 1. Zebenus. by the providence of God, was made Bishop of Antiochia. Philetus was the tenth: Zebenus the eleventh:

and Babylas was the twelfth Bishop of Antiochia,Babylas. of whom Eusebius recordeth, that hee dyed in prison: like as Alex|ander Bishop of Ierusalem ended his life in prison: both the one and the other,Euseb. l. 6. c. 39. suffered such kinde of martyrdome vnder the persecution of Decius.
In the Catalogue of Emperours, catholicke Bishops and Heretiques, subioyned to the Ecclesiasticall History of The|odoretus: wee reade that Babylas Bishop of Antiochia, would not suffer Decius to enter into the Temple wherein Christi|ans were convened, and that before hee was beheaded, hee gaue direction to burie with his bodie, the chaine also, wherewith his bodie had beene bound, as a funerall orna|ment of his buried body. But Eusebius deserueth best cre|dite, who affirmeth that hee dyed in prison, and maketh no mention of his beheading. Some imagine that hee who died in prison, and hee who was beheaded, were both Bi|shops of Antiochia, but living in different ages: yet seeing the Catalogue aforesaid, speaketh of this suffering vnder the Emperour Decius, it is more probable that there is some o|uersight in the writer of the Catalogue. To Babylas succee|ded Fabius.Fabius. Hee was entangled with the error of Novatus, but was reclaymed againe by the vigilant travails of Diony|sius Bishop of Alexandria.Euseb. l. 6. c. 44. Demetrianus. Paulus Samo|satenus. Domnus. Demetrianus a married man, was successor to Fabius. Paulus Samosatenus a pestilent Here|tique, was the fifteenth Bishop of Antiochia. Domnus the sonne of Demetrian the sixteenth, Timeus the seventeenth, Cyrillus the eighteenth, and Tyrannus the ninteenth Bishop of Antiochia.
The names of the Bishops of Rome, Alexandria, and Antiochia, were the more accurately obserued and registred after the Councell of Nice (albeit I recite them before) because it happened in that generll Councell, that for ti|mous suppressing of heresies, the Bishoppes of these places were called Patriarches, and had power to convocate Coun|cels within their owne bounds, for suppressing of Here|tiques. Alwayes it fell out farre contrary to the expectation of holy fathers: for the Patriarches were the chiefe pro|tectors

of heresie, as the historie of the subsequent Centu|ries euidently declareth. Neuerthelesse in this Centurie be|side those men of God aboue mentioned (nothing inferior in spirituall graces to the Bishops of Rome, Alexandria, An|tiochia and Ierusalem) there were many worthy men in o|ther places, such as Frmilianus Bishop of Caesarea in Cap|padocia, a man familiarly acquainted with Origen. Grego|rius and Athenodorius, brethren and Pastours in Pontus. Helenus in Tarsus, and Nicomas in Iconium. Theotectus in Caesarea Palestinae.Euseb. l. 7. c. 2. Maximus in Bostra. Eusebius and Ana|tholius Bishops of Laodicea. Quirinus Bishop of Scesiana, or as others call it, Scescania, a worthy martyr, about whose necke a milstone was hanged,Func. Chron. as hath beene before declared.
I make an end of this second head with the greater gladnesse, that I perceiue the litle stone hewed out of the mountaine without hands to be waxing and growing to the big|nesse of a great mountaine, re|plenishing the whole earth, euen in the time of most hor|rible persecu|tions.




CENTVRIE. IIII.

Bishops of Rome.
Plat. . Mlitiad._AFter Eusebius, Miltiades gouerned the Romane Church 4. yeeres, 7. months, and 8. dayes. His ministration was in the dayes of the raigne of Constantine, to whom the Emperour remitted the controuersie be|twixt Cecilianus and the Donatistes,Euseb. lib. 10. cap. 5. to bee judged by him and his Collegues, Rheticus Maternus, and Marinus. The Donatistes would not rest vpon the determination of Miltiades, and his Collegues. And therefore the good Emperour appointed this cause of new againe to be judged in Arles,August. epist. 68. by a number of Bishops of Spaine, Italie and France. In the Councell of Arles, Ceci|lianus was likewise absolued, and the Donatistes againe suc|cumbed in their probation. Notwithstanding they appealed to the Emperour Constantine: and when the Emperour heard the cause of Cecilianus pleaded before himselfe, the Dona|tists could not proue, that either Cecilianus had beene admit|ted Bishop of Carthage by a man who was Proditor, or yet that he had admitted any other man culpable of the like fault to an Ecclesiasticall office. If the Bishop of Rome had bin supreame Iudge in all Ecclesiasticall causes, Constantine had done him wrong, to appoint other Iudges to iudge in this cause, after the B. of Rome, and his Collegues, had giuen out their definitiue sentence.August. epist. 162.  166. August. Cau|slao. epist. 86. His ordinance concerning prohi|bition of fasting vpon the Lords day, expedient at that time to be a distinguishing note of true Christians, from Mani|chean heretiques, whose custome was vpon the Lords day to fast. The purple garment, the palace of Lateran, the su|perioritie of the towne of Rome, and gouernment of the

West, which honours some alledge were conferred by Con|stantine to Miltiades and Silvester, is a fable not worthy of re|futation: all these honours the Emperours of the West, suc|cessours of Constantine, possessed,  not the Bishop of Rome, for the space of many hundreth yeeres.
To Miltiades succeeded Silvester,Silvester. Platina, de vita Silvest. Scrat. lib. 1. cap. 6. Theo. lib. 1. cap. 2.3.  ministred 23. yeeres, 10 months, and 11. dayes. In his time was the heretike Arrius exco~municated by Alexander, without the fore-knowledge of the B. of Rome: It was enough, that after exco~munication intimation was made to other bishops, which duty the B. of Alexandria neglected not. Learned men shold be ashamed of fables, to say that Constantine was baptized by Siluester, for Sil|uester was dead before Constantine was baptized. And Platina himselfe is compelled to grant, that Marcus, the successor of Siluester,Euseb de vita Constnt. lib. 4. gouerned the church of Rome in Constantines daies. And Eusebius testifieth, that Constantine was baptized in Nico|media, immediatly before his death. Concerning the donatio~ of Constantine, wherein he conferreth the do~inion of the West to the B. of Rome,Simile. it is like vnto a rotten egge, which is cast out of the basket, lest all the rest be set at the lesse auaile. No ancient writer maketh mention of any such thing. Yea Con|stantine, in his testamentall legacie, allotted the Dominion of the West to two of his sons, namely, to Constantinus yonger,  to Constans.Note. How then had he, by an anterior disposition, resigned these Dominio~s to the B. of Rome? If Papists be not better countenanced by Antiquitie in other things,Marcus. Platin. de vita Mar. Iulius. Soom. l. 4. c. 8. then in this point, they haue no great cause to bragge of Antiquitie.
To Siluester succeeded Marcus, and ministred 2. yeeres, 8. months, and 20. dayes.
After Marcus, Iulius gouerned the Roman church, 15. yeeres Sozomenus attributes to Iulius 25. yeeres. His ministratio~ was in the daies of the Emp. Constantius  his brethren. He was a defe~der of the true faith,  a citie of refuge to those who were persecuted by Arrians: as namely, to Athanasius B. of Alexan|dria,Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 15. Paulus B. of Constantinople, Asclepas B. of Gaza, Marcel|lus B. of Ancyra,  Lucius B. of Adrianopolis: All these were vnjustly deposed from their offices by the Arrians  had re|course

to Iulius. Hee was neither ashamed of the Gospell of Christ, nor of his aflicted seruants. In the councell of Sardica great honour was co~ferred vnto him, to wit, that men vnjust|ly condemned by Arrians, should haue refuge to Iulius: to whom they gaue power of new againe, to judge their cause. This was an Act of the councell of Sardica,  not of the Ni|cene councell (as was confidently alledged in the councell of Carthage) and a personall honour conferred to one man alone, for respectiue causes: but not extended to his succes|sours, as though all the Bishops of Rome at all times should be Iudges of appellation. The Arrians were sore grieued for this, that Iulius both in word, and deede, and writ, assi|sted Athanasius and his complices. The chafing letters, and mutuall expostulations, that passed betwixt Iulius and the Arrians conueened in the Councell of Antiochia, are to be read in the Historie of Socrates.Socrat. l. 2. c. 15. Idem, lib. 2. cap. 17. Platina, in the gran|doure of his speeches, is inconsiderate, as if Iulius had damned the presumption of the Orientall Bishoppes, who durst conuocate an assemblie without licence before ob|tained from the Bishop of Rome.Sozom. l. 3. c. 10. Noe such thing is contained in the letter of Iulius, but onely an expostu|lation, that they did not aduertise him of their Councell, to the ende hee might haue sent his Ambassadours, and giuen vnto them his best aduise. Iulius knewe the Con|stitutions of the Nicene Councell,Ruffin. l. 1. c. 6. Canon. 6. which gaue power to euery Patriarch within his owne boundes, to conuocate Councels.
To Iulius succeeded Liberius,Liberius. Damas. Marian. Ierom. and continued sixe yeeres: some assigne vnto him eighteene yeeres, others nineteene yeeres: so vncertaine is the computation of the yeeres of their gouernment. Hee gouerned the Church of Rome in the dayes of Constantius, by whom also hee was banished to Thracia, because hee would not consent to the deposition of Athanasius: which point was seriously vrged in the Councell of Millane.Theod. l. 2..15.16.17. Theodoretus giueth ample testimonie of his constancie and freedome of speaking to the Emperour (not

disagreeing with his name) before his banishment. In his absence Foelix the second was chosen to be Bishop of Rome; to whom Theodoretus giueth this praise, that hee adhered firmely to the Nicene Councell: but blameth him for this, that he receiued his ordination from Arrians.Theod. ibid. Notwithstan|ding he was more hated by the Arrians, then was Liberius,  was put to death by them,Platina, de vita Foeli. after he had gouerned one yeere, foure months, and two dayes. After two yeeres banish|ment, Liberius returned backe againe to Rome. Theodoretus is silent in the matter of his praises after his returning.Hilar. in frag|ment. Hila|rius, Bishop of Poitiers affirmeth, that hee both consen|ted to the deposition of Athanasius, and to the councell of Sirmium. There is nothing lacking now to giue out a determinate sentence, whether or no the Bishop of Rome may erre in matters of Faith: but onely the appea|rance of the great Aduocate of all euill causes Onuphri|us, who will needes finde out some olde partchment, or some vnknowne manu-script, to free the Chaire of Rome from all suspition of errour in matters of faith.Bellarm. de Rom. Pont. lib. 4 cap. 9. But Bellermine giues ouer his cause, and can finde no sufficient Apologie for him, because his letters written to the Empe|rour Constantius after his returning from banishment, smels of Arrianisme.
After the death of Liberius,Damasus. succeeded Damasus, and ruled 18. yeeres, in time of the raigne of Iulian, of Iouinian, and of Valentinian:Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 9. Ruff. l. 2 c. 10. Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 29. his competitor Vrsinus had many fauou|rers, in so much that the question who should be elected Bishop of Rome, was tried by the sword, rather then by reasons, suffrages, and votes: so that in the Church of Sisinum were slaine to the number of 137. persons. Damasus preuailed, and had the vpper hand. Hee was friendly to Peter Bishop of Alexandria, whom Lucius an Arrian Bishoppe imprisoned:Theo. lib. 5. cap. 9. but hee escaped, and fled to Rome, as Athanasius had done before in the dayes of Iulius. He damned the Heresie of Apollinaris, in a councel met at Rome. His Epistle written to the Oriental Bi|shops, wherein he intimates vnto them the condemnitory

sentence pronounced and Apollinaris and his disciple Timo|theus,Theod. ibid. is indited with the swelling pride of a lofty minde, breathing soueraignty and preheminence aboue all other Churches, as if the Romane Church were that onely Apo|stolicke chaire, whereunto all other Churches ought hom|age and reuerence.Basil. epist. 10. ad Euseb. Samo|sat. So that Basilius, Bishop of Casarea in Cappadocia, complaines of the pride of the West, because they cared onely for their owne preheminence, but not for the estate of their persecuted brethren in the East, vn|der the Arrian Emperour Valens, whose estate they knew not, neither sent they messengers to visite them, neither would they receiue true information concerning the estate of their brethren. Yea, and Basilius saith, that hee purposed oft times, to haue written to the chiefe of them, that is to Damasus, that he should not count the splendor of pride to be true dignitie,Note. and honour. Where it is to be mar|ked, that when hee speakes of Damasu, hee called him , that is, the principall of them, to wit, of the Churches of the West: but not the supreame gouernour of the vniuersall Church, neither the soueraigne commander of the Churches of the East. It is ignorance of the Ecclesiasticall historie, that makes men to imagine, that the supremacie of the Bishop of Rome is an ancient thing. When Damasus damned the heresie of Apollinaris, in the councel conuee|ned at Rome, it was the yeere of our Lord, 379. accor|ding to the computation of Ierom: and at this time the very aiming to supremacie is counted Splendor superbiae, that is, the splendor of pride. Damasus wrote concerning the liues of the Bishops of Rome preceding his time: and was familiarly acquainted with Ierom, as Ieroms writings clearly declare.
Siricius. Socrat. l. 7. c. 9. Hist. Magd. Cent. 4. cap. 10. Malac. 2. verse 14.To Damasus succeeded Siricius, and ministred 15. yeeres: at what time Gratianus and Valentinian obtained the Emperiall gouernment: he ordained, that married men, who were ad|mitted to Ecclesiasticall offices, after their ordination should abstaine from the company of their wiues as if it were great deuotion to a man to transgresse against the wife of his youth

the wife of his couenant,Platin. de vita Pontif. and his companion in all his wea|risome labours. His prohibition of the second marriage, smelleth of the Heresie of Montanus. In his time with pride of the Cleargie at Rome was joyned vnsatiable auaritious|nesse,Lege 27. de Episcop  Cleri. in C. Thodos. increasing daily by degrees, so that the Emperours Valentinian the 11. and Theodosius, were compelled by a law, to inhibite widows vnder pretence of deuotion to leaue their houses, treasures, and house-hold-stuffe, to the Church, to the vtter impouerishing and vndoing the estate of their children.


Bishops of Alexandria.
IN the third Centurie wee rested at the name of Achillas,Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, whose successour was Alexan|der. His accurate disputation concerning the vnitie in the Trinitie, made Arrius a presbyter in Alexandria, to thinke that Alexander was intangled with the errour of Sabellius: Hereof arose contentious disputations, new opinions, exul|cerate minds, and open schismes. This intestine maladie was not vnknowne to the good Emperour Constantine, who sent Hosius Bishop of Corduba, a man singularly beloued of the Emperour, together with perswasiue letters from the Emp. exhorting both Alexander Arrius, to leaue accurate and profound disputations, and keepe inuiolably the peace and vnitie of the Church: But no meanes could auaile vn|til this question was decided by the determination of the ge|nerall Councell of Nice.
After the Councell of Nice had damned the opinion of Arrius as Hereticall,Athanasius. Theod. l. 1. c. 25. Sozom. l. 2. c. 17 Alexander continued not aboue fiue months aliue: In the last period of his life hee called for Athanasius, but he was not present: Of whom Alexander said; Thou hast escaped, but shalt not escape, fore-prophecying, that Athanasius should vndergoe the weightie charge, which hee, giuing place to nature, and to the calling of God, was

leauing. Athanasius in his young yeeres and childish playes was counterfeiting diuine mysteries, and baptizing chil|dren:Rff. l. 1. c. 14. yet after such due forme of interrogatories and an|sweres preceeding Baptisme,Hist. Magd. cent. 4 cap. 10. that Alexander, the Bishop durst not presume to rebaptize those who apparently in childish simplicitie had beene made partakers of diuine grace. He began no sooner to accept the waightie charge of the Church of Alexandria, Anno, 333; but the Arri|ans began to fret and offend, knowing how diligent he attended vpon Alexander his predecessor, at the coun|cell of Nice, and how vigilantly and wisely hee had de|tected the lurking absurdities of the vilde Heresie of Arrius: And they thought the preferment of Athana|sius was the vtter vndoing of their opinion. Therefore they conspired against him,Socrat. lib. . cap. 35. and by a multiplied number of false accusations preuailed somewhat against him, euen in the dayes of the Emperour Constantine. But in the dayes of Constantius and Iulian, almost the whole world conspired against him: so that except hee had beene vp|holden by that grace that commeth from aboue, it was not possible that hee could haue borne out such vn|supportable hatred.Nazianzen. in laudem Athanasii. Sinl. Iustly did Nazianzene compare him in time of aduersitie to the Adamant, and in time of prosperitie to the Magnes. In time of aduersitie no trou|ble ouercame him: in time of prosperitie, hee allured the hearts of men more intractable then yron, to embrace the truth of God.
The troubles of Athanasius.Now seeing Athanasius liued sixe and fourtie yeeres, gouernour of the Church of Alexandria, his great trou|bles cannot be comprised in better order, then by decla|ring shortly what troubles he sustained: first in Constan|tines dayes, next vnder the raigne of Constantius: thirdly, vnder the raigne of Iulian:  last to speake of his peaceable end vnder the raigne of the Emperour Valens, albeit he was an Arrian Persecuter. In the dayes of Constantine first he was accused by an effronted harlot, whom the Arrians had su|borned to beare false witnesse against him: but Athan. guided

the matter with wisedome, and suffered Timotheus, a wor|thy Presbyter,Theod. l. 1. c. 29. to speake (whom hee had brought in with him to the Councell) but he was silent himselfe. The im|pudent woman pointing out Timotheus by the finger (as if hee had beene Athanasius) with clamours voyde of all wo|manly modestie, affirmed that he had abused her in whore|dome, so that all who were present were ashamed of her im|pudencie. This was done in the Councell of Tyrus, to the perpetuall shame of the Arrians, who subborned an harlot to accuse the faithfull servant of Christ without a cause.
Secondly, they accused him for this, that hee had cut off the hand of Arsenius, sometime his owne servant: and for greater evidence, they produced in the Councell of Tyrus before the Iudges, the hand of a man inclosed in a case: which hand they affirmed that Athanasius had cut off from Arsenius. This they spake the more confidently, because they supposed that Arsenius remayned still kept in their own custodie:Note. but by the providence of God hee escaped, came to Tyrus, and was presented before the Councell, having both his hands perfect, sound, and vnmutilated. After this the Councell was full of confusion, for the Arrians cryed, that Athanasius by magicke arts deluded the senses of men: and they were purposed, by violence and force to lay hands vpon him, and to teare him in pieces: but he fled by a ship, and came to Constantinople, where the Emperour was, as shall bee declared, God willing. The rest of his accusati|ons, and how they dealt against him most vniustly and falsely, and gaue out a sentence of deposition against him in his absence, I remit vnto its owne place.
Vnder the raigne of Constantius, Athanasius was compel|led to flie at two diuers times. First, while the Emperour Constans was yet aliue, who procured a Councell to be ga|thered in Sardica, wherein the cause of Athanasius was try|ed, and he found innocent: and was sent backe againe and restoed to his place.Theod. l. 2 c. 8. For Constantius feared the menacing letters of his brother Constans, who threatned to leade an

army to the East, and to possesse Athanasius in his place a|gaine,Idem lib. 2. c. 13 if his brother lingred in doing of it. After the death of Constans, Sabinianus was sent to kill Athanasius, but hee escaped miraculously, as hath beene declared.
Againe, hee was compelled first to flie, and afterward to lurke in the dayes of Iulian. Hee was restored againe by the good Emperour Iovinian: and he continued in his ministra|tion vntill the dayes of Valentinian and Valens:Ruffin. l. 1. c. 34. and although Valens was a cruell persecuter, yet hee abstained from perse|cuting of Athanasius, for honour of his gray haires, and for that hee was reverently regarded of all men.Sozom. l. 6. c. 19. Thus Atha|nasius, full of dayes, died in peace, after he had governed the Church of Alexandria 46. yeeres.
To worthy Athanasius,Peter. succeeded Peter, whom the Em|perour Valens caused to be imprisoned, and Lucius an Ar|rian Bishop, to be seated in his roome. Lucius was made Bishop of Alexandria, against all kinde of Ecclesiasticall order: neither did the people craue him, nor the clergie of Alexandria approue him,Theod. l. 4.22. nor any Orthodox Bishoppe giue him ordination. Peter escaped out of prison, and fledde to Damasus Bishoppe of Rome. Lucius like vnto a ravening wolfe, not onely banished the Homousians out of Alexan|dria and Egypt, but also that which was more insolent, and never attempted before: hee persecuted the Monkes who dwelt in solitary places of the wildernesse, and banished them, who had already banished themselues, from all the delicate pleasures of the world. But marke, To what place could men be banished, who inhabited the desert places of barren wildernesses? Hee caused them (especially Ma|carius and Isidorus) to bee transported to an Isle, wherein no Christians were to be found, but onely Pagans, and wor|shippers of divels.
When these prisoners of Christ approached neere vnto the Isle, the divell left his old habitation, to wit, the mouth of the Image, from whence he was accustomed to speake; and hee possessed the Priestes daughter, who ran vn the shoare, and cryed, words not vnlike to those which were

spoken to Paul and Silas in Philippi, by the maide who had the spirit of divination:Acts. 16.17. and after this the divell left her, ly|ing vpon the ground, as though shee had beene dead. But the men of God,Note. by their supplications to God, restored the young woman to health, and delivered her to her father. The Inhabitants of the Isle, who saw the wonderfull works of God, received the faith, and were baptized in the Name of Christ. Lucius was so dashed with the fame of this won|derfull work, and with the crying out of people against him, that hee permitted the foresayd Monkes to returne backe a|gaine to their owne places.
After Peter succeeded Timotheus,Timotheus. for one cause worthie to be blamed, because hee favoured the vsurpation of Maxi|mus Cynicus, who presumed without a lawfull calling to be Bishop of Constantinople. And after him Theophilus succeeded, whose attempts against Chrysostom I remit to the next Centurie.


Bishops of Antiochia.
IN Antiochia,Vitalius. after Tyrannus, succeeded Vitalius, about the time that the rage of the tenth Persecution began to bee asswaged: therefore hee re-edified a Church in Antiochia, which had beene demolished in the time of the persecution of Dioclesian:Philogonius. Theod. l. 1 c. 3. Eustatius. Theod. l. 1. c. 7. and his successor Philogonius, perfected the building. To whom succeeded Eustatius, who was present at the Councell of Nice, and was Moderator and mouth to all the rest. Eusebius sometime Bishoppe of Berytus, after|ward Bishop of Nicodemia, and last of all Bishop of Con|stantinople:Soc. l. 1. c. 24. did insinuate himselfe in favour with the Em|perour Constantine, and obtained from him liberty to goe to Ierusalem, and to visite the Temples that Constantine had lately builded in Bethlehem, Ierusalem, and vpon Mount O|livet. To him resorted a number of Arrian Bishops, who had all secretly conspired against Eustatius, and subborned a

vile woman to accuse him of whoredome. The Arrians vp|on the simple deposition of a woman, subborned by them|selues:Theod. l. 5. c. 21. contrary to all kinde of order, deposed Eustatius, and perswaded the Emperour to banish him, as a man convict both of adultery and of tyranny. But the Lord layde his correcting hand vpon the woman, whom the Arrians had suborned, so that she dyed, sore tormented with a grieuous sicknesse, and confessed that money was given vnto her to accuse Eustatius,Note. and that shee had sworne deceitfully, be|cause the childe procreated with her, was begotten by Eu|statius a Smith of that name, but not by Eustatius Bishop of Antiochia.
The Arrians in the dayes of Constantine, had no great vpper hand, except onely in the matter of Athanasius his ba|nishment to Triere: and in the deposition and banishment of Eustatius to Illyricum. But in the dayes of Constantius they tooke boldnesse, and planted Arrian Bishops, in all princi|pall places: so that in Antiochia (after Eustatius) Eulalius, Euphronius, Placitus, Leontius, Eudoxis, all these were Arrian Bishoppes, placed by them in Antiochia. In the end Meletius was ordained Bishop of Antiochia,Meletius. a man of great gifts, whom the Arrians transported out of Sebastia in Armenia, and placed him in Antiochia; supposing that by his excellent learning, many should be allured to their o|pinion: but it fell out farre otherwise; for Meletius pro|fessed the true faith. Onely the reproueable forme of his entrie, by receiving ordination from Arrian Bishops, was the ground of remedilesse schismes in the Church of An|tiochia. There had been already two factions in the towne; to wit, Arrians, and Eustatians: now the third faction is ad|ded of them, who were called Meletians, with whom Eusta|tians did not communicate, but abhorred them as they did the Arrians.Theod. l. 3. c. 4.
This schisme indured after the death of Meletius for the space of fourscore and fiue yeeres. Meletius was banished in the dayes of Constantius,Sr. l. 2. c. 44. and Euzoius an Arrian Bishoppe, placed in his roome. Hee was restored againe by Iulian,

onely for desire he had to vndoe things done by Constantius, and to bring his name to disgrace.Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 1. Likewise vnder the raigne of the Emperour Valens, hee was banished the second time. Hee governed the Church of Antiochia fiue and twenty yeeres,Sozm. l. 6.7. and dyed in Constantinople, immediatly after the second generall Councell: and was carryed to Antiochia, to be buried there.
The ordination of Paulinus to be Bishoppe of Antiochia,Paulinus. Meletius being yet aliue, was the foolish fact of Lucifer Bi|shop of Calaris, in the Isle of Sardinia. Hee was restored from banishment in the dayes of Iulian. and tooke purpose, accompanied with Eusebius, Bishop of Vercellis in Liguria, who was likewise restored at that same time, to visit the e|state of their brethren.S. l. 3. c. 6. Eusebius addresseth himselfe to Alex|andria, and conferred with Athanasius. But Lucifer went to Antiochia,, where he found miserable distractions, euen amongst those who professed one and the selfe same Faith. When exhortation to vnity could prevaile nothing, but the dissention dayly encreased, hee ordayned Paulinus presbyter of Antiochia,Theod. l. 3. c. 4. and the chiefe of those who were called Eu|statiani, to be Bishop of Antiochia. This fact of Lucifer was like vnto fuell added vnto the fire, and mightily augmented the schisme. Theodoretus blameth him for so doing, and Eusebius Vercellencis, when hee came backe from Alexan|dria, disliked also the fact of Lucifer. Wherefore Lucifer would not communicate any longer with Eusebius.
These sorrowfull times of multiplyed schismes, aliena|ted the hearts of a great number of people, from the true Church.Soc. l. 3. c 9. Meletius was restored from his second banish|ment,Idem l. 5 c. 5. in the dayes of the Emperour Gratianus. Paulinus would on no condition communicate with him, because hee had receiued ordination from the Arrians. When Me|letius had ended his life, the people would not admit Pauli|nus to be their Bishop,Theod. l. 5.23. because they sayd, it was not meete that he should be his successor, who dispised his fellowship and counsell in his life time.
To Meletius succeeded Flavianus,Flavianus. a worthy man. Pau|linus

albeit hee appoynted Evagrius to bee his successor, yet such formes manifestly repugnant to the approoved or|der of the Church could take no place. The Bishoppes of Rome,Theod. l. 5 c. 23. Damascus, Siricius, and Anastatius, were great ad|versaries to him, and mis-informed the good Emperour Theodosius against him: but when he appeared before the Emperour, hee spake before him, both freely and wisely, words that liked the Emperour well, as they are reported by Theodoretus: O Emperour, if any man doe blame my Faith as perverse, or my life as vnworthy, I am content to bee iudged by my very adversaries: but if the disputation onely bee concer|ning principality, and eminent places, I will not contend with any man, but denude my selfe of all superiority, and commit the chaire of Antiochia to whom yee like best. The Emperour admired his courage and wisedome, and sent him backe againe to governe his owne Flocke, and was slow to heare frivolous accusations in time to come against Flavianus. This was that worthy Bishop, who associated Iohn Chryso|stome to bee his fellow labourer in Antiochia:Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 23. and who mitigated the wrath of Theodosius conceived against the City of Antiochia, for misusing the Image of his wife Placilla.


Bishops of Constantinople.
COnstantinople was builded by Constantine,Func. Chron. Anno, 336. in a place where Asia and Europe neerly confines: being separated onely by a narrow river, called of olde Bosphorus Thracius. The cause wherefore this Imperiall Citie was builded in this place, was not to resigne the towne of Rome, and the government of the West to the Bishop of Rome: but, as Sozomenus writes, that Constan|tinople or new Rome,Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 3. might bee as a soveraigne Ladie to all those who in the East, West, North, or South, were obe|dient to the Romane Empire.
Learned men in our dayes are ashamed to maintaine all the foolish fables of the Romane Church, for they see cleerly the cause of the building of this great Citie, was to keepe firmely both the East and the West vnder the So|veraignty of Constantine, and his successors.
Alexander Bishop of Constantinople,Alexander. prooved a worthy man, in the dayes of the Emperour Constantine. The Arri|ans finding themselues to be vtterly reiected by Athanasius, they addressed themselues to Constantinople, vnder the con|duct of Eusebius, Bishop of Nicomedia: and threatned A|lexander, that in case hee would not receive Arrius into the fellowship of the Church,Theod. l. 4 c. 4. then they would bring him in, authorized with the Emperours command, to the griefe of his heart. Alexander cloathed himselfe with the armour of God and all the night long prayed in this sense: Lord, if Arrius be to be received to morrow into the communion of thy Church, then let thy servant depart in peace, and destroy not the iust with the wicked: but Lord, if thou wilt spare thy Church, wherevnto I am assured thou wilt be favourable: then Lord, turne thine eyes toward the wrdes of the Eusebians, and give not thine inheritance to a desolation and reproach: and cut off Arrius,Note. lest while hee entreth into the Church, his heresie also seeme to enter with him, and so no difference seeme to bee betwixt Piety and Impiety.
The next day following the prayer of Alexander: Euse|bius Bishop of Nicomedia, with his retinue, came with great confidence and pompe, to performe all which they threat|ned they would doe.Theod. ibid. The death of Arrius. But Arrius was compelled to goe to a secret place, where his bowels gushed out: and he conclu|ded his wretched life with ignominy and shame.
To Alexander succeeded Paulus:Paulus. his lot was to gouerne this Church, vnder the raigne of an Arrian Emperour Con|stantius, who reiected him, and seated Eusebius Bishoppe of Nicomedia, in his place. But this great Patron of the Arri|an heresie, scarcely was placed in Constantinople, when he ended his life. The Homousians received againe Paulus to bee their Bishoppe.Socrat. l. 2. c. 7. The Arrians chose Alaedonius.

This was the cause of great strife in Constantinople, and the people divided in factions, hatefully invaded one another. the Emperour hearing of the tumult, sent Hermogenes, the Generall Commander of his horsemen, to remoue Paulus from Constantinople: Hermogenes was very ready to exe|cute the Emperours commandement,Sozom. l.3.6.7. but the people be|ing affectioned toward their Pastor, arose vp with popular tumult, compassed the house of Hermogenes, set it on fire, sew him, and fastned a cord to his legges, and trailed him along the street. For this cause, the Emperour Constantius willing to punish the authours of this tumult, hastened to come to Constantinople. The people went forth to meet him, and with teares confessed their fault, and craved par|don. The Emperour abstayned from punishing them vnto the death, but he cut off the one-halfe of th victuall, which the liberality of his father had bestowed vpon Constanti|nople;oe. l, 2, , 16. to bee payed yeerely out of the tributes of Egypt. Hee banished Paulus the second tune, and seated Macedoni|us in Constantinople, not without effusion of blood. Paulus was againe restored by the meanes of the Emperour Con|stans: but after the death of Constans, hee was banished to Cucusus, a towne of Armenia, where hee was strangled by the bloody Arrians.
The Church of Constantinople was miserably troubled with Arrianisme, vnder the raignes of Constantius and Va|lens. The raignes of Gratianus and Theodosius, was a brea|thing time to the professors of the true Faith. At this time Nazianzen a constant defender of the Faith, was chosen Bi|shop of Constantinople, who notwithstanding voluntarily left the great Citie, in regard the Bishops assembled in the second generall Councell, gaue not a full and vniversall con|sent to his admission: Yet gaue they all their consent to Nectarius,Ruff. l.2..2  a man of noble birth, of the countrey of Cilicia, at that time , and who had received no Ecclesia|sticall preferment before that time.
Ntari.This man (I say) they made Bishop of Constantinople, with full consent and allowance, both of the Councell and

people; ouer-passing Nazianzenus: so fraile are the cogita|tions of men, euen in generall Councels, that they are oft times more ruled with affection then reason.Hist. Magd. Cent. 4 cap. 10. Nectarius continued in that office vntill the third yeere of the raigne of Arcadius, that is, vntill the yeere of our Lord 401. In his time the confession of sinnes done in secret, to presbyter Poenitentiarius, was abrogated in the Church of Constanti|nople, vpon this occasion as Socrates writeth.Note. A certaine noble woman was confessing in secret her sinnes to pres|byter Poenitetiarius, and she confessed adultery, committed with one of the Church Deacons.Socrat. lib. 5.ap. 19. Eudaemon (this was the name of the Father confessor) gaue counsell to Nectarius, to abrogate this custome of auricular and secret confession, because the Church was like to be slandered, and euill spo|ken of by these meanes. Socrates can scarse giue allowance to this fact of Nectarius, in respect that by abrogation of this custome, the vnfruitfull workes of darkenesse were lesse coargued and reproued. But Socrates considered not, that Christ,Iohn 4. when he talked with the Samaritane woman at the Well, sent away his Disciples to buy bread, to the ende the poore Samaritane sinner might more freely poure out her secret sinnes in the bosome of Christ, who knew all things that were done in secret. It is not my purpose to con|tend with Socrates, he is writing an history, I am writing but a short Compend of an history: he taketh libertie to declare his iudgement concerning this fact of Nectarius, in abrogating confession of secret sinnes to presbyter Poeniten|tiarius.
No man can blame me to write my iudgement concer|ning auricular confession.Gen. 9.23. Simile. It is in our dayes not like vnto the mantle wherewith Sem and Iapheth couered the naked|nesse of their Father Noe: but it is in very deed a lap of the mantle of the Deuill, couering the nakednesse of his chil|dren, that is, the horrible treasons that are plotted in secret by the children of the Deuill, against Christian Magi|strates. Now is auricular confession for greater causes to

be abrogated, then of olde presbyter poenitentiarius was dis|charged by Nectarius.


Bishops of Ierusalem.
Macarius.TO Thermon succeeded Macarius, Anno 318. about the seauenth yeere of the raigne of Constantine: In his time it is thought,Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 8. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 17. Theod. lib. 1. cap. 18. Ambrose obitu Theodos. that Helena, the mother of Constantine, found the Crosse of Christ: but Ambrose writes, that shee wor|shipped it not, for that, saith he, had been Gentili error,  vanitas impiorum, that is, an errour of Pagans, and vani|tie of vngodly people. But now to lay aside the inexcusable fault of adoration of the tree whereupon our Lord suffered. What necessitie had Helena to be so earnest to seeke out this tree, and to commit it to the custodie of all posterities? seeing that Ioseph of Arimathea, who sought the bodie of IESVS at the hands of Pilate,Math. 27.58. to the end he might burie it honourably, yet sought he not the tree whereon Christ was crucified, which with little adoe might haue beene ob|tained. Secondly,Note. during the time that the Crosse was easie to be found, and easie to haue beene discerned from other Crosses. How could the blessed Virgine the mother of the Lord, and holy Apostles, haue committed such an over|sight, in not keeping that precious treasure, if so be in the keeping of it there be so great deuotion, as the Romane Church now talkes of? Thirdly, what is the cause, that the Romane Church brags so much of antiquitie? when as the worshipping of the crosse, one of the maine points of their Religion was vnknowne to the first three hundred yeeres of our Lord: and now in the fourth Centurie, the crosse is found, but not worshipped: yea, and the adoration of it is detested and abhorred, as an errour of the Pagans.
Maximus.To Macarius succeeded Maximus, who had beene his

fellow-labourer, as of olde, Alexander was to Narcissus. Macarius gouerned the Church of Ierusalem, in the peace|able dayes of Constantine,Ruff. lib. 1. cap. 17. but Maximus gouerned that same Church himselfe alone, in the dayes of Constantius. He was present at the Councell of Tyrus: but Paphnutius a Bishop and confessor in Thebaida, pittied the simplicitie of Maxi|mus, whom the Arrians with deceitfull speeches had al|most circumueened, and he stepped to him, and suffered him not to sit in the assembly of vngodly people: whereup|on followed a bond of indissoluble coniunction, not onely with Paphnutius, but also with Athanasius, who was char|ged with many false accusations in that wicked Councell of Tyrus. This warning made him circumspect and wise in time to come:Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 8. so that he was not present at the Arrian Councell of Antiochia, gathered vnder pretence of dedi|cation of the Temple, which Constantine began to build, but his sonne Constantius perfected the building of it.
To Maximus succeeded Cyrillus,Cyrillus. a man greatly hated by the Arrians, in so much, that Acacius Bishop of Caesarea Palestinae deposed him (no doubt by some power granted to him by the Emperour Constantius,Theod. lib. 2. cap. 26. with aduise of Arrian Bishops). Notwithstanding Silvanus Bishop of Tarsus recei|ued him, and he taught in that Congregation with great li|king and contentment of the people. The strife of Acacius against him in the Councell of Seleucia, I remit vnto its owne place.
In time of famine he had a great regard to poore indigent people,Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 25. and sold the precious vessels and garments of the Church for their support. This was a ground of his accusati|on afterward,Note. because of a costly garment bestowed by the Emp. Constantine to the church of Ierusalem, which Cyrillus sold to a Marchant in time of famine, and againe, the Mar|chant sold it vnto a lasciuious woman: and such friuolous things were aggregated by the Arrians, who hated the men of GOD.



Of other Pastors and Doctors, in Asia, Africa, and Europe.
BEsides the Patriarchs of principall places, God raised vp in this Centurie a great number of learned Preachers, who were like vnto the Ibides of Aegypt,Simile. a remedy prepared by God, against the multiplied number of venemous  fly|ing Serpents. Euen so learned Fathers, of whom I am to speak, were instruments of God, to vndoe the heresies which abounded in this age, aboue all other ages. Did not Na|zianzenus vndoe the Heresie of Apollinaris? Basilius the He|resie of Eunomius? Hilarius like vnto a second Deucalion saw the ouer-flowing flood of Arrianisme abated in France. Ambrosius, Epiphanius, and Ierom set their hearts against all Heresies, either in their time, or preceding their dayes. It were an infinite labour, to write of them all, who in this age, like v glistering starres, with the shining light of celesti|all doctrine, illuminated the darknesse of the blind world: but the names of some principall Teachers (God willing) I shall remember.
Eusebius Pamphili, Bishop of Caesarea in Palestine, liued vnder the Emperour Constantine,Eusebius Pamphili. with whom he was fami|liarly acquainted. He was desired to supply the place of Eu|statius Bishop of Antiochia, whose deposition the Arrians without all forme of order, had procured most vnrighteous|ly: but he would not consent to accept that charge, so that the chaire of Antiochia wanted a Bishop eight yeeres.Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 24. Some expecting the restitution of Eustatius; others feeding them|selues vpon vaine hopes, that Eusebius would accept that place. The Emperour Constantine commended his mode|stie, and counted him worthy to be Bishop of the whole world. Neuerthelesse, he was not altogether free of the Heresie of Arrius before the Nicene Councell, and he was remisse and slacke in the cause of ATHANASIVS.

He was so familiarly acquainted with Pamphilus,Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 2. who suffe|red martyrdome in Caelarea, that he clothed himselfe with his name, and called himselfe Eusebius Pamphili.Hist. Magd. cent. 4. cap. 10. He died about the time that Athanasius first returned from banish|ment, by the meanes of Constantine the younger, about the yeere of our Lord 342.
Nazianzenus liued in the dayes of Constantius,Gregorius Nazianzenus. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 6. Iulian, and Theodosius. He was borne in a little towne of Cappadocia, called Nazianzum, from which he receiued his name. He was trained vp in learning in Alexandria and in Athens; his familiaritie with Basilius Magnus began in Athens,  it was increased in the Wildernesse: he Preached in Sasma, but because it was a place vnmeete for studies,Ruff. l. 2.c. 9. he returned to Nazianzum, and was a helper to his aged father. After his fathers death he went to Constantinople, where he found the towne in a most desolate condition, in regard the Arri|an and Macedonian heresies had so mightily prevailed, that all the principall Churches were occupied by them. Nazi|anzenus onely had libertie to Preach in a little Church called Anastatia, because the truth of God, which seemed to haue beene buried,Sozom. lib.. cap. 5. now by the Preaching of Nazianzenus was revived againe. In the second generall Councell gathered by Theodosius, because some Bishops of Macedonia  Egypt murmured against his admission, he counterfeited the fact of Ionas,Ruff. lib. 2. cap. 9 and was content to be cast out of his place, to pro|cure peace and concord amongst his brethren. He benefited the Church of Christ in the dayes of Iulian, by writing bookes of Christian Poesie,Thed. lib. . cap. 8. whereby the Christian youth should haue no harme by the interdiction of Iulian, prohi|biting the Children of Christians to be brought vp in the Schooles of learning. He detected the heresie of Apollinaris, and the abominations of Heathen idolatrie, whereunto Iu|lian had sold himselfe,Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 7. more cleerely then any other man had done. A man worthie for excellencie of gifts, to be cal|led Theologus.
Basilius Magnus,Basilius Magnus. Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, was so vnited in heart and mind with Nazianzenus, that the Pen

of Socrates will not separate the Treatises of their liues. His father Basilius,Socrat. lib. 4. ap. 26. his mother Eumele, his nurse that fostered him, named Macrina, all were Christians. His father was martyred vnder the persecuting Emperour Maximus. He left behinde him fiue sonnes: three of them were Bi|shops, namely, Basilius Bishop of Caesarea, Peter Bishop of Sebata, and Gregorius Bishop of Nyssa. He was instrusted in all kinde of learning in Caesarea, in Constantinople, in Athens vnder Himerius and Proaeresius, in Antiochia vnder Libanius. At his second comming to Athens, he acquainted himselfe with Nazianzenus. They spent too much time in searching out the deepenesse of humane learning: and it re|pented Basilius,Basil. Eustatio, epist. 79. that he had spent so much time in searching out things that are not necessary to eternall life. He was or|dained a Deacon by Meletius, B. of Antiochia, and a Pres|byter by Eusebius B. of Caesarea in Cappadocia. The good cariage of Basilius toward Eusebius is worthic of remem|brance, albeit Eusebius conceiued indignation against him without a cause, yet he would not expostulate with his Bi|shop, but he departed to a solitarie place in Pontus, where he remained vntill the dayes of the Emperour Valens. Then did the Arrian Heresie so mightily prevaile, that necessitie compelled the Churches of Cappadocia to intreat Basilius to turne againe, left in his absence Arrianisme should get a full vpper-hand. Basilius returned, not without the fore|knowledge  good aduise of Nazianzenus his deare friend,Nazian. Basi|lis, epist. 19. who counselled him to preueene Eusebius, and to ouercome him in courtesie and humanitie: So was he reconciled to Eusebius, and after his death was ordained B. of Caesarea in Cappadocia: whom God so blessed, that the Arrians and Eunomians,Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 26. who seemed to be excellently learned, when they encountered with Nazianzenus and Basilius, they were like vnto men altogether destitute of learning. In the persecuti|on of Valens, he was led to Antiochia, and presented before the Deputy of Valens, who threatned him with banishment and death: but he answered him with inuincible courage, so that the Deputy was astonished at his answeres. He was

not afraid of banishment,Socrat. ibid. because the earth is the Lords: neither was he afraid of death, but wished to haue that ho|nour, that the bonds of his earthly tabernacle might be loo|sed for the testimony of Christ.Note. The Emperours sonne Ga|laces at this time was sicke vnto the death, and the Empresse sent him word. that she had suffered many things in her dreame for the B. Basilius, so he was dismissed, and suffered to returne to Caesarea.
The prouident care of God ouer-ruling all humane co|gitations, kept before hand some sparkles that were not quenched in the feruent heat of this persecution. The mul|tiplied number of his Letters sent to the Bishops of the West, whereof he receiued no comfortable answere, gaue vnto Basilius iust occasion to suspect affectation of suprema|cy in the West, as his owne words doe testifie, which I cite out of the Latine version as most easie to be vnderstood: Ni|hil nos fratres separat nisi animi proposito,Basil. transma|rinis, epist. 77 separations causas ro|brque demus: vnus est Dominus, vna Fides, Spes eadem. Siue caput vniversalis Ecclesiae vos ipsos esse reputatis, non potest pedi|bus dicere caput, non est mihi opus vobis, c. That is, There is nothing, brethren, that separates vs, except the purpose of our owne mindes furnish both cause and strength to sepa|ration: There is one God, one Faith, one Hope. Or if yee suppose your selues to be head of the vniversall Church, yet the head cannot say vnto the feete, I haue no neede of you.
Nyssa,Gregori Nyssenus. is a Citie of Mysia, of olde called Pythopolis. The brother germane to Basilius Magnus, named Gregorius, was Bishop of this towne. In the second generall Councell, to him was committed the ouer-sight of the Countrey of Cappadocia. Albeit the volume of his Bookes be not ex|tant,Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 8. yet he is renowned in the mouths of the learned: and the fragments of his writings declare that he hath beene a man of note and marke. Concerning sinne, he said, that al|beit the Serpents that stinged vs,Note. were not slaughtered, yet we haue sufficient consolation in this, that we are cured from their venemous bits and stings.Numb. 21.6 Concerning pilgrimage to

Ierusalem, Mount Olive, and Bethlehem, he said, that a pil|grimage from carnall lusts, to the righteousnesse of God, is acceptable to the Lord; but not a iourneying from Cap|padocia to Palestina:Hist Mgd. Cent. 4 cap. 10. and that God will giue a reward in the world to come,Note. onely to things done in this world, by war|rant of his owne Commandement.
Epiphanius. Sozom lib. 6. cap. 32.Epiphanius was borne in a little Village of Palestina, cal|led Barsanduce, in the fielde of Eleutheropolis. He was brought vp amongst the Monkes of Palestina and Egypt. In the ende he was ordained Bishop of Salamina, the Me|tropolitane towne of the Isle of Cyprus. He refuted the Heresies preceding his time in his booke called Panarium, and set downe a summe of the true faith in his booke called Anchoratus. He had a great regard to the poore: in so much, that he was called Oeconomus pauperum. And like as Cyprus was naturally situated in a place neere approaching to Asia the lesse, and to Syria, and to Egypt, and Pentapolis, and not farre distant from Europe: so it fell out, that Christians, who were disposed to support their indigent brethren, they sent their collections to Epiphanius, and he distributed them to the poore.Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 10. With all these commendable vertues, there was mixed a reproueable simplicitie in him: he was circumvee|ned by Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, and tooke a dealing against Iohn Chrysostome Bishop of Constantinople, because he would not be suddaine in damning the Books of Origen. Also he taught in Constantinople, with indeuour to alienate the hearts of the people from their owne Pastour, and cele|brated the communion, and ordained a Deacon in Con|stantinople, without the foreknowledge and consent of Chrysostome, and contrary to the Church order. Chrysostome on the other part sent him aduertisement, that in case he re|ceiued any disgrace or harme in the fury of popular commo|tions, he should blame himselfe, who by his own inordinate doings was procuring the same. After this, Epiphanius cea|sed from such doings, and entered into a ship, of purpose to returne backe againe to Cyprus, but he died by the way. It is reported of him, that when he entered into the ship, he

said,Sozom. lib. 8. cap. 15. he left three great things behinde him, to wit, a great towne, a great pallace, and great hypocrisie.
It were a matter of infinite labour,Note. and not agreeing with the nature of a Compend, to write of all the worthie men of God in the Easterne parts, who did fight a good fight, runne a good race,Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 1. and kept the Faith. Asclepas in Gaza, Luci in Adrianopolis, Basilius presbyter in Ancyra, a migh|tie adversarie to the Arrians, vnder the raigne of Constantius, and to the Pagans vnder the raigne of Iulian, in whose time he was martyred:Thed. lib. 1. cap. 5. Philogonius Bishop of Antiochia, Hellanicus Bishop of Tripolis, and Spyridion, who of a keeper of cattell, became Bishop of Trimythus, Hermogenes Bishop of Caesa|rea in Cappadocia, who was present at the Councell of Nice, Iames Bishop of Nisibis, in Mesopotamia, in the dayes of Constantius,Theod. lib. 2 cap. 30. by whose prayers the armie of Sapores King of Persia was miraculously disappointed. Paulus Bishop of Neocaesarea: this towne is situated vpon the bankes of Eu|prates, and Paphnutius Bishop in Thebaida, two notable Confessors, who were both present at the Councell of Nice. Eusebius Samosatenus,Theod. lib. 2. cap. 32. to whom many of Basilius Epistles are directed, and who refused to redeliuer vnto the Emperour Constantius the subscriptio~s of the Arrian Bishops, who con|sented to the admission of Meletius to be Bishop of Antio|chia, which subscriptions were put in his custodie. And al|beit the messenger sent from the Emperour, threatned to cut off his right hand, in case he deliuered not the subscriptions aforesaid, yet he constantly refused to deliuer them: and the Emperour both admired and commended his constancie:Theod. lib. 5. cap. 8. Barses Bishop of Edessa in Mesopotamia, Eulogius and Pro|togenes presbyters there,Idem, lib. 4. cap. 18. vnder the raigne of Valens were ba|nished to Antinoe in Thebaida, whose travailes God won|derfully blessed, to the conversion of many soules to the kingdome of God: Theodulus Bishop of Trianopolis, Amphi|lochius Bishop of Iconium in Lycaonia. Pelagius Laodicenus, whose name is the more famous for his insolent fact;Note. for he married a young woman,Tod. lib. 4. cap. 13. and the first night after her marri|age, he perswaded her to preferre Virginall chastitie, to ma|trimoniall

copulation. Antiochus the brother sonne of Eu|sebius Samosatenus could not abide the imposion of the hands of an Arrian Bishop. Letoius Bishop of Meletina in Armenia, who burnt the Monasteries, or rather as Theodore|tus writes,Theod. lib. 4. cap. 11. the dennes of theeues, wherein the Heretiques called Massaliani had their abiding Ephem Syrus a man borne in Nisibis, brought vp in the wildernesse, was counted a fa|mous Writer in the Syrian Language. The bookes shrow|ded vnder his name, are thought for the most part to be supposititious.Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 27. Aeas who liued in company with Zenon Bi|shop of Maioma, neere vnto Gaza, is much reported of, be|cause he married a young woman, procreated three children with her, and in the end left her, and entered into a Mona|sterie, forgetting his matrimoniall couenant. Zebenius Bi|shop of Eleutheropolis in Phaenicia, to whom Sozomenus af|firmeth, that by diuine revelation,Sozom lib. 7. cap. 28. the places were manife|sted, wherein the bodies of the Prophets, Habacuk and Mi|cheas were buried: So superstitious are Ecclesiasticall Wri|ters alreadie become, that the searching out of things no|thing appertaining to eternall life, are ascribed to divine re|velations. The judicious Reader will pardon me, that I write not in particular of the liues of all the fore mentioned Bishops and Pastors, because the nature of a short Compend cannot permit it to be done.


Bishops and Doctors in Africke.
Didymus. Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 15.IN Africke, ouer and besides the Bishops of Alexandria, was Didymus, a Doctor of the schoole of Alexandria, who through occasion of a dolour that fell into his eyes, became blind from his very youth: Yet by continuall exercise of his minde, he became excellently learned in all Sciences: But aboue all things the exact knowledge of divine Scriptures made him a terrour to the Arrians. Many doe write, that the very last period of time, wherein Iulian the Apostate

concluded his wretched life,Sozom. lb. 6. cap 2. was revealed to Didymus in a dreame, and that he againe tolde it to Athanasius, who lur|ked secretly in Alexandria, during the time of the raigne of Iulian.
Arnobius was an Oratour in Africke,Arnobius, afterward he be|came a Christian, and craued to be baptized. Christian Bi|shops lingered to conferre the holy Sacrament to a man, who had beene a hater of Christian Religion of a long time. Yet Arnob. freed himself from all suspition of Paganisme, by writing Bookes wherein he confuted the Idolatrie of the Pagans,Ierom. chron. and was baptized about the yeere of our Lord 330. About the suffering of our Lord he writes very judiciously: That like as the beames of the Sunne, that shine vpon a tree, when the tree is cutted,Simile. Arnob. in Psal. 129. the Sunne-beames cannot be cut|ted: Euen so, in the suffering of Christ, the diuine Nature suffered no paine.
Lactantius Frmianus, was the Disciple of Arnobius. In elo|quence he was nothing inferior to his Master:Ierom ad Paulinum. yet it is thought, that he impugned errours with greater dexteritie, then he confirmed the Doctrine of the Truth.
Optatus Bishop of Meleuitanum in Africke,Optatus Mele|uitanu. in the dayes of Valentinian and Valens, set his Pen against the Donatistes, especially against Parmenianus, whose absurd assertion he clearely refutes.
First, Whereas the Donatists affirmed, that the Church of Christ was onely to be found in a corner of Africke. He refutes it by Scripture,Psal. 2.. wherein it is written, Aske of me, and I will giue thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the ends of the world for thy possession: This place proues the Church to be Catholicke.
Also whereas they saide, that Baptisme was not auailea|ble, except some of their sect had beene present at the admi|nistration thereof; he answereth, That when God first crea|ted the Element of water, the presence of the Trinitie was powerfull in operation to create water, albeit none of the Donatists were then present: Euen so the Trinitie can worke effectually in Baptisme, albeit none of the Donatists be pre|sent:

Yea, and that it was God (the author of Baptisme, and not the Minister) that did sanctifie, according as it is writ|ten, Wash me,Psal. 51.7. and I shall be whiter then the snow, c.


Bishops and Doctours of Europe.
Acholius.ACHOLIVS Bishop of Thessalonica, baptized the Emperour Theodosius, after he returned from the slaughter of Maximus. The Emperour fell sicke by the way, before he came to Constantinople, and was desirous to be baptized:Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 6. Neverthelesse, he would not suffer Acholius to baptize him, vntill he was assured that Acholius was not spotted with the Arrian Heresie. After Baptisme the Em|perour recouered his health againe.Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 4. Acholius was brought vp in Monasteries, like as Epiphanius, and many other wor|thie men were brought vp.
Hilarius.Hilarius Bishop of Poitiers in France, liued vnder the raigne of Constantius: a man in Religion constant, in man|ners meeke and courteous.Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 31. He was banished immediately after the Councell of Millane, to Phrygia, as some suppose. Theodoretus writeth, that he was banished to Thebaida: and relieued againe from banishment vnder Iulian. But it is more apparent,Theod. lib. 3. cap. 4. that he remained in Phrygia, vntill the Councell of Seleucia; vnto which Councell he was brought from banishment: not by any speciall commandement from the Emperour, but by a generall commandement giuen to his Deputie Leonas, to assemble together the Bishops of the East.Hist. Magd. Cent. 4. cap. 10. Vnder pretence of obeying this commandement, Hi|larius being banished in the East, was brought to the Coun|cell of Seleucia: from Seleucia he went to Constantinople. The Emperour refused to heare him reason with the Arri|ans in the matters of Faith, but gaue him libertie to re|turne to his owne countrey againe. He tooke great paines to purge the countrey of France from the poyson of Arrian heresie: and he preuailed so farre, that Ierom compares him

to Deucalion,Ierom. in Chron. who both sawe the flood of waters ouer-flow|ing Thessalia, and the abating of them also: Euen so Hila|rius saw both the growth and decay of Arrianisme in France.Similie. He liued sixe yeeres after his returning from banishment, and concluded his life vnder the reigne of Valentinian.
Ambrose the sonne of Symmachus,Ambrosius. was a man of noble pa|rentage: vnder the Emperour Valentinian he was gouernour of Liguria. At this time Auxentius Bishop of Millane (an Arrian) died. Great sedition was in the Towne, for the e|lection of a new Bishop,Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 11. euery man contending to haue a Bishop chosen of that faith which he himselfe best liked. Ambrose fearing the vndoing of the Towne by this intestine contention, exhorted them to vnitie and concord, with words and reasons to perswase, that the people with one consent cried out, they would be all of one minde, if that Ambrose were appointed to be their Bishop.Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 30. The Empe|rour thought this inexpected consent of the people came from GOD, and he consented to the desire of the people. So was Ambrose ordained Bishop of Millaine. After the death of Valentinian, he was grieuously troubled by Iustina, the mother of Valentinian the second: for shee was infected with Arrianisine. Ambrose was fauoured by the people, and would not betray the sheepe-folde of GOD to Wolues.Theod. lib. 5. cap. 13. Ambrose ad Marcellinam epist. 33. August. Con|fess. lib. 9. c. 7. Theod. lib 5. cap. 14. Hist. Magd. Cent. 4. cap. 10. The particular description of the broile of Iustina may be read at length in the Epistle that Ambrose writes to his sister Marcellina.
The miracle wrought at the sepulchres of Protasius and Gervasius, mittigated somewhat the furie of Iustina. But the dolorous tydings of the slaughter of Gratianus compel|led Iustina to flie from Italie to Illyricum for safetie of her owne life, and her sonnes life. He sustained also great trouble vnder the two Tyrants Maximus and Eugenius: so that he was compelled in the time of Maximus, to flie to Aquileia: and in the time of Eugenius, to flie to Hetruria, He liued also vnder the raigne of Theodosius, whom hee sharpely reprooued for the slaughter of the innocent people of Thessalonica:Theod. lib. 5. cap. 18. and died in the third yeere of the raigne

of Honorius, after he had gouerned the Church of Millane twentie-two yeeres.
Prudentius.Prudentius, a man of Spaine, a Lawyer at some times, and a Warriour at other times in his young yeeres. In his old age he writ of diuine matters. He liued vnder the reigne of Valentinian the second, of Theodosius, and his sonnes. He set forth his knowledge in Bookes of Latine Poesie, albeit Greeke inscriptions be prefixed vnto them, such as , which intreateth of the fight betwixt the spirit and the flesh:Hist. Magd. Cent. 4. cap. 10. , which intreateth of the workes to be done in the day time: , intreateth of Divinitie and di|vine things: , intreateth of Originall sinne, a|gainst Cerdon and Marcion, the Authors of two beginnings: , a booke conteining the prayses of victorious Martyrs.Psal. 50.58. In this Booke is frequent invocation of Saints, ex|presse against holy Scripture: , conteining Histo|ries, both of the olde and new Testament. The verses, wherein he argueth the Heresie of the Manicheans, who attributed vnto Christ, not a true, but a phantasticall bodie made of aire, are very judiciously conceiued:
Restat vt ariam pingas ab origine gentem.
Arios proceres, Leuim, Iudam, Simeonem,
Aerium DAVID, magnorum corpora Regum
Aeria, at que ipsam foecundae virginis alvum
Acre fallaci, nebulisque  nube tumentem.
The Ecclesiasticall Writers, whom I haue chiefly follow|ed in this Compend, make no mention of him.
Osius.Osius Bishop of Corduba, was a Confessor, in the Perse|cution of Dioclesian and Maximianus. He was regarded by the Emperour Constantine, for the markes of the rebuke of Christ. The Emperour employed him in the schisme in Aegypt,Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 7. betwixt Alexander and Arrius. Likewise he sent him to the Bishops of the East, who differed in opinion from the Bishops of the West concerning the keeping of Easter day.Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 16. He was present at the Councell of Nice, where

he damned the heresie of Arrius: And at the councell of Sardica, he absolued Athanasius, Paulus, c. Neither was he terrified with the menacing Letters of Constantius, but an|swered couragiously, that Athanasius was an innocent man, and that the Emperour did not well to hearken to the ca|lumnies of Versatous and Valens, men who had by writ con|fessed to Iulius Bishop of Rome,Thod lib. 2. cap. 19. that the accusations inten|ded against Athanasius, were but forged calumnies. And this they did of their owne accord freely, and not compel|led. In his decrepit yeeres (for hee liued an hundreth yeeres) some weaknesse was found in him. At the councell of Syrmium, he was compelled to be present in that assem|bly of Arrian Bishops,Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 31. to whose wicked constitutions (fear|ing torture and banishment, from which he was lately redu|ced) he subscribed.
Ierom was borne in a towne of Dalmatia,Hieronymu. called Stridon, and was instructed in the Rudiments of Learning at Rome. From Rome he went to France,Ierom. epist. ad Gerons. of purpose to increase his knowledge, and to diuerse other places, and he returned a|gaine to Rome, where he acquainted himselfe with honou|rable women, such as Marcella, Sophronia, Principia, Paula, and Eustochium, to whom he expounded places of holy Scripture, for he was admitted presbyter: He was counted worthie to succeed Damasus B. of Rome: his gifts were enuied at Rome: therefore he left Rome, and tooke his voi|age toward Palestina. By the way he acquainted himselfe with Epiphanius B. of Cyprus, with Nazianzenus B. in Con|stantinople, with Didymus Doctor in the Schoole of Alex|andria, and sundry other men of Note and Marke. In the end he came to Iudea, and made choise of the place of the Lords Natiuitie to be the place of his death. At Bethlehem, Paula a Noble woman (who accompanied Ierom,Hist. Magd. cent. 4. cap. 10. and his brother Paulinianus from Rome) vpon her owne charges builded foure Monasteries. Ierom guided one Monasterie, wherein were a number of Monkes. The other three, where|in there were companies of holy Virgines, she guided her selfe. Ierom was a man of sterne disposition, and more in|clinable

to a solitary and Monkish life, then to fellowship and societie. Neither Heliodorus in the Wildernesse, nor Ruffinus out of the Wildernesse,August. epist. 17. could keepe inuiolable friendship with him. The Letters that passed betwixt August. and Ierom declare, that Ierom knew not how great a victory it was in loue, in humilitie, and friendship to ouer-come them,Ierom. Aug. epist. 13.14. who seemed to contend against him. Ierom wanted not his owne grosse errours. Concerning the creation hee thought,Ierom. auar. in tit. cap. 1. Ierom. lib. 18. Comment. in Isaiam. Hist. Magd. cent. 4. cap. 10. that Angels, Thrones, Dominations, were existent before the world was created. In his Bookes written against Iouinian, he writeth not reuerently of Mariage, and he see|meth to condemne the second Mariage. He ended his life a|bout the twelfth yeere of the raigne of Honorius, in the yeere of his age 91.
Ecclesiasticall Writers haue filled their Bookes with excessiue commendations of Heremites and Monks: of whom (God willing) I shall write in a particular Treatise of Monasti|call life.




CENTVRIE. V.

Patriarches of Rome.
_AFter Stricius succeeded Anastatius,Anastatius. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 9. Plana, de vit. Pontif. Innocentus 1. Socrat lib. 7. cap. 9. and go|uerned the Church of Rome three yeeres. About the yeere of our Lord 401. hee entred into his office, vnder the raigne of Honorius. Hee made a constitution, that men should not sit, but stand when the Gospell was read. After him succeeded Innocentius, and continued in his office fifteene yeeres: hee was an aduersarie to the Novatians, and Pelagians, and was friendly to Iohn Chrysostome, whose deposition Eudoxia the Emperours wife had procured. Innocentius sent to Honorius, and Arcadius; fiue Bishops, and two Presbiters, to procure the appointment of a Councell, wherein the cause of Chry|sostome might be examined: for hee counted the gathe|ring of an Ae cumenicke Councell the only remedy where|by the vehement tempest of so great commotions as follow|ed the deposition and banishment of Chrysostome,Sozom. 1.8. c. 26. could be settled: but the aduersaries of Chrysostome procured the messengers of Innocentius to be ignominiously entreated, and sent backe againe.Ibid. cap. 28. Heere let the iudicious Reader marke that the power of conuocating generall Councells appertained to the Emperour, and not vnto the Bishop of Rome.Note. In this mans time (according to mine opinion) the Roman Church began to swell in pride, and to vsurpe iurisdiction ouer other Churches, hauing no better ground than a personall and temporall act of the councel of Sardica.
Zosimus the successor of Innocentius continued not aboue the space of a yeere and 5. months in office,Zosimus. or 2. yeeres,

as Socrates writeth.Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 11. To him Platina ascribeth this constitu|tion, that no seruant should be assumed into the clergie: but he lamenteth, that not onely seruants, but also the sons of strange women, and flagitious persons, were admitted to spirituall offices to great detriment of the Church. He sent Faustinus a Bishop to the Councell of Carthage, with 2. Presbyters of the Romane Church to craue that no mat|ter of moment and importance should be done without ad|uise of the Roman Bishop.Platin. de vit. Zosu. He pretended an act of the coun|cell of Nice allotting this dignitie to the Romane chaire: but after diligent search of the principall register no such act was found.Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10. I expected that Onuphrius now should haue compeared,  in so maine a point said something to the cause, which with tooth  naile he defendeth, but in his an|notations I see nothing except a diuersity of cou~ting of yeres for in his reckoning Zosimus continued 3. yeeres 4-months.
Bonifacius 1.To Zosimus succeeded Bonifacius 1. and gouerned 3. yeeres. At his election there was a schisme in Rome. Some elected Bonifacius,Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 11. others Eulalius to be their bishop. The Emperour Honorius ba~ished them both from Rome, but after 7 months Bonifacius was restored, and was Bishop of Rome: at this time they were bishops of Rome, to whom the Emperour gaue allowance, but they were not Emperours, to whom the Bishop of Rome gaue allowance.
Coelestinus 1. Socrat. l. 7. c. 11.After Bonifacius, Coelestinus gouerned the Church of Rome, eight yeeres, ten months, and seuenteene dayes. He was an aduersary to the Novatians, Pelagians, and to Nestorius and his adherents. Socrates taketh him vp, right, that hee was bitter against the Novatians, for desire of preheminence. In Constantinople they who professed the true faith, had libertie to meete together, albeit in matters of discipline their opinion was not found: but Coelestinus silenced Rusticola the Bishop of the Novatians For desire to haue all Bishoppes stouping vnder his soue|raignitie. Marke the words of Socrates in the Latine translation bearing these words:Socrat. ibid. Romano Episcopatus iam dim peride atque Alexandrin ultra sacred lutes ad

exterum dominatum progrss:Note. that is, the bishoprick of Rome, euen of old hauing stepped beyond the limites of Priest|hood to an externall domination, as the Bishopricke of Alexandria had done before. Pelagius had propagated his heresie in the Isle of Britaine. But Coelestinus hindred the propagation of a wicked heresie, by sending Germanus to the Brittaines, and Palladius to the Scots. Coelestinus more impudently than his predecessours,Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10. Innocentius, Zosimus and Bonifacius, vrged a submission of the Churches of Carthage vnto the Romane chaire, and that they should accept in fauour Appiarius whom they excommunicated for his appellation from his owne Bishop to the Bishop of Rome: but the fathers of the sixt Councell of Carthage would neither absolue Appiarius before his repentance were knowne, neither would they stoup vnder the iurisdiction of the Roman Church.
To Coelestinus succeeded Sixtus the third,X ystus or Sixtus. and continued in office eight yeeres, ninteene dayes. Hee was accused of the crime of Adultery by Bassus; but Sixtus was found innocent,Platina de vitispontif. and Bassus was found a calumniator and a false accuser: therefore he was banished by the Emp. Valentinian the third, and his goods were appointed to goe to the vse of the Church. Bassus after his banishment desired to be re|ceiued againe in fauour with Sixtus: but his petition was re|iected as if he had sinned against the holy Ghost. Notwith|standing the flatterers of the chaire of Rome writeth that Sixtus buried Bassus his accuser with his owne hands;Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10. which seemeth to be repugnant to his vnmerciful forme of dealing in his life-time.
After Sixtus,Leo. Leo a deacon in Rome, and absent out of the towne, was chosen the bishop of Rome, and ruled 21. yeeres, 1. month, 13. daies:Platina de vit. pontif. he stirred vp the Emperour Theo|dosius 2. to appoint a councell for suppressing the error of Eutyches, wherein it was rather co~firmed than suppressed by the craft of Dioscorus B of Alexandria, whereof I shall speake hereafter, God willing,  how Eutyches was co~demned in the councel of Chalcedon vnder the raigne of Martianus. His

wisdome and eloquence in mitigating the surie of Attila hath beene handled in the preceding historie.Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10. Amongst his constitutions none is more commendable then his constitution against ambitious men,Note. who presume con|tinually to high places. Hee ordained that they should be depriued both of the higher, and the lower place: of the lower place for their pride, because they had proud|ly despised it: of the higher, because they had auariti|ously suted it. In discipline nothing is better than to beare downe those place mongers, whereby it commeth to passe, that prerogatiue of place is referred to prero|gatiue of gift.Hilarius. Hilarius followed and continued seuen yeeres, three months, ten dayes. To whom succeeded Simplicius,Simplicius. and continued fifteene yeeres, one month and seuen dayes.Foelix. 3. Foelix the third was the successor of Simpli|cius, and continued eight yeers, eleuen months, and seuen|teene dayes. Hee gouerned the Church of Rome in the time of the Emperour Zeno,Platin. de vit. Pontif. and in the time, when Odo|acer and Theodoricus contended for the superioritie of Italie: hee was nothing inferiour to his antecessors in zeale to ad|uance the Supremacie of the Romane Chayre: for hee excommunicated Acatius Bishop of Constantinople, be|cause he craued not his aduise in receiuing Ptrus Moggus in fauour, like as hee had craued his aduise at the first when he excommunicated him. This Petrus Moggus was an Euty|chian heretike, and was iustly excommunicated by Acatius, who vsed the aduise of Foelix Bishop of Rome, in exco~muni|cating him.Hist. Magd. cnt. 5. cap. 10. But when Petrus Moggus testified his repentance by his supplicant bill, containing the recantatio~ of his error, Acatius absolued him. This grieued the proud stomacke of Foelix, because his aduise was not craued in all things. There|fore he excommunicated Acatius, as is said. Acatius little re|garding the pride of the Romane Bishop, gaue to Foelix an hard meeting: for he both excommunicated Foelix, and razed his name out of the roll of Bishops. Ambition was the first great cancker-worme that consumed  defaced the beautie of the Church of Rome.
Gelasius the successor of Foelix,Gelasius. an Africane borne, ru|led foure yeeres, eight months, and seuenteene dayes. The estate of Italie was so troubled by the incursions of barba|rous people, that the manners of the people were altogether dissolute (for hee ministred in the last yeere of Theodori|cus King of Italie) therefore hee endeuoured to establish discipline in the Church:Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10. hee claimed superioritie ouer all Churches more manifestly than any of his predeces|sors had done, for he affirmed that the Church of Rome should iudge all Churches, and should bee iudged by no Church, and that the right of Appellation to the Bishop of Rome from all parts in the world, was not a supposititious act of the Nicene Councell, as the Councell of Carthage had determined, but that it was authentike,  a Right giuen by them indeed to the Roman Church: neither would h
e be reconciled with the Orientall Bishops in any case, except they would first allow the excommunication of Acatius,Platina, de vit. Pontif. and raze his name out of the roll of Bishops. Platina writeth that hee did excommunicate the Emperour Ana|statius a fauourer of the Eutychian heresie, but this exam|ple once begun, was practised in most prodigall maner by the Bishops of Rome against Emperours, who maintained no heresie.


Patriarches of Constantinople.
IOhn Chrysostome succeeded to Nectarius in the dayes of Arcadius,Iohn Chryso|stome. and Honorius: hee had beene an helper to Flavi|anus Bishop of Antioch, from whence hee was transported by the authoritie of the Emperour Arcadius,Theod. l. 5. c. 27. and ordai|ned Bishop of Constantinople, sore against the hearts of the people of Antiochia. In Oratory he had profited in the school of Libanius,Szom. l. 8. c. 2. in Philosophie in the schoole of Andragathius beyond his fellowes. His libertie in reproouing of sin both in Court and Clergie, procured against him the hatred of

Eudoxia the Empresse, and hatred of the Clergie, who could not suffer their corrupt maners to be reformed. Theo|philus Bishop of Alexandria was opposed to Chrysostome from the verie first time of his ordination: for hee endeuou|red to haue Isidorus a Monke brought vp in the wildernes of Schethis, and afterward a Presbyter in Alexandria to bee seated in Constantinople: but when his plotted course fai|led, he became an enemie to Chrysostome, and gladly embra|ced all occasions, whereby he might procure his deposition: how he was iustly deposed, banished, and iourneyed to death by the malice of Eudoxia, and Theophilus it hath beene suf|ficiently declared in the preceding historie. Other things (God willing) shall be handled in the description of the life of Theophilus.Chy. rn. Chrysostome gouerned the Church of Con|stantinople. 7. yeeres.
Arsatius.After Chrysostome, Arsatius the brother of Nectarius an aged man (for he was fourescore yeere old) sate in Constan|tinople scarce 2. yeeres.
Atticus.Atticus the successor of Arsatius sate 21. yeeres. He was admitted to this office in the time of the minoritie of Theo|dosius the second:Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 1.2. Sozom. l. 8. c. 27 Theo. lib. 5. cap. 34. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 4. at what time Anthemius his counseller (a man in wisdome inferiour to none who liued in his time) gouerned the affaires of the Kingdome. Atticus was not vn|learned: he was godly and prudent: he inserted the name of Chrysostome into the roll of Bishops, and in the pub|like Liturgie made an honourable commemoration of his name, and perswaded Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria to doe the like. Socrates affirmeth that God by his ministrie wrought miraculous workes, and that a Ievve sicke of the Palsie was baptized by him in the Name of Iesus, and immediatly after Baptisme was healed of his disease. In staying the progresse of superstition, wherein people, euen at this time were enclined,st. Magd. nt. . cap. 10. hee carried himselfe prudently: for some of the people of Constantinople resorted to the sepulcher of Sabbatius to pray, and to doe some worship to the defunct: but Attus caused his body in the night season to be raised, and to be buried

in another place vnknowne to the foresaid superstitious peo|ple,Note. and so they left off their resorting to the sepulchre of Sabbatius.
Sisinnius after Atticus ministred 2. yeeres.Sisinnius. Nestorius follow|ed him in office, but his name is to be reade in the catalogue of heretikes.Maximianus. Proclus. Next to Nestorus was Maximianus, who con|tinued not aboue, 2. yeeres, and 5. months. To whom succee|ded Proclus, and continued 12. yeeres.
Flaianus after Proclus gouerned that sea,Flaianus. in the dayes of Theodosius the second: a faithfull man in his calling, but scarcely did he complete 2. yeeres in his Bishopricke. Hee deposed and excommunicated Eutyches an Abbot in Con|stantinople, the authour of a pernitious heresie. Hee was cruellie troden vnder foot in the second councell of Ephesu called , that is, a councell of brigandrie. Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria,Evag. l. . c. 10. in that councell fauoured the opinion of Etyches, and by tumultuary dealing, so oppressed Flavi|anus, that he procured his death. They who attribute too much to the authoritie of Councels,Note. let them fasten their eyes vpon this councell, and learne, that possibly councels may erre, and that Patriarches, such as Dioscorus was, may erre, euen in matters of faith.
To Flaianus succeeded Anatolius, and gouerned eight yeeres.Anatolius. Geadius. Acatius. And after him Gennadius thirteene yeeres. Acatius the successor of Gennadius gouerned seuenteene yeeres vnder the Emperour Zeo. Hee gaue a good proofe of his con|stancie in the true faith, at that time when Basiliscus (who draue Zeno from his Kingdome) condemned the Councel of Chalcedon, and compelled bishops to subscribe to the er|rour of Eutyches. The great dissention that fell out bewixt him and the Roman Bishops, for Petrus Moggus Bishop of Alexandria, and Petrus Cnapheus Bishop of Antiochia, it was, not for co~municating with them before they renounced their errour, as some learned men doe affirme, but for plaine emulation;Funct. Comnt inchrnol. such as was of old betwixt Pompeius and Caesar, the one could not abide a co~panion, the other could not abide a superior. The Roman Church manifestly co~tended for supe|riority:

the Church of Constantinople on the other part per|ceiuing what aduantage the Roman bishops tooke of this that their counsel was craued,Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10. they left off the doing of it. And this moued the proud stomacke of Gelasius (after the death of Acatius to burst out in these arrogant words,Gelasius in epist. a Dar|dan. 11. that the church of Rome had power to iudge of all other churches, but no church had power to iudge of the church of Rome; yea, and Platina a late writer groundeth the supremacie of the B. of Rome vpo~ this,Platin. de vit. Simplicii. that Acatius B. of Consta~tinople wrote vnto him, to damne the heretical opinion of Perus Moggus B. of Alexandria: albeit the faith of Peter was grounded vpo~ a sure rocke,Math. 16. yet the supremacie of the Roman Bishops is grounded only vpon such sandie ground, as Platina and other flatterers of the Romane chaire doe cast out in their writings.
Pharauitas.After Acatius succeeded Phrauitas, otherwise called Flaui|tas, and continued scarse 4. months: some thinke that God in wrath shortned his dayes,Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10. because that by vnlawfull meanes hee attained to that dignitie to be Bishop of Con|stantinople. The Synodicke letter of Petrus Moggus Bi|shop of Alexandria written to Flauitas, and pondered by his successor Euphmius, wherein Petrus Moggus accurseth the councell of Chalcedon, it will clearely prooue inconstancie in Petrus Moggus, but not a fault in Acatius: for many are like vnto dogs,Evagr. lib. 3. cap. 23. who returne vnto their vomite againe, and this blame must rest in the bosome of fickle and vnconstant men,Simile. and not in the bosome of honest men who are deceiued by them.
Euphemius.Euphemius succeeded to Flauitas, and gouerned vnder the raigne of Zeno and Anastatius, and would not complete the ceremonies of the inauguration of Anastatius vntill the time that by his oath and hand-writ,Hist. Magd. cent. 4. cap. 10. hee promised to be a defen|der of the true faith and of the actes of the councell of Chalcedon. The hand-writ Anastatius craued to be deliue|red backe againe to him, which when he could not obtaine, Euphemius was compelled to flie for safetie of his life. When he pondered the Synodicke letter of Petrus Moggus he ab|hored his name,  inserted against the name of Flix B. of

Rome into the catalogue of Bishops, which was razed and cancelled by Acatius one of his predecessors.


Patriarchs of Alexandria.
THeophilus ministred in Alexandria in the dayes of The|odosius,Theophilus. and of his sonnes Arcadius and Honorius: a man both reproovable in his life, and inconstant in his faith. Hee sent Isidorus a Monke, to Rome there to lurke secret|ly, and to expect the event of the battell that was to bee sought betwixt Theodosius Maximus, and to congratulate the victor. When hee returned from Rome, hee endevou|red to promote him to the Bishopricke of Constantinople: but Iohn Chrysostome, was preferred before him. After this, hee cannot keepe friendship with Isidorus, whom he inten|ded once to haue preferred, but vpon a light occasion cast him off, and excommunicated him; because hee would not deliver to him the mony left in testamental legacie to be distributed to the poore. This money which Theophilus si|ster had left to the vse aforesayd;Sozom. l. 8. c. 12. Theophilus craved that it might be put in his hands, to be imployed to building and repairing of Churches. But Isidorus answered, that the mo|ney put in his custodie, should bee bestowed according to the will of the defunct. And that it was a worke more ac|ceptable to God, to support the poore, who are the living temples of God, then to build olde and ruinous walles. Therefore Theophilus hated, and excommunicated Isidorus: for this cause Isidorus left Alexandria, and addressed him|selfe to the wildernesse of Schethis, where hee complained to Ammonius, Dioscorus, Eusebius, and Enthymius, called Long fatres, of the iniury that Theophilus had done vnto him; who intreated Theophilus to receiue Isidorus in favour againe, and to admit him to his communion: but Theophi|lus gaue vnto them an evill reward for their travels; for hee hated them, and finding that there were diverse opinions

amongst the Monkes of Nitria and Schethis, hee put fuell to the fire, to the end that diversity of affection might bee ad|ded to diversity of opinion: a man in all his courses malici|ous and deceitfull. Longifratres fled to Constantinople, to complaine to the Emperour Arcadius, of the malice of The|ophilus, and they were humanely and courteously received by Chrisostome; but not admitted to the participation of the holy mysteries, vntill their cause had beene first iudged. To the rest of the Monkes who dwelt in Nitria and Schethis, the malice of Theophilus was not vnknowne. And fiue hun|dred of them (especially such as were Anthropomorphite) came from the wildernesse of Nitria, with intention to haue slaine Theophilus,Socrat. l. 6. c. 7. but hee met them, and with gentle and flattering words, lenified their anger, for he said vnto them: Brethren, I see your faces as the face of God. They tooke his words in this sense, as if hee had sayd; that God was fashioned according to the likenesse of a mans body. There|fore they desired him to abiure the doctrine of Origen, which thing hee willingly did, for he hated the bookes of Origen: and so he escaped the danger.
The next practice of his malice, was against Iohn Chry|sostome Bishop of Constantinople, whom he hated, because he had received and courteously intreated Isidorus and Lon|gifratres, who came to Constantinople, with intention to accuse him. In this matter hee dealt deceitfully, like vnto a crafty foxe lying in waite, vntill hee found occasion to set on. First, hee reconciled himselfe to Epiphanius, Bishop of Salamin in Cyprus, and mooved him to gather a Councell in Cyprus, for damning the bookes of Origen; and to write to Iohn Chrysostome, that he would do the like in his bounds: but Chrysostome tooke little regard of the counsell of Epipha|nius, other things were more necessarie, then to trouble the memoriall of a man that was dead long agoe. Theophilus was glad to haue this advantage, that Epiphanius a man of great account, was on his side; and so soone as hee found that Edoxia, the Emperor Arcadius wife, with Courteours and some of the Clergie, were incensed against Chrysostome,

hee was in readinesse as a firebrand of Satan, to execute all evill turnes. So the man of God (as hath beene declared) was deposed, banished, and vniustly put to death, by Eudoxia and Theophilus, two chiefe procurers of it.
Cyrillus,Cyrillus the nephew of Theophilus, on his brothers side, succeeded to Theophilus, and governed two and thirty yeers; A man learned, zealous, and actiue: his ministration was vnder the raignes of Theodosius the second, and Valentinian the third. Hee was an adversary to Heretiques in his dayes, especially to Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, who de|nyed the personall vnion of the divine and humane Nature in Christ: whose opinion as hereticall, was damned in the Councell of Ephesus.
Cyrillus tooke too much vpon him: for hee revenged the iniury that the Iewes had done vnto Christians in the night time, by setting vpon their Synagogues slaying a great num|ber of them, banishing others, and distributing their sub|stance, as a prey to the multitude that followed him.Soc. l. 7. c. 13. The Iewes had dwelt in Alexandria from the dayes of Alexander the Great, to that time; but now by the fury of Cyrillus, they were vtterly vndone and scattered. Orestes the Deputy of Theodosius the second, was in the towne, to whom Cyrillus would not complaine of the iniury done by the Iewes, a|gainst the Christians: but at his owne hand vsurping the office of a civill Magistrate, hee set vpon the Iewes, slew, scattered, and spoyled them, as hath beene aboue mentio|ned. This was the ground of vnsupportable discord be|twixt Orestes and Cyrillus; in so much, that fiue hundred Monkes of Nitria, came out of the wildernesse to Alexan|dria, to support Cyrillus their Bishop.Soc. l. 7. c. 14. One of them called Ammonius, wounded the Governour Orestes, and when he was taken and punished vnto the death; Cyrillus called him a Martyr, buried him in the Church, changed his name, and called him , that is, admirable.
The Romane Bishoppes claimed a superiority over their brethren; but Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria, plainely pre|tended a superiority over civill Magistrates. This mooued

Socrates writing of Coelestinus the first, to say, that the Bi|shops of Rome and Alexandria,Soc. l. 7. c. 11. had stepped beyond the li|mits of Priesthood, to the affectation of an externall domi|nation. The Bishops of Rome kept their owne pride, and borrowed from Alexandria a proud vsurpation of domina|tion over civill Magistrats: but the wise providence and pro|vident wisedome of our God, would haue the mouthes of the Bishops of Rome opened to condemne that civill domi|nation, which their successors afterward most proudly v|surped.
Gelasius de anathematis vinculo.Marke what Gelasius writeth, that before the comming of Christ, some persons, such as Melchisedecke, were both Kings and Priests. This (saith hee) Satan imitating in his members, would haue Pagan Emperours to be called Ponti|fices maximi,  Imperatores: but when he came who was indeed both King and Priest, to wit, Christ, neither did the King take vpon him the priestly dignity, neither the Priest kingly authority.
Dioscorus, who succeeded Cyrillus, his name is to reade in the catalogue of Heretiques;Proterius. but Proterius was the true successour, in regard hee kept the true Faith: but hee was cruelly slaine by the favourers of Discorus, immediately af|ter the death of the Emperour Martianus.Hist. Magd. Cent. 5. cap. 10. Timotheus Sa|lophaciolus. Evagr. lib. . cap. 11.
Timotheus Salophaciolus, governed as Bishop in Alexan|dria, 23. yeeres, six moneths, in the dayes of Zen and Basi|liscus. Albeit Basiliscus advanced another Timotheus, sur|named Aelurus to be Bishop of Alexandria, yet when Zeno was restored to his soverainty againe, Salophaciolus received his place againe.
After Timotheus Salophaciolus, followed Iohannes Taben|nesiota, whom the Emperour Zeno iustly hated for his per|iury: for hee came Ambassador to the Emperour,Iohannes Ta|bennesiota. and cra|ued, that when their Bishop were dead, the Church of Alex|andria might haue liberty to choose their owne Bishop: the Emperour suspected that hee was ambitiously suting the place to himselfe, and therefore did binde him with an oath, that when the place should happen to be voyd, hee should

make no meanes to possesse himselfe of that roome: but hee did the contrary, and accepted the place: therefore the Emperour Zeno banished him: hee fled to Felix Bishop of Rome, who being mis-informed by Iohannes Tabennesiota, made him to thinke, that hee was persecuted for the true Faith, as Athanasius was, who fledde to Iulius Bishoppe of Rome: but the Emperours letter assured him of the contrarie, that hee was banished for periurie. Petrus Moggus, who followed, is to bee reckoned in an other Catalogue.


Patriarchs of Antiochia.
TO Flavius,Porphyrius. Soc. l. 7. c. 9. in Antiochia succeeded Porphyrius, whose ordination was more secret then becomes the ordi|nation of Bishoppes to bee, in absence of the people, when they were delighting themselues with the sight of Stage|playes in Daphne. Hee consented to the deposition of Iohn Chrysostome. No man whom I haue read, maketh reverent record of him; except Theodoretus, who possi|bly doth not examine him narrowly, but for the digni|tie of his place,Theod. l. 5. c. 35. letteth him passe with a note of commen|dation.
After Porphyrius succeeded Alexander,Alexander. a man much com|mended by Theodoretus for eloquence, but more for peace: for hee was not onely an instrument to quiet the estate of his owne Church of Antiochia, but also to quiet the estate of other Churches,  he was the first who inserted the name of Iohn Chrysostome into the catalogue of holy Bishops, and perswaded others to doe the same.Theodotus. Theodotus was his succes|sor foure yeeres, of whom little is written.
To Theodotus succeeded Iohannes Grammaticus,Iohannes Gram|maticus. and mi|nistred eighteene yeeres. In his time the Councell of Ephe|sus was assembled by Theodosius the second, and Valentinian the third. In it there was a pitifull distraction, betwixt Iohn

Bishop of Antiochia, and Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria, for a light cause. Not because Iohn Bishop of Alexandria favoured the heresie of Nestorius: but in respect hee gaue out definitiue sentence before the full number of his bre|thren were assembled together. This dissention was after|ward reconciled, and Iohannes sent to Cyrillus, Paulus E|misenus; and craved his friendshippe, and was reconciled vnto him.
Domnus.Domnus the successour of Iohannes, was an vnconstant man. Hee consented to the deposition of Eutyches, and af|terward in the Councell called , he consented to the reposition of Eutyches. Hee received a iust recompence of his vnconstancie: for the second Councell of Ephe|sus deposed him, and ordayned Maximus Bishoppe af Antiochia.
Maximus.Maximus was admitted Bishop of Antiochia, by the se|cond Councell of Ephesus. He was presented at the Coun|cell of Chalcedon; wherein, albeit the second Councell of Ephesus was damned as hereticall, and all the acts of it were abrogated; yet they gaue allowance to the deposition of Domnus,Evag. l. 2. c. vlt. and to the admission of Maximus, which thing came to passe by this occasion; Leo Bishop of Rome had re|ceiued Maximus to his communion, before the Councell of Chalcedon (albeit he had received ordination from an hereticall Councell) and the Ambassadours of Leo were presidents in the Councell of Chalcedon:Hist. Magd. cent. 5 cap. 10. therefore they overpassed lightly, and with allowance, any fact that was done by the Bishop of Rome. But all the world was set in businesse, when Acatius received in fauour Petrus Moggus, because it was done without foreknowledge of the Bishop of Rome.
To Maximus succeeded Martyrius, who being absent at Constantinople for necessarie affaires of his owne church,Martyrius. Petrus Gnapheus stole away the hearts of the people from him, so that at his returning hee was compelled to leaue Antiochia, with this good night: I forsake a disobedient Cler|gie, a rebellious people,Theod. lct. l. . and a defiled Church, reserving vnto my selfe the dignity of Priesthood.
Petrus Gnapheus,Petrus Gna|pheus. for his deserts is worthy to be reckoned in the roll of Heretickes. First, he supplanted Martyrius by vnhonest meanes in the dayes of the Emperour Le. Se|condly, he obtained a clause to be added to that part of the Liturgie, which is called Trasagios, sanctus Deus, sanctus for|tis, sanctus immortalis.Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10. To this (I say) hee added, qui cruci|fixus est pro nobis, which forme of speaking (albeit , may tolerate it to bee spoken) was sayd by him in an hereticall sense, as if the Divinity had suffered paine. Thirdly, he attributed divine honour to the Virgin Mary, and ordayned that her name should bee called vpon, in the publique prayers of the Church. Hee was banished by the Emperour Leo, and restored by Basiliscus. Hee damned the Councell of Chalcedon, and was banished the second time
 by the Emperor Zeno, and excommunicate by Felix Bishop of Rome,Stephanus. and Acatius Bishop of Constantinople. Stephanus succeeded in his roome, and was incontinent made out of the way,Calandion. by the faction of Gnapheus. Calandion succeeded Stephanus, and hee likewise was banished by the Emperour Zeno. In the end Petrus Gnapheus subscribed the henoticke letters of Zeno (these were letters containing a summe of the true Faith, an approbation of godly Councels, and a pro|testation of vnitie with godly Bishoppes) , in the Greeke language signifieth vnitiue or coniunctiue, and he|noticke letter were written to procure peace, and vnion in the Church. By these meanes Gnapheus obtained his place againe, and is reckoned in the catalogue of Bishops, onely for the subscription of the Emperours henoticke letters.


Patriarchs of Ierusalem.
TO Cyrillus succeeded Iohannes Nepos.Iohannes Nepos. Polythronius. After him Poly|thronius ministred in Ierusalem. Hee was oft accused, and oftentimes absolved. His chiefe accusation was this, that hee counted himselfe the supreme Bishop of all Bishoppes.

Sixtus the third Bishop of Rome was serious in this turne, because hee thought that the apple of his eye was touched when supremacie was spoken of. Therefore hee sent eight Ambassadors to Ierusasem: a Councell of 70. Bishops was gathered, and Polythronius was found innocent. Notwith|standing he was convict of some other faults; namely, that hee refused to consecrate a Church, vntill ten pounds of gold were payed vnto him: for this cause hee was orday|ned to dwell without the towne, a Vicar to supply his roome, and and a portion to bee allotted to him for his sustentation. This portion appointed for his sustentation, when hee sawe the people of Ierusalem pinched with fa|mine, hee solde it, and supported their necessity, and was for his loving affection to his flocke, restored to his office againe.
Iuvenalis.To him succeeded Iuvenalis, whose vnconstancie God iustly punished. Hee was present at the first Councell of E|phesus, and consented to the excommunication of Nestorius. He was present likewise at the second Councell of Ephesus, and consented to the restitution of Eutyches.Evagr. lib. 11. cap. 10. He was depo|sed in the Councell of Chalcedon, and received into fauour againe, after the humble confession of his fault. This is that famous Author, whom the Romane Church citeth for the fable of the Assumption of the Virgin Marie. When he returned to Ierusalem, a number of turbulent Monkes rose vp against him, and desired him to accurse the Councell of Chalcedon, which when hee refused to doe, they chose a|nother Bishop, called Theodosius: but the Emperour Mar|tiaxus commandement was, straight to fetch Theodosius aliue vnto him: therefore hee fled, and Iuvenalis returned againe vnto his place.Anastatius. Martyrius. The names of Anastatius and Martyrius, who followed Iuvenalis, for their assenting to Basiliscus, and to Petrus Gnapheus, are not worthy to be inserted in this Cata|logue.



Of other Pastors and Doctors.
THeodoritus was Bishop of Cyrus a towne in Syria (whose builder seemes to haue beene Cyrus King of Persia) a man of excellent learning,Theodoritus. he liued vnder the Emperours, Theodosius 2. Valentinian 3. and Martianus. Hee had the ouersight of eightie parishes lying within his ample diocie. Hee is bold to affirme in a certaine Epistle written to Leo Bishop of Rome, that by his trauailes a thousand soules within his bounds were reclaimed from the heresie of Marcion. Hee fell into many lamentable troubles. The ground of all was the extraordinarie loue he carried toward his owne Patriarch Iohn Bishop of Antiochia. For like as hee accompanied him to the Councell of Ephesus, so like|wise hee concurred with him in the deposition of Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria, and Memnon Bishop of Ephesus: but the Councell gathered at Ephesus tooke triall in the cause of Cyrillus and Memnon, and absolued them, and damned Iohn Bishop of Antiochia, and his complices. Theodoritus was one of the number. The second trouble followed vpon the necke of the first: for by instigation of patriarch Iohn, hee wrote against the twelue heades or twelue Theses of Cyril|lus written against Nestorius, wherein he mistaketh the doc|trine of Cyrillus, as if hee had fallen into the errour of Apollinaris: but after that Cyrillus wrote a declaration of his owne meaning, it was found that both Cyrillus and Theodoritus professed one faith, and they were reconciled. Neuerthelesse Theodoritus was damned in the second coun|cell of Ephesus for writing against Cyrillus, neither being cited, accused nor conuict of any fault. Theodoritus com|plained to Leo Bishop of Rome, of the outrage of Dioscorus bishop of Alexandria, who had damned him in a Councell before hee was heard. Leo absolued him, and the councel of

Chalcedon, after hee pronounced Anathema against the er|rours of Nestorius and Eutyches, they in like maner absol|ued him. And finally after his death in the fift general coun|cell, his writings against the twelue heades of Cyrillus were damned. All these troubles proceeded from one and the selfe same ground, to wit, vpon the extraordinarie loue hee caried toward his Patriarch Iohn. This one thing laid aside, hee was nothing inferiour to the most wise, ac|curate, and learned writers of the ancient time. In the first of his learned dialogues called , he prooueth that the Word became flesh without changing of the diuine Nature into the humane Nature,Theod. dialogo. 1 c. 8. or the hu|mane Nature into the diuine. Euen as in the Sacra|ment of the Supper of the Lord the bread becomes the body of the Lord, not by changing the substance of it, but by assuming by grace an other vse than it had, the very symbol obtaineth the name of the thing represen|ted by the symbol. When Papists doe read the dia|logues of Theodoritus, let them leaue off to bragge of the antiquitie of the doctrine of Transubstantiation, and take them to the Monke Damascene the first authour of their :Note. he continued at least thirtie yeeres in his ministrie, and ended his life, as is supposed, vnder the raigne of Leo the first.
Augustinus.Augustine in his young yeeres was infected with the er|rour of the Manicheans. His mother Monica watered her face many times with teares, in her prayers begging at God his conuersion to the truth. God heard her prayers: he was sent to Millan to be a teacher of Rhetoricke, by the preaching of Ambrose Bishop of Millan, and the deuote behauiour of the people in singing Psalmes to the praise of God,The maner of Augustines conuersion. the like whereof Augustine had neuer seene in any place before: for men in earth praising God with ardent affection seemed to represent the Angels of hea|uen, who incessantly prayse God with vnspeakable desire. Also with the reading of the life of Antonius the heremite, he was wonderfully moued, and began to dislike his former

conuersation, which hee had spent in worldly pleasures, and went vnto a quiet garden, accompanied with Alipius: with many teares he bewailed the insolencie of his bypast conuersation, wishing the time to be now come, wherein without farther delay his soule should be watred with the dew of the conuerting grace of God.August. Con|fes. lib. 8. cap.   And as he was powring out the griefe of his wounded heart to God with a flood of teares, hee heard a voyce saying vnto him, tolle  lege, and a|gaine, tolle  lege, that is to say, take vp and read, take vp and read. At the first hearing, he tooke it to haue beene the voyce of boyes or maides speaking in their play such words one to another: but when he looked about,  could see no body hee knew it to be a celestiall admonition warning him to take vp the booke of holy Scripture (which he had in the garden with him) and read. Now the first place that fell in his hands,Rom. 13. ver. 13.14. after the opening of the booke, was this: Not in gluttonie, nor drunkennes, nor in chambring, nor wantonnesse, nor in strife, or enuying: but put on the Lord Iesus Christ, and take no thought of the flesh, to fulfill the lustes thereof. At the reading whereof he was so fully resolued to forsake the vanities of the world, and to become a Christian, that imme|diatly thereafter he was baptized by Ambrose Bishop of Mil|lan, with his companion Alipius and his sonne Adeodatus. After this hee returned to Africke, and was coadiutor to Valerius Bishop of Hippo, as Chrysostome was to Flauianus in Antiocha: and after the departure of Valerius: he was Bishop of Hippo: his vncessant trauels in teaching Gods people, and in stopping the mouthes of heretikes and gainsaiers of the truth of God, specially Donatists, Pelagians and Manichean heretikes, his learned writings do testifie. When he had liued 76. yeeres, he rested from his labours, before the Vandales had taken the towne of Hippo, which in time of Augustines sicknesse they had besieged.
In this Century flourished worthy preachers in France,Bishops of France. such as Eutherius Bishop of Lions. Saluianus B. of Marseill, who liued at that time when the nation of the Gothes oppressed

France, and many beganne to doubt of the prouidence of God, in respect that wicked men had so great vpper-hand. Salvianus in his godly and learned bookes doth declare that it is a iust thing with God to punish men, who knowes their dutie best, with greatest punishments, in respect that oft times they are most negligent doers of it. Clauaianus Mam|mertus Bishop of Vienne is praised by Sidonius with exces|siue commendations, as if all the graces of Ierom, Augustine, Basilius, Nazianzenus, and many other fathers had beene in|corporated into his person. Hilarius first Bishop of Arls, and afterward (as appeareth) of Vienne, opposed himselfe directly to Leo Bishop of Rome,Leo ad Gal. Episcop. epist. 77.  epist. 89. and would acknowledge no iurisdiction, nor domination of the Bishop of Rome ouer the Churches of France: for this cause Leo accused him as an vsurper of supremacie, onely because hee would not stoupe vnder his feete: but Hilarius came to Rome, no|thing regarding the anathems and cursings of the Romane B. and in his face affirmed, that neither did Christ appoint Peter to be head of the rest of the Apostles, neither had the Bishop of Rome a soueraigntie ouer the Churches of Fraunce. All the grandure of Leo his speeches was, to talke of those few words:Math. 16. Tu es Petrus,  super ha petra, c. that is, thou art Peter, and vpon this Rocke, c. as if Christ had breathed vppon him, and had bidden him receiue the holy Spirit, so confidently did he af|firme that in these wordes was allotted a supremacie to the Bishoppes of Rome the successors of Peter. But this grandure (I say) of his proud conceites, and vaine interpretation of Scripture made not men of vnderstan|ding incontinentlie to stoup vnder the feete of a proud Prelate.
Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 10.Vincentius Lirinensis a mightie impugner of heresies. Prosper Aquita~icus. Sido~ius B. in some part of Ouernie. Martinus Tu|ronensis is co~mended for the gift of many miraculous workes that were wrought by his hands. He co~pared virginitie, mar|riage,  fornication to a medow, a part wherof was eaten by the pastoring of beastes, another part was hollwed by the

rudenes of rooting swine, and the third part was vntou|ched, but flourishing in the perect growth of grasse neere to mowing time. Fornication he compared to the part of the medow that was hollowed, and misfshioned with Swine. Mariage to that part of the medow that was pastored,Note. so that the herbes had then rootes, but wanted the beautie of their flowres: but virginitie is like vnto that part of the medow that is vntouched, flourishing with roote, blade, flower, and all kinde of perfection. In counting marriage good, but virginitie better, hee followeth the doctrine of the holy Apostle Paul. R gius Bishop of Rhemes, (by whom Clodoeus the first Christian king of France was baptized,1. Cor. 7. and the whole countrie of France was purged from Paganisme and Arrianisme: whereby it was miserably polluted by the Gothes, and Vandales) was a man of great account.
Concerning Aurelius and the Bishops of Carthage, Memnon, and the Bishops of Ephesus, some occasion will be offered to speake of them in the head of Councels, neither will the nature of a Compend and breuitie whereunto I study, per|mit me to write of euery wor|thie man of whom I read in this Centurie.




CENTVRIE VI.

Patriarches of Rome.
Anastatius._TO Gelasius succeeded Anastatius the second and gouerned 1. yeere 2. months 24. dayes; hee ministred in the dayes of the Emperour Anastatius: hee was hated of the Clergie, because he admitted to his fellowship Photinus a Deacon, whom Foelix and Gelasius had excommunicated as a friend to Acatius Bishop of Constantinople.Platina de vitispontif. Platina writeth of him, that he ended his life as Arrius did, and that his bowells gushed out, when he was doing his secret busi|nes. The verie flatterers of the Bishops of Rome are compel|led to say, that some of them were fauorers of heretikes, and for that cause punished by God with extraordinarie iudge|ments: but I ground nothing vpon the words of Platina, but so much as maketh against the~, whom he intendeth to flatter.
Symmachus.To Anastatius succeeded Symmachus, in the dayes of the Emperour Anastatius: and when Theodoricus king of Gothes raigned, in Italie, great sedition was among the people, at his election. The one part of the Clergie  people chusing Sym|machus, the other Laurentius to be Bishop of Rome: but with common consent,Platina de vit. pontif. a Synod was appointed at Ravenna, and there the election of Symmachus was ratified, hee continued in office. 15 yeeres, 6 months, 22. dayes.
Hormsda the successor of Symmachus sate 9. yeeres, 18. dayes: who by co~mandement of Theodoricus king of Gothes, and raigning in Italie, gathered a councell at Rome and damned the error of Eutyches of new againe.
Likewise Ambassadors were sent to the Emp. Anastatius, and to Iohn B. of Constantinople to exhort them to forsake

the wicked error of Eutyches,  to acknowledge two natures in Christ, to wit, the diuine and humane nature. But Anasta|tius answered with proud words, Nos imperare volumus, nobis imperari nolumus. That is we will command, but wee will not be commanded. Likewise the B. of Constantinople puft vp in pride by the assistance of the Emp. despised the counsell of Hermisda. Moreouer against the law of nation, they delt in hu|manlie with the Ambassadors of Hormisda,Platin. de vit. Pontif. and thrust them into an old and broken ship, with straite commandement that they should not arriue at any harbour in Grecia,Note. but kept a direct course toward Italy. Notwithstanding by the proui|dence of God that ship arriued safely at the coasts of Italie.
The error of the Manicheans began againe to be ouerspread in Rome. But Hormisda tooke their bookes and burnt them in the porch of the Church called Con|stantina.
Iohn the first gouerned the church of Rome in the dayes of Iustinus the elder,Iohn 2. to whom also he was sent Ambassador by Theodoricus, to craue that the Arrian Byshops whom hee had banished out of his dominions might be restored to their places againe: else the catholick Bishops of Italy should expect all kind of rigor at his hands. The B. Iohn with many teares perswaded the Emperour Iustinus to condiscend vnto the petition of Theodoricus. Neuerthelesse when he returned backe againe to Italy he was cast into prison, where he ended his life, after he had gouerned the church of Rome 2. yeeres, 8. months.
Foelix 4. the successor of Iohn 1. co~tinued in office 4. yeeres 2. months,Foelix. 4. Platina. 13. daies. he excommunicated Athanasius Patriarch of Constantinople for heresie, hee ordained that Christians before their departure out of this life should be annointed with oyle.Comment. Funct. lib. 7. This custome is now kept in the Roman church, and is called the Sacrament of extreme vnction.
Foelix 4 succeeded Bonifacius 2. whom the Graecians called Agathon,Bonifacius. 2. but both names soundeth to one and the selfe same thing. The schisme that was among the people at his election ceased, by the death of his co~petitor Dseu: he ministred 2.

yeeres, 2. daies. In his time Eulalius B. of Carthage, submitted himself vnto the chaire of Rome: wherupon Bo~ifacius tooke occasio~ of insolent insulting, in so far, that he is not asha~cd to writ of Aurelius B. of Carthage, August. B. of Hippo,  of the rest of the fathers, who were prese~t at the 6 cou~cel of Carthage that through the instigatio~ of the deuil they swelled in pride against the Roman church  against his predecessors Bonifa|cius. 1.  Coelestinus who~ his predecessors most iustly had exco~|municated:Hist. Magd. cent 6. cap. 10. but now (saith he) Eulalius hath co~fessed the fault of Aurelius,  of the cou~cel of Carthage,  submitted himself in humble maner to the chaire of Rome: therefore he  the church of Carthage are receiued againe vnto peace  co~mu|nio~ of the Roman church. Marke here how they who would impaire a iot of that supre~acy whereat the church of Rome ai|med, were forthwith deliuered to the deuil, how holy, modest,  learned so euer they had bin;Note.  a vain, timorous  beastly body Eulalius is preferred to Aurelius B. of Carthage, to Aug. B. of Hippo,  to a graue cou~cel of motha~ 200. fathers: only for this, that he submitted himself to the chair of Rome. The time is now approching, wherein it wil be clearely ma~ifested, that supremacy was the very aple of their eye,  touch that once, there is nothing but curses to be thu~dred out of mount Tar|peius euen against August. himself  against reuerent cou~cils.
Ioannes 2.Iohn 2. was successor to Bonifacius: he ministred in the time of the Emperour Iustinian, 2. yeeres, 4. months: he was called for his eloquence Mercurius, or nuntius Iovis.
Agapetus.Agapetus the successor of Iohn 2. vder the raigne of Iustinia~ had scarcely liberty to attend vpo~ his own flocke: for immedi|atly after he was ordained B. of Rome, he was sent to the Emp. Iustinia~ by Theodatus king of the Gothes, to pacifie his wrath: for the Emp. intended to make war against him, for the cruell slaughter of Amalasunta his wife: this was an vnhonest cause,  an vnseemely message to the B. of Rome to vndertake. It is affirmed by Historiographers, that Iustinian secretly sollicited Agapetus to the error of Eutyches,  that Agapetus answered vnto him couragiously,Platin. de vit. Pontif. that hee supposed hee was sent to a most Christia~ Emperour, but he found him to be Dioclesian.
This liberty is thought to haue done good to Iustinian, and that hee imbraced the true Faith more seriously then before, and deposed Anthemius Bishop of Constantinople, an Eutychian Heretique, and placed Menas a Bishop profes|sing the true Faith, in his roome. Afterwards Agapetus died at Constantinople, after hee had beene chosen Bishoppe of Rome eleven monethes, and one and twentie dayes, and his bodie was put into a chest of leade, and transported to Rome.
Silverius the son of Hormisda,Silverius. sometime Bishop of Rome, was successor to Agapetus. Theodatus King of Gothes, com|pelled the Clergie to subscribe to his election: hee gover|ned the Church of Rome at that time, when Iustinian sent Belisarius to fight against Vitiges. Theodora the Emperour Iustinians wife, sent to Silverius, desiring him that he would condiscend to the restitution of Anthemius an Eutychian Heretique, and to the deposition of Menas, Bishop of Con|stantinople. Silverius refused to obey such impious com|mandements. Therefore Theodora sendeth a commande|ment to Belisarius to banish Silverius, and to appoynt Vi|gilius Bishop of Rome, who had promised to fulfill her de|sires. Thus was Silverius banished to the Isle of Pontia, after hee had ruled the Church of Rome one yeere, and fiue moneths.
Vigilius succeeded Silverius,Vigilius. and ruled seventeene yeeres and six and twenty dayes. His entry to this office is inexcu|sable: for by open force, secret bribes, and promises to per|forme the impious desires of the Empresse, hee obtained the chaire of Rome: so that Onuphrius cannot finde out an ex|cuse for his vnlawfull entry. Theodora the Empresse, vrged him to performe his promise, and to restore Anthemius. But Vigilius, as appeared, repenting of his great temeritie and rashnesse, answered, that evill promises were not to be kept: for this cause hee was led away violently to Constantinople,Note. and a cord was fastned about his necke, and he was drawne through the streets, and cast into prison: hee endured all this contempt the more patiently, because hee confessed,

that for his sinnes hee had deserved greater punishment at the hands of God,Platin. de vitis Pontif. then this man. In the end hee was deli|vered out of prison, by the earnest request of Narses Cap|taine of Iustinians army in Italy, but hee dyed by the way: and hee whom so many cares could not destroy, the sick|nesse of the travell destroyed him at Sicrle, and his bodie was transported to Rome, and buryed there. But now let vs consider the fondnesse of Baronius, who keepeth no mea|sure in his Historie; but as the Poet speaketh of a Ship ros|sed with a vehement tempest:
Tollimur in coelum subtato gurgite,  idem,
Subducta ad manes imos descendinus vnda.
Baron. tom. 7. ann. 538.When Baronius speaketh of the entry of Vigilius, he calleth him a thiefe, a brigand, a man who entred not by the doore of the sheep-fold, a false Bishop, an Antichrist: yet soone after hee calleth him the Vicar of Christ as though by the crueltie whereby he draue his predecessor Siluerius to death he were worthy of the name of the Vicar of Christ. Albeit hee restored not Athemius, according to his impious pacti|on with Theodora, yet hee wrote vnto the Heretiques, An|themius, Theodosius, and Severus; and confirmed their error by his secret missiue letters, as Morenus in his booke called Misterium iniquitatis, prooveth. His cariage in the fift gene|rall Councell, hee being present in the towne of Constanti|nople, shall be declared God willing, in its owne place, the cord that was lapped about his neck, and drew him through the streets of Constantinople, could not draw out of his proud stomacke the conceite of supremacie: for hee sent his opinion in writing to the Councell, but would not bee present to sit in a lower place then Eutychius Bishop of Con|stantinople, and Moderator of the Councell.
Pelagius.After Vigilius succeeded Pelagius the first: hee ruled the Church of Rome eleven yeares, twelue moneths, and twen|ty eight dayes. In a very perillous time this charge was committed to him; namely when the Nation of the Gos

had chosen Toul to bee their King, who was a fierce and cruell man, and was called for his fiercenesse, Flagellum Dei; that is, the scourge of God: hee led a great army from Tarvisium through Italy, destroying and wasting the coun|trey, whithersoever hee went, but hee set his face chiefly a|gainst Campania. By the way hee addressed himselfe in the habite of a simple souldier to mount Cassinates, where was Saint Benedict, the father of Monkes; not because he inven|ted the Monasticke life, but because the most part of Monks adhered to the forme invented by him: hee was but lately sprung vp, in the dayes of the Emperour Iustinus the elder, and of Pope Iohn the first;Platin. de viz. Ioan. 1. yet was his name in great ac|count, so that Totilas in a disguised habite went vnto him, and conferred with him. Platina writeth that Saint Bene|dict knew him, notwithstanding of his deepe dissimulation, and with terrifying words disswaded him form vsing cruelty against Christians.
The counsell was good, but Totilus was not obedient vn|to it. He was slaine in battell by Narses, neere to Brixellum: and Teias whom the Gothes chose in his roome, was slaine in battell at Nuceria: so the Kingdome of the Gothes in I|taly, was vtterly vndone by the valour of Narses. After the first comming of Theodoricus into Italy, they raigned in Ita|ly seventy two yeeres. Now their name, dominion, and all their might is vtterly quenched. Pelagius depended much vpon the friendship of Narses, And when Macedonius Bi|shop of Aquileia died, Honoratus Bishop of Millan ordained Paulinus to be his successor. Pelagius Bishop of Rome grie|ved at this. Neverthelesse hee complaineth not to Narses, that Paulinus was Bishop of Aquileia without his consent, but rather, because this was done without the foreknow|ledge of the most noble Emperour Iustinian; who like as he had delivered Istria and Venice,Pelag 1. Epist.  from the grievous bondage of Totilas; so likewise it became them to expect the Empe|rours answere, before they had appointed a Bishoppe in A|quileia.
Marke the hypocrisie of the Bishops of Rome,Note. vnder co|lour

of obedience to the civill Magistrate, secretly creeping to their owne soveraignty, the chiefe marke whereat they continually aymed.
Iohannet 3.Iohn the third succeeded Pelagius, and governed twelue yeers, eleven moneths, and twenty six dayes. In the dayes of Iustinus the younger, who was successor to the Emperour Iustinian, did he minister in the Roman Church; and at that time when Alboinus King of the Longobards came into Ita|lie, with a great army, with their wiues and children, and setled their aboad in that part of Italy which lyeth about the river Padus.Platin de vit. Pontif. The Empresse Sophia, had irritated Narses that valiant captaine, with contumelious words; and he gaue to her, and to the estate of the Empire, this hard meeting, that hee possessed the Longobards in Italy, weaving a web vnto her (according as hee promised) which shee was not able all her time to vndoe againe. The Deputy of the Emperour of Constantinople, kept a part of Italy, which was not con|quered by the Lombards, and this was called Exarchatus Ravennae; and the Bishop of Rome, with the assistance of the countrey, kept Rome free from the dominion of the Lombards for a short time.
At this time did Iohn the 3. governe the church of Rome. He brought in new constitutions into the church, that Cho|repiscopi, otherwise called Vicarij Episcoporum,Hist. Magd. cent. 5 cap. 10. would haue no power at all of imposition of hands: which constituti|on he confirmed with a foolish reason, because none of the 70 disciples, whom Christ adioyned as helpers to the Apo|stles, had power by imposition of hands, to conferre the gift of the holy Spirit. Now the time is come, when every man endevoureth, with some novelty, and new toy, which hath not been heard of before, to go beyond his predecessors.
Benedictus 1.Benedict the first, continued in his charge 4. yeeres, one moneth, 28. dayes. He had great griefe in his time, because the prevayling power of the Lombards oppressed the coun|trey of Italy, and the towne of Rome was sore pinched with famine. The heart griefe hee conceived for the calami|e of the countrey, is thought to haue hastened his death.

Neverthelesse he had this comfort, that the Emperour Tibe|rius the second, in whose time he ministred, sent ships load|ned with corne from Egypt, to support the distressed estate of the Romanes. Tiberius was indued with many good qua|lities, and princely gifts: hee was valiant, godly, and libe|rall; and the more bountifull he was to the poore,Platin. de vit. Pontif. his riches so much the more abounded: for besides the treasures of Narses, that were brought to him from Italy, when Narses dyed; hee found also in his owne palace vnder a crosse of marble (which he commanded to be raised, and not to bee trod vnder foot any longer, but to be set in a more honou|rable place) there I say, he found an infinit treasure of silver and gold. Finally, when hee overcame the Persians, such quantitie of gold, silver,  precious things were atchieved, as none of his predecessors had obtained the like: so that the Proverb, hee who soweth largely, shall reape largely, had liuely performance in the person of the noble Emperour Ti|berius.
After Benedict succeeded Pelagius the second,Pelagius 2 and mini|stred vnder the raignes of Tiberius and Mauritius, 10. yeers, 12. moneths, 10. dayes. Hee was elected without the fore|knowledge of the Emperour, contrary to the custome observed in those dayes; but hee excused himselfe to the Emperour Mauritius, by sending Gregorius Ambassadour vnto him, and declaring that the towne of Rome was be|sieged by Lombardis, so that no messenger could bee sent from Rome to Constantinople, to acquaint the Emperour with his election. The forme of the siege of Rome was this: The Emp. Mauritius had hired Sigibertus King of France, to make warre against the Lombards, and to driue them out of Italy, but his army was overthrowne by Eucharis King of the Lombards. With this victory the Lombards were puft vp, and they besieged the towne of Rome, they had also taken it, if they had not been hindred by great inundation of wa|ters. The inundation of Tiber was extraordinary, it over|flowed the wals of the towne of Rome, and brought with it a multitude of Serpents, which afterward putrifying, cor|rupted

the aire, whereof arose a vehement pestilence in Rome, and Pelagius the second, in this contagious sicknes ended his life.
Gregorius. 1.Gregorius the first, called Magnus, succeeeded Pelagius 2. and ministred 13. yeeres, 6. months, 10. dayes. He was cho|sen with consent of the Clergie and people, but he was vn|willing to accept the office. And he wrote to the Emperour Mauritius, that he should not assent, neither to the desire of the Clergie,Platin. de vitis Pontif. nor people: but his letters were intercepted by the Governour of the towne of Rome, and rent in pieces. And other letters were written vnto the Emperour, reque|sting him to condiscend, that Gregorius might haue the o|ffice, whom both Clergie and people had elected. The Emperour agreed willingly to his election, for he had beene acquainted with him in Constantinople, when he came Am|bassador from Pelagius 2. to excuse his oversight in accep|ting the office of Bishop of Rome, before the Emperours knowledge of that purpose. Hee brought into the Romane Church the forme of the Greek Letanies, and ordayned that in their prayers,  should be nine times repeated. This prayer is thought to haue beene vttered by multiplyed repetitions, in the dayes of the Emperour Iustinius, when Antiochia was terribly shaken with a vehement earthquake, the little number that were aliue sayd; Lord haue mercy, Lord haue mercy, which in Greeke Kyrie Eleison; hee bor|rowed also from the Liturgie of the Iewes, Allelu-iah; and added these words vnto the Latin service, Diesque nostros in pace disponas, that is, In peace dispose our dayes. Hee was the first that devised the stile of Servus servorum Dei, that is, the servant of the servants of God: taking occasion (as ap|peareth) so to doe by the arrogant attempt of Iohn Patriarch of Constantinople, called , or ieiunator, who had v|surped the stile of Ocumenicke, or vniversall Bishoppe, to whom Pelagius the second, and Gregorius the first, mightily opposed themselues,Lib. 6. Indici. 16. Epist. 30. and called him the fore-runner of An|tichrist, who durst vsurpe such an arrogant stile.
Note.But marke now, I pray you, how farre ambition prevai|led

both in the Chaire of Constantinople, and in the chaire of Rome. The humility of Christ was now layde aside, notwithstanding of their humble stiles, Servus servorum Dei: and the first occasion that was presented vnto them of vsurpation, of the stile of vniversall Bishop, it was greedily embraced.
First, Iohn called Ieiunator, Patriarch of Constantinople, saw that the Imperiall seat was in Constantinople, and that the towne of Rome was besieged by the Lombards. Now he thoght it was time to stirre, and to advance his owne chaire aboue all chaires. And incontinent after Bonifacius the third, finding himselfe in favour with the Emperour Phocas, glad|ly accepted the same preheminence in his owne person, which his predecessors had damned in the person of Iohan|nes Ieiunator: so they were all for the most part a nest of am|bitious Prelats, preaching the humility of Christ, but hun|ting for the supremacy foretold of Antichrist. Reade the Epistles which Gregorius writeth to Mauritius, detesting and abhorring this supremacy, whereat the Patriarches of Constantinople aymed. Amongst other things, hee saith; Exclamare compellor,Greg. lib. 4. Epist. 32. ac dicere, O tempora,  mores: ecce cun|cta in Europae partibus, barbarorumiuri sunt tradita. Destru|ctae vrbes, eversa castra, depopulatae provinciae, nullus terram cul|tor inhabitat,  tamen sacerdotes, qui in pavimento,  cinere flentes iacere debuerunt, vanitatis sibi nomina experiunt,  novis ac prophanis vocabulis gloriantur: that is to say, I am compelled to cry out, O times, O manners: behold, in all the parts of Europe, all things lie vnder the reverence of barbarous peo|ple: townes are destroyed, castles are overthrowne, pro|vinces are spoyled, no labourer inhabiteth the land. Not|withstanding, the Priestes, who should lie in ashes vpon the ground, weeping, they are seeking vnto themselues names of vanity, and they glory in prophane stiles.
Now apply these words of Gregorius the first, vnto Boni|facius the third, and it shall be found that hee embraced the name of vanity, and the glory of prophane stiles, at that same time, when it became him better to be lying in sacke|cloth

and ashes, and to bee mourning for the prevailing power of barbarous people, and for the barbarous butche|ry of Phocas the Emperour,Note. who conferred vnto him that e|minent stile, to be called Bishop of Bishops. Gregorius flatte|ring Epistle written to Phocas, after he had traiterously mur|thered his master Mauritius, his wife and children, will be a perpetuall blot to the name of Gregorius.Hist. Magd. cent. 5 cap. 10. The constitu|tion hee made concerning prohibition of marriage, to men in spirituall offices, hee was compelled in his owne time to abrogate againe; because it was not onely the occasion of vncleannesse, but also of secret murthers of innocent babes, and whereas the Apostle Paul said, It was better to marrie then to burne: Gregorie was compelled to say, It was better to marrie then to murder. The sending of the Monkes, Augustine, Melito, and Iohannes, to Brittaine, was not so much to reduce them to Christian religion, which they had embraced in the dayes of Lucius King of the Brit|taines, and of Eleutherius Bishoppe of Rome, as hath beene declared, in the second Centurie, the second chap|ter: as to conquer them to the ceremonies and rites of the Romane service.
Gregorius was the first, of whom wee reade, that writeth of sacrifices to be offered,Note. for relieving of soules tormented in Purgatorie, and hee leaneth vpon such ridiculous fables, which hee heard of one Foelix Bishop of Centum-cellae, as it is a shame to rehearse them, but seeing they are not asha|med of lyes,Hist. Magd. Cent. 6. cap. 10. Greg lib. 4. cap. 55. let the dung of their owne inventions be cast into their owne faces: hee writeth, that a Presbyter of Cen|tum-cellae went to the bath-house to wash himselfe, where hee found a man vncouth and vnknowne to him, but ve|ry humble and seruiceable, and after he had serued him sundry dayes, the Presbyter to requite his kindnesse, brought vnto him two consecrated hostes, as a bles|sing and a reward for him who had served him so du|tifully, but the man with sadde countenance, answered: This bread is holy, and I am not worthy to eate it. I was sometime Master and Proprietare of this house,

but now for my sinnes I am appointed to this seruile occu|pation: if thou would doe a benefit to me, offer them to the Almightie God, as a sacrifice for my sinnes, and thinke that ye are heard of God, when yee cannot finde me in this place any longer. Surely, Popish Purgatorie,  soule-Masses are first grounded vpon foolish fables, and afterward con|firmed by dreames of foolish Monkes.


Patriarches of Constantinople.
EVPHEMIVS before he would annoint Anastatius to be Emperour,Euphemius. (who came to that honour by Ariadne the wife of the Emperour Zeno, whom he married) he craued a confession of his faith, with a promise sealed by his hand|write, that he should make no novation in Religion during his time.Theod. lector. lib. 2. The Emperour craued his hand-write againe, which seeing that Euphemius refused to render backe againe, the Emperour procured his deposition, and banished him, and placed Macedonius in his roome.
To Euphemius succeeded Macedonius,Macedonius. Hist. Magd. Cent. 6 cap. 10. Timotheus. to whose custodie the hand-write aforesaid was committed by Euphemius: which when he would not render, the Emperour banished him also, and commanded to slay him at Gangra, the place of his banishment.
To Macedonius succeeded Timotheus, an vnconstant man, and iustly compared to the narrow sea, that runneth betwixt Baeotia and Calchis, which floweth and ebbeth seuen times in 24. houres; so was this Bishop wauering minded, and more bent to please men, than to be approued of God. In witnesse whereof I haue set downe one example. The Abbot of the Monasterie called Studitum, refused to be ordained by imposition of his hands: for he said, the hands of that man,An example of Timotheus his incon|stancie. who hath damned the Councell of Chalcedon, shall not be laid vpon me: whereunto Timotheus answered, who|soeuer accuseth, or damneth the Councell of Chalcedone,

let him be accursed, and when this was reported to the Em|perour Anastatius, to eschew his indignation, he said the contrary, whosoeuer accepteth the councell of Chalcedone, and alloweth of it, let him be accursed.
Iohannes Cap|pa.Iohn of Cappadocia is not worthy that his name should be inserted in this Catalogue, a proud, avaritious,  ambitious heretique, who could neuer behaue himselfe dutifully, nei|ther in a ciuill, nor in a spirituall calling. He was first the Emperour Anastatius his Deputie, and was deposed for aspi|ring to an higher place. Next, he became Patriarch of Con|stantinople, and aspired to the dignitie of Oecumenicke  vniuersall Bishop. It is true, that Iohannes  vsurped the title of preheminence, therefore this Iohannes Cappadox was laid aside as an Eutychian heretique, and the great in|vectiues against this vsurped authority, are chiefly set against Iohannes Ieinnator. But marke how Pelagius the second, ere Gregorius trod vpon this pride, with a proud mind, as Dio|genes did vpon the couering of Plato his bed, he is not con|tent to damme the decree of the Councell of Constantino|ple,Tom. 2. Con|cil. but also he affirmed that it was not lawfull to him to as|semble a Councell without libertie first obtained from the Bishop of Rome, which thing no man spake before him: so Sathan wrought mightily in them both, as he doth in the children of pride and disobedience.
Iohannes Scho|lasticus.After him succeeded Iohn called Scholasticus, and continu|ed not aboue one yeere. Evagrius calleth him Iohannes Sir|miensis, lib. 4. cap. 39.
Epiphanius.To Iohn succeeded Epiphanius, in the dayes of Iustinian, who blessed his armie which went to fight against the Van|dales, vnder the conduct of Belisarius: he ministred sixteene yeeres, as Chytreus writeth.
Anthimus.The name of Anthimus is worthy of the roll of obstinate heretiques. He was Bishop of Trapezus, but by the meanes of Theodora the Emperour Iustinians wife, he was promoted to be Bishop of Constantinople. Theodora was too busie in Church affaires, and Sophia the wife of Iustinus the second was too busie in ciuill affaires. The estate both of Church,

and Kingdome had beene in better plight, if both of them had beene lesse busie.
Anthimus being deposed and banished for heresie,Menas. suc|ceeded Menas, who kept the true faith, and gouerned the Church of Constantinople sixteene yeeres.Lib. 4, cap. 9. Evagrius recko|neth Basilides in the roll of Bishops of Constantinople,  Anthimus to be Bishop of Alexandria.
To Menas succeeded Eutichius,Eutychius. of whom occasion will be offered to speake in the fift generall Councell, wherein he disputed iudiciously in the question, Whether or no it was lawfull to excommunicate heretiques after their death. His opinion concerning the bodies of the Saints after their Re|surrection, that they should be subtle, like vnto the aire and winde, and not solide and palpable, was refuted by Gregorius the first, who proued by the example of Christ his body af|ter his Resurrection, that the body of the Saints should not be like vnto the aire, and the winde: for Christ saith, Handle me,Luk. 24.39. and see: for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me haue.
After Eutichius followed Iohn called ,Iohannes Ieiu|nator. or Ieiunator: this name he obtained by the sobrietie, and temperancie of his life. Notwithstanding when his stomacke was emptie of meat, his heart was full of pride, and he followed the foot|steps of Iohannes Cappadox, and would be called vniversall Bishop, against whom Gregorius the first contended mighti|ly, euen as Lactantius of olde contended against the Pagans, impugning the errour more mightily,Gregor. lib. 4. Epist. 32. Vsque ad epist. 40. Cyriacus. than solidly confir|ming the truth. It is supposed that he ministred 13. yeeres, vnder the Emperour Mauritius. To whom succeeded Cy|riacus.


Patriarchs of Alexandria.
AFter Iohn called Tabennesiota,Iohannes. succeeded another Iohn, who kept the true faith,  was banished by Anastatius, because he would not damme the Councell of Chalcedone.
Theodosius.To Iohn succeeded Theodosius an obstinate defender of the errour of Eutiches. He was familiarly acquainted with Se|uerus of Antiochia, and Anthimus of Constantinople, where|by the misery of these dayes may be easily esied, wherein three notable heretiques gouerned principall Townes, such as Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antiochia. He was so obstinate in his errour, that he was rather content to be bani|shed vnder the raigne of Iustinian, than to renounce his er|rour.
Zoilus. Apollinarius.After him succeeded Zoilus, and after him Apollinarius, who was present at the fift generall Councell. To whom succeeded Eulogius,Eulogius. Petrus. and after him Petrus, who ministred vn|der the raigne of Mauritius.


Patriarches of Antiochia.
Flavianus.AFter Palladius succeeded Flavianus, who suffered great troubles for the true faith, namely, by the cruell perse|cution of the Emperour Anastatius, and the calumnies of Xenaeas B. of Hierapolis (a stranger indeed from the coue|nant of God, as his name importeth) for he blamed Flavi|anus most vniustly of the heresie of Nestorius, but when Fla|vianus both by word  writing had cleared himselfe of that calumnie, the malice of Xenaeas ceased not: for he brought with him to Antiochia a great number of Monkes to com|pell Flavianus to abiure the Councell of Chalcedon. The towne supported their Bishop against a raskall number of seditious and hereticall Monkes. Notwithstanding the Em|perour Anastatius infected with the heresie of Eutyches, counted Flavianus, who was most vniustly persecuted, to be the author of this tumult, and banished him, and placed Severus in his roome.
The Emperour Iustinus the elder displaced Severus, and punished him,Paulus. and appointed Paulus to be Bishop of Antio|chia.
To Paulus succeeded Euphraesius,Euphrasius. who died in that fearefull calamitie of the Towne of Antiochia, when it was shaken and ouerthrowne with earthquake,Lib. 4. cap. 5. as Evagrius witnesseth.
Euphraimius was a ciuill gouernour in the East parts,Euphraimius. who pittied the decayed estate of the towne of Antiochia, and fur|nished all necessarie things for the repairing of the towne of Antiochia: for which cause the people were so affectioned to him, that they would haue him to be their Bishop. So Euphraimius becomes Bishop of Antiochia, or Theopolis, for at this time it had both these names.Lib. 4. cap. 6. Evagrius writeth, that he vndertooke the charge of the Apostolicke chaire, in which words, it is manifest, that not onely the chaire of Rome, but also the chaire of Antiochia was called the Apo|stolicke chaire. The towne of Antiochia at this time was ta|ken by Cosroes King of Persia, set on fire, and many of the people were cruelly slaine.Evag. lib. 4. cap. 24. Euphraimius their Bishop at this time left the towne, a perilous example, except the people had beene in safetie, and he onely persecuted, yet he left be|hinde him so much as might redeeme all the Church goods.
After Euphraimius followed Domnius.Domnius. nastatiu. And after him A|nastatius. He ministred vnder the Emperour Iustinian, at what time the Emperour fell into the errour of them, who saide, that our Lord Iesus in his very conception adioyned vnto his diuine nature an immortall body, which was sub|iect to no humane infirmities. Anastatius opposed himselfe to the Emperours opinion, and the Bishops followed Ana|statius, and not the Emperour: for this cause Iustinian was purposed to haue banished him, but he escaped this trou|ble, by the Emperours death. Neuerthelesse, he was bani|shed by Iustinus the younger, for some alledged cause of di|lapidation of Church goods: and Gregorius was placed in his roome.
Gregorius ministred in Antiochia 23.Gregorius. yeeres, vnder Iusti|nius 2. Tiberius and Mauritius: he was in great account with Mauritius, to whom he foretolde, that he would be promo|ted to the Imperiall dignitie. And Mauritius imployed him

in great and waghtie businesse, such as in pacifying the tu|mult of his armie, which made insurrection against Germa|nus their captaine. Also he sent him Ambassadour to Cos|roes King of Persia,Evag. lib. 6. cap. 18. who was astonied at the grace that was in his speeches. Notwithstanding, he was accused by Aste|rius a Deputy of the East, of the filthie sinne of incest: but he cleared his owne innocencie so euidently, that his accuser was with ignminie scourged and banished. He died of the gowtes infirmitie,Euphemius. and after his death, Anastatius, whom Iu|stinus banished for dilapidation of Church-goods, being yet aliue, was restored to his owne place againe. To whom suc|ceeded Euphemius.


Patriarches of Ierusalem.
Helias.AFter Martyrius succeeded Helias, a feruent defender of the true faith. Neither would he condescend to the ba|nishment of Euphemius, Bishop of Constantinople, nor to the admission of Seuerus to be Bishop of Antiochia: there|fore the Emperour Anastatius banished him.
Iohannes.To him succeeded Iohn, of whose politicke dealing in cir|cumueening Anastatius the Emperours captaine, I haue suf|ficiently declared in the preceding history.
Petrus. Macarius. Eustochius.To Iohn succeeded Peter, and after him Macarius, and af|ter Macarius, Eustochius, who impugned the Bookes of O|rigen, and draue out of his bounds the Monks of Nova Lau|ra, defenders of the opinions of Origen: Theodorus Ascidas B. of Caesarea in Cappadocia, tooke this in an euill part. The Emperour Iustinian caused a generall Councell to be gathered at Constantinople, wherein not onely the bookes of Origen were damned, but also Theodorus himselfe the de|fender of them. This displeased the Emperour Iustinian, be|cause he loued Theodorus dearely: therefore he procured that Eustochius B.Iohannes. Neamus. Isicius. of Ierusalem should be remooued, and Maca|rius restored againe. After whom succeeded Iohannes, Nea|mus, and Isicius.
In this Centurie, whereas I pretermit the names of other Pastors and Doctors in the Church, I haue done it vpon this consideration. I find in this Centurie, that by the irrup|tion of barbarous people,Note. such as the Gothes, Vandales, Hunnes, Auares, Schythians, Lombards, youth was hin|dred from studies, many memorable bookes were burnt, ancient Languages were vtterly spoyled, learning was great|ly diminished, flattery of preuailing powers increased, am|bition in the West, heresie in the East, turned the estate of the Church vpside-downe, so that scarcely could men of good gifts, and keeping integritie of faith, be furnished vnto the principall Apostolicke chaires. Now after a manner the sunne is going downe, the shadowes waxe great, the darke|nesse approacheth, the Antichrist is at the doore, worthy to be welcommed with darkenesse, and decay of knowledge. What shall I now write of other Pastors and Doctors? shall I follow the foolish conceits of Historio
graphers, in whose opinion the gift of miracles increased,Acts 2. when the gift of knowledge decayed: but the contrary is knowne by Scrip|ture, that the holy Apostles, whom Christ indued with ex|traordinary gifts of working miraculous workes, he indu|ed them also with extraordinary gifts of knowledge: but the writers of this time, especially Evagrius who concluded his History with the death of Mauritius, bringeth in many famous men in this Centurie, gifted with power to worke miraculous workes. But when I consider the end of these miraculous workes, they are brought in, either to confirme the sanctimonie of the Monasticke life, the adoration of the Crosse, or some other grosse superstition. Zosymas a monke is commended by him for his prophericall foreknowledge of the ruine of Antiochia, and for the miracle of the Lyon, who slew the Asse that caried his victualing to Caesarea, and likewise the Lyon by his mandate was compelled to beare that same burden which the
Ae had borne to the portes of Caesarea.Evag lib. 4. cap. 26. No man is so senselesse, or ignorant, but may per|ceiue that this lying miracle is brought in, to the confirma|tion of the excellency of the monasticall life.
The miracle of Thomas B. of Apamea, tendeth to the ado|ration of the tree of the Croe. The miracle of the fire that came out of Barsaunphius shop at Gaza,Idem lib. 4. cap. 33. and consumed the most part of them who were in company with Eustochius B. of Ierusalem, is a notable lie, and tendeth onely to confirme superstition. The miracle of the Image of the Virgine Ma|rie, detesting Anatolius an hypocrite, an Idolater, and a sor|cerer, and yet insinuating himselfe in familiar acquaintance with Gregorius B. of Antiochia, in the dayes of the Empe|rour Tiberius, any man may perceiue that this miracle is for|ged, not so much for detestation of hypocrisie,Idem lib. 5. cap. 18. Idem. lib. 6. cap. 22. Idolatrie, c sorcerie, as for worshipping the Image of the Virgine with a deuout minde. The miracle of Simeones, who in his yo
uth miraculously tamed a Pard, and fastened his girdle about the necke thereof, and brought it like a Catte into the Mo|nasterie, and afterward liued vpon the toppes of pillars, and mountaines,Idem lib. 6. cap. 21. fed with branches of trees 68. yeeres: this fable whereunto it tendeth all men doe see. And finally the gol|den Crosse sent by Cosroes to Sergiopolis, tendeth not onely to the invocation of Saints, but also to put our trust and con|fidence in them, as the last words of the Epistle of Cosroes, and his wife Sira, clearely importeth. Now let the judicious Reader pardon me in pretermitting many things written by others, left I should wearie them by filling their eares with fables and lyes.




CENTVRIE VII.

Of Popes, Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors.
_AFter Sabinianus succeeded Bonifacius the third,Bonifacius the third. and continued onely nine moneths in his Popedome: finding opportunitie of time, by the disliking that the Empe|rour Phocas had of the Patriarch of Con|stantinople, Bonifacius insinuated himselfe in the fauour of the Emperour, and ob|tained at his hands, that the Church of Rome should be cal|led the supreme head of all other Churches.
To him succeeded Bonifacius the fourth,Bonifacius the fourth. and gouerned sixe yeeres, eight moneths, and thirteene dayes: He ob|tained from Phocas a Temple (of olde builded to the ho|nour of all the gods of the Gentiles,Platina in vita Bon. 4. called Pantheon): this he purged from the abominations of Heathen people, and dedicated it to the Virgine Marie, and to the Saints. Like|wise, he instituted a Festiuall day, to be kept in honour of all the Saints, in which day the Bishop of Rome himselfe should read the seruice.Funct. com|ment. in chron. lib. 8. He esteemed much of the Mona|sticke like, and gaue vnto the Monkes equall honour with the Clergie, in priuiledge of Preaching, ministring the Sa|craments, binding, and loosing, c. so were the Monks as|sociated into the tribe of the Priests.
After him succeeded Theodatus,Theodatus. otherwise called Deus de|dit, and gouerned three yeeres, and three dayes: He made an Ordinance, that no man should marry the woman, to whom, or with whom he had beene witnesse in Baptisme, because this was counted spirituall consanguinity.
This was an vndoubted note of Antichrist, to make lawes in the matter of marriage,Levit. 18. not agreeable to the law

of God. Many doe write, that he cured a leprous man with a kisse: But from this time forward let vs beware to giue hastie credite to miracles, which are brought in for none other cause, but onely to confirme a lying doctrine: and in holy Scripture they are called ,2 Thes. 3.9. that is, Miracles of lyes.
Bonifacius the fift.To him succeeded Bonifacius the fift, and ruled fiue yeeres and ten moneths: He made a constitution, that no man who ranne for safetie to a religious place, should be drawne out of it by violence, how grieuous soeuer his of|fence had beene: A law-Antichristian indeede, and much impairing the authoritie of the ciuill Magistrate.
Honorius the first.Honorius the first succeeded Bonifacius the fift, and ruled twelue yeeres, eleuen moneths, and seuenteene dayes: He was infected with the heresie of the Monothelites, and was damned in the sixt generall Councell assembled in the dayes of the Emperour Constantinus Pogonatus, and hath bin touched in the Treatise of Succession.
Seuerinus the first.To him succeeded Seuerinus the first, and continued one yeere, nine moneths, and eleuen dayes: He was confirmed in his Popedome by Isacius Exarche of Italie: for at that time, the election of the Clergie, and consent of the people, was not much set by. Isacius also spoiled the treasures of the Church of Laterane,Platina in vita Seuerini. being offended with this, that the Church-treasures were so rich, and that they bestowed no|thing to the support of Souldiers who were in great neces|sitie.
Iohn the fourth.After him followed Pope Iohn the fourth, who exceeded not the space of one yeere, one moneth, and nineteene dayes in his gouernment.
Theedoretus.Theodoretus the successor of Iohn the fourth, was the sonne of Theodorus Bishop of Ierusalem. If the Romane Church so much detested marriage in the persons of men in a spiri|tuall calling, how came it to passe that they admitted Theo|doretus to be Pope, who was the sonne of a married Bishop? He ruled sixe yeeres, fiue moneths, and eighteene dayes. He excommunicated Pyrrhus Patriarch of Constantinople for

the heresie of the Monothelites: but after the death of the Emperour Heraclius, Pyrrhus returned from Afrike, where he had remained a space in banishment, he came to Rome, recanted his errour, and was absolued from excommunica|tion: but like vnto a dogge he returned againe to his vo|mite, and was excommunicated of new againe by Theodore|tus: but Pyrrhus was slaine by the Senators of Constantino|ple, before he was possessed into his former dignitie, as par|taker of the vile treason intended by Martina and Heracleo|nas her sonne,Platina in vit. Theod. against Constantine the sonne of the Emperour Heraclius.
After him succeeded Pope Martinus,Martinus. and gouerned sixe yeeres, one moneth, and twentie-sixe dayes: He sent Am|bassadours to Paulus, Patriarch of Constantinople, exhor|ting him to forsake the errour of the Monothelites: but he misvsed the messengers the more confidently, because he saw the Emperour Constans altogether addicted vnto the heresie of the Monothelites. Martinus on the other part, as|sembled a Councell at Rome of 150. Bishops, wherein he renewed the excommunication of Syrus B. of Alexandria, Sergius and Pyrrus, Bishops of Constantinople: likewise, he excommunicated Paulus Bishop of Constantinople, for the errour of the Monothelites. The Emperour Constans highly offended against Martinus, sent first Olympus the Exarche of Italie, either to take Pope Martinus prisoner, or els to kill him: but his attempts were frustrate, not without a miraculous worke of God, as Platina recordeth. And af|terward he sent Theodorus Calliopas, who vnder pretence of friendship came to salute the Pope, and cast him in bonds, and sent him to Constantinople, where Constans the Empe|rour caused his tongue to be cut out, and his right hand cut off, and banished him to Chersonesus Ponti. The chaire of Rome was vacant for the space of foureteene moneths,Hist. Magd. Cent. 7. cap. 10. be|cause they had no certaintie of the time of the death of Pope Martinus.
Next vnto him,Eugenius the first. Eugenius the first was chosen Pope, and gouerned two yeeres, and nine moneths: He was the first

that made an Ordinance, that Bishops should haue prison-houses, for correcting the enormitie and contumacie of the Clergie.
Vitalianus the first.After him succeeded Vitalianus the first, he continued foureteene yeeres, and sixe moneths in the Popedome: to the singing of Psalmes in the Church by vive voyce, he ad|ded Organs.
Adeodatus.Next after Vitalianus followed Adeodatus, and ruled foure yeeres, two moneths, and fiue dayes: of a Monke he was made Pope. In his time there were terrible apparitions in Heauen: a great Comete continuing for the space of three moneths: terrible thunders, the like whereof had not beene heard in any preceding time: great abundance of raine, fast|ning the Corne to the ground, so that they grew againe, and in some places of Italie came to maturitie and ripenesse: Great incursions of Turkes and Saracens, who spoyled the Isle of Sicilie. In all these calamities (sayth Platina) Adeo|datus multiplied supplications for preuenting the fore-signi|fied wrath to come. If repentance and abolishing of horri|ble Idolatrie, which had now taken deepe roote, had beene joyned with prayers, the Lord might haue beene the more easily entreated.
Donus. Platina in vit. Doni. 1.Donus, or Domnus, his successor, ruled fiue yeeres, and ten dayes: he reduced the Church of Rauenna, after long relucta|tion, to the obedience of the chaire of Rome. It is to be no|ted, that all the time they were not subiect to the Bishop of Rome, they were called by the Romanes : so bent were they to vindicate all declining from their autho|ritie with opprobrious names of Heresies imposed to the decliners thereof.
Agatho.Agatho, successor to Donus, ruled 2. yeeres, 6. moneths, and 15. dayes: of whom Platina writeth, that he cured a le|prous man with a kisse, as Pope Deus dedit had done before. In his time, Constantinus Pogonatus, Emperour, gathered the sixt generall Councell at Constantinople, wherein the here|sie of the Monothelites was condemned, and Macarius, Pa|triarch of Antiochia, for his obstinate perseuering in that er|rour,

was excommunicate: and Theophanius, sometime an Abbot, was placed in his roome. But this I remit vnto its owne place. The epistle of Agatho, written to the sixt gene|rall Councell, is full of Antichristian pride, wherein he af|firmeth, that the chaire of Rome neuer erred, and that it cannot erre: that euery soule, that is to be saued, must pro|fesse the Romane traditions, and all the constitutions of the Romane Church are to be receiued, as if they had beene de|liuered by the diuine voyce of Peter.Hist. Magd. cent. 7. cap. 10. Likewise, he damned the marriage of men in a spirituall calling: he commendeth the Masse, impudently alledging a writing of Chrysostome concerning the Masse, whereas in all the writings of Chry|sostome, this word of the Masse is not to be found.
After Agatho,Leo the se|cond. succeeded Leo the second, who continued onely ten moneths, and seuenteene dayes: He was the first author of the kissing of the Pax.
To him succeeded Benedictus the second,Benedictus the second. and ruled ten moneths, and twelue dayes onely. In his dayes Constantinus Pogonatus, Emperour, ordained, that in time to come, the consent of the Emperour, and Exarche of Italie, should not be expected, but he whom the Clergie and people did elect, should forth-with be counted the Vicar of Christ. In so doing the Emperour very vnaduisedly put an hurtfull wea|pon into the Popes hand, whereby the estate of the Empire was encombered, and hurt afterward.
Iohannes the fift,Iohn the first. his successor, continued not aboue one yeere and nine dayes.
And Conon the first,Conon the first. the successor of Iohn the fift, ended his course after the issue of 11. moneths, and 3. dayes.
After the death of Conon, the election of the Pope was like to be decided by weapons, rather than by Suffrages and Votes: some fauoured Theodorus, others promoued Pascha|lis: and neither of the parties would yeeld to the other. In the end, the people thought expedient to reiect them both, and to choose some third person to the Popedome: So they elected Sergius the first,Sergius the first. and carried him vpon their shoul|ders to the Church of Laterane. In his time Iustinian the se|cond

gathered a Councell at Constantinople, to perfect and finish the worke which his father had begun. Sergius refu|sed to subscribe the Acts of the sixt generall Councell, al|beit his Ambassadour, who was present at the Councell, had subscribed them.Platina de vita Serg. Of the consecrated Hoste, he ordai|ned one part to be put into the Chalice, to represent the bo|die of Christ, which was risen from death: another part to be eaten, to represent the bodie of Christ walking vpon the earth:Note. the third part, to be laid vpon the Altar vntill the ende of the Masse, to represent the bodie of Christ lying in the Sepulchre. He gouerned thirteene yeeres, eight moneths and twentie-foure dayes.


Patriarches of Constantinople.
COncerning the Patriarches of Constantinople, in this Century little mention is made of them, because for the most part, they kept not the right faith, but were intangled with heresie. After Cyriacus, Thomas, and Iohannes, and Con|stantinus, succeeded, whose faith (as vnspotted with any blame of heresie) hath an honest testimony in Church rolles, called Sacra diptytha. Sergius, Pyrrhus, and Paulus, were mise|rably infected with the heresie of the Monothelites. Pyrrhu once recanted his heresie, and was absolued from excom|munication by Pope Theodorus: but he returned inconti|nent againe as a dog to his vomite. Pope Theodorus when he excommunicated him the second time, vsed a new and inso|lent frme of doing,Hist. Magd. Cent. 7 cap. 9. the like whereof was neuer heard at any time before: for he infused some drops of the consecrated cup into inke, and writ a sentence of cursing against Pyrrus. Pau|lus also obtained at the hands of the Emperour Constans, e|dicts to be affixed in diuers places, whereby all men should be compelled to subscribe to the error of the Monothelites. After them Petrus and Theodorus, albeit they maintained not the fore-mentioned heresie with so high and proud attempts

as others had done, yet they were addicted vnto it. Gregorius successor to Theodorus, in the sixt generall Councell, had de|fended the error of the Monothelites, but when he was cleer|ly refuted by testimonies of Scripture,  by places cited out of the Fathers, he yeelded, and embraced the true faith. Cal|lynius ministred vnder the raign of Iustinian the second, who demolished a Church neere approching to his pallace, and builded an house of presence, wherein the people might cherish the Emperour. Callynicus was compelled to conse|crate the house by prayer: but in regard he was enforced a|gainst his heart to pray, he made his prayer short, in this manner, Glory be to God, who patiently comporteth with vs, both now, and for euer, Amen. For this cause Iustinian hated Callynichus, and when he returned backe againe from his ten yeers banishment, he caused the eyes of Callynichus to be put out, and sent him to Rome, there to remaine in banishment.


Patriarchs of Alexandria.
IN Alexandria, before the Saracens (vnder the conduct of Mahomet) conquered the countrey of Egypt, few of note and marke were to be found in that chaire. After Eulogius, Iohannes scribo continued in office onely two yeeres. After him Iohannes Eleemosynarius is highly commended for his li|beralitie toward the poore. Cyrus his successor was an here|tique, following the errour of the Monothelites.Paulus Dia|conu, lib. 18. rerum Rom. He payed tribute to the Saracens: but when the Emp. Heraclius was wearied of the payment of tribute, then all the countrey of Egypt was possessed by the Saracens: which incursion of the Mahumetans, albeit it cutted not off the personall suc|cession of the Patriarches of Alexandria, yet it obscureth the cleare notice of their succession vnto vs, who are farre di|stant from them.



Patriarches of Antiochia.
IN Antiochia Anastatius Sinaita is found to haue beene Bi|shop of Antiochia, in the dayes of the Emperour Phocas: He obtained this name to be called Sinaita, because he had macerated himselfe with long fasting, and with hard exerci|ses of an heremiticall life vpon mount Sina, Anno 610. hee was slaine in a seditious commotion, stirred vp by the Iewes, who dwelt at Antiochia, who slew many other Christians: but they vttered great crueltie, ioyned with vile in humani|tie, against Anastatius, in whose mouth they cast the verie excrements of his owne bodie,Nicephorus. lib. 18. cap. 44.  45. as the Magdeburg Historie recordeth, citing the testimonie of Nicephorus. After him another of that same name called likewise Anastatius, suc|ceeded, and was B. of Antiochia: He was a Syrian, a man of a subtile spirit, who circumuented the Emperour Heraclius: for at the Emperours command he subscribed the decrees of the Councell of Chalcedon, onely simulately, and for desire of preferment: but after he had subscribed, that two na|tures personally vnited were to be acknowledged in Christ, he demanded of the Emperour, what he thought of the will and operation of Christ, whether was two willes and ope|rations in Christ, or one will, and one operation onely? The Emperour troubled with the noueltie of the question, con|sulted with Sergius B. of Constantinople, who returned this answere to the Emperour, that one will and one operation was to be acknowledged in Christ. The Emperour Hera|clius being circumvented by false and deceitfull teachers, was ashamed to forsake that opinion, which he had once condiscended vnto. So this heresie of the Monothelites tooke deepe roote in the East, vntill the time that God, pu|nishing the contempt of his truth, suffered the Saracenes, with their blasphemous Mahometan doctrine to be vniver|sally ouer-spred in the East.
To Anastatius succeeded Macarius, a most obstinate defen|der of the heresie of the Monothelites: for the which cause hee was excommunicated and deposed in the sixt generall Councell, and Theophanius, an Abbot in Sicilie, was made bishop of Antiochia. After him are reckoned Petrus, Thomas and Ioannes, without any further discourse, except a bare commemoration of their names.


Patriarches of Ierusalem.
THe Church of Ierusalem in this age was pitifully de|faced, as lying nearest to the incursions of strong enemies, both Persians and Saracens. Zacharias Bishop of Ierusalem was carried captiue by Cosroes king of Persia, and remained a prisoner for the space of fourteene yeeres. In the ende hee was restored to his former dignitie, at that time when the Emperour Heraclius ouercame Cosres in warre-fare, and recouered the rosse of Christ againe, which the Persians had spoyled, and taken out of Ie|rusalem. This came to passe in the yeere of our Lord 624.
To Zacharias succeeded Sophronius;Note. of a Monke, Hee was made Patriarch of Ierusalem: He lacked not his owne commendation in the sixt generall Councell, as one who kept the true Faith iuuiolable: He was present in Ierusalem when Haumer Prince of Saracenes entered into the Towne and Temple: and he was a beholder of the last desolation of the Church in the towne.


Other Pastors and Doctors.
IN this Centurie there is great scarsitie of learned men, yet that which was lacking in learning, it must bee

supplied one way or other: Some were politique, others (in the opinion of ignorant people) were so deuout and holy, that miracles were wrought by their handes, and at their sepulchres: namely, lying miracles, aduancing the kingdome of the Antichrist. The most remarkeable Bi|shops of Rauenna in this Centurie were Theodorus, Repa|ratus, and Foelix, all of contrarie dispositions, and so flat opposite one to another as possible could be. Theo|dorus was terrible, and couetous: and when hee saw that hee was despised by the people and Clergie, being de|sirous of reuenge,Hist. Magd. cent. 7. cap. 10. hee betrayed the libertie of the church of Rauenna, in the dayes of the Pope Donus. Reparatus being ignorant of that which Theodorus had done, and finding the Church of Rauenna, subjected to the chaire of Rome, for verie heart griefe incontinent hee ended his life. Foelix refused to pay vnto Constantine the summe of money which hee demanded as a testimonie of sub|jection. For this cause Pope Constantine desired support from the Emperour Iustinian the second, for subduing the Bishop of Rauenna. Foelix on the other part, hearing, that the Emperours armie was approching to Rauenna for the cause aforesayd, hee instigated the people to fight for the liberty of their Church: Both the armies fought with martial courage: In the end the Emperours armie preuailed, the Towne of Rauenna was taken, many were slaine, others were carried captiue to Constantinople, the eyes of Foelix were put out, the rest were banished to Bithynia. What can be found in this historie but pride on the one part, am|bitiouslie seeking superioritie: and on the other part po|licie, sometimes yeelding, sometimes despairing, and some|times with bellicous hardinesse presuming to pleade a spirituall cause with weapons of a corporall warre-fare.
In this Centurie many miracles are attributed to the per|sons whom the people counted to be deuote.
Piatina, in ita Ivan. 5.Ioannes, Bishop of Bergomum in Lombardie, was a man of so great reuerent account, that Princes were wont, by rising our of their Thrones, to doe honour vnto him. It happe|ned

vpon a time, that hee reproued Iipetus king of Lom|bardis freelie and sharpelie, in time of a banquet. Iunipertus willing to be reuenged of him, prouided, that hee should be sent home vpon a strong, fierce, and loftie horse, which was accustomed to cast the riders,Note. and to teare and lacerate them: But when the Bishop of Bergomum was mounted vpo~ him, hee left his fiercenesse, and carried him peaceably and calme|lie vnto his owne house.
Ioannes gn, bishop of Wrecht, in whose hand a piece of drie timber budded and flourished,Note. yet was he an idiot and an vnlearned man.
Remaclus Bishop of the same Towne, and borne in Bur|deaux of France, left his Episcopall office, and went to the Wildernesse, where hee led an Heremiticall life, defending his insolent fact by the example of Moses, Abraham, Elias Heliseus, and Christ himselfe, who were all found to haue beene in the Wildernesse. But if hee had beene a man of deepe vnderstanding, hee might haue alledged more pertinently the example of Narcissus, bishop of Ierusalem, who in going to the Wildernesse, forsooke his Episcopall office for a time, than the example of Christ, who went vnto the Wildernesse to enter into the holie office of Preaching, after preparation of fasting, praying, and fighting with spi|rituall armour against the prince of Darknesse. Notwith|standing, hee is thought both in his life time,Matthew. 4. Platin. in vitae Ioan. and also af|ter his death to haue wrought miracles.
In Austume a Towne of France, called in Latine Au|gustodunu~, Leodegarius is thought to haue retained his voice,  the benefite of distinct speaking after that his tongue was cut out,Note. and that manie miraculous works were wrought after his death, if credite can bee giuen to Vin|centius.
The miracles of Andoenus Bishop of Rowen, who also writ a booke of the miraculous deliuerance of the soule of Dagobertus king of France, and an infinite number of other lying miracles, all confirming superstition, of purpose I

leaue them as fables superaboundant in the writings of Vin|centius.
Concerning Isidorus Hispalensis, occasion will be offered to speake of him in the sixt Councell of Toledo.
The vaine disputation concerning the diuersitie of the kee|ping of Easter day in Scotland and England, betwixt Colmannus and Wuilfridus it is as vn|necessarie to be written, as it was vnne|cessary with heat and contenti|on to haue beene disputed.




CENTVRIE VIII.

Popes of Rome.
_AFter Pope Sergius succeeded Iohn the 6. and continued 3. yeeres, and 3. months.Iohn. 6.
After him Pope Ioannes 7. continued 2. yeeres and 7. monthes:Iohn. 7. hee liued in the dayes of Iustinian the 2. who sent Ambas|sadors vnto him for procuring an vnion betwixt the churches of the East and west, because they differed in opinions concerning the Canons of the sixt generall Councell, wherein prohibition of mar|riage to men in spirituall offices was dissallowed, and the Patriarch of Constantinople was equalled in autoritie to the Patriarch of Rome. These Ambassadors aforesaid retur|ned from Pope Iohn the seuenth without any answere, with proud carriage, or as others thinke, a cowardlie forme of dea|ling all writers doe reproue.
After him succeeded Sisinius who continued not about 20. dayes in his Popedome.Sisinius.
After Sisinius succeeded Constantine the first and go|uerned 7. yeeres,Constantine the first. and 20. dayes: his Popedome was vnder the raigne of Iustinian the second, Philippicus, and Anastasius. The Emp. Iustinian supported him against Foelix Bishop of Ra|venna, who had refused to pay to the B. of Rome the summe of money imposed vnto him in time of his ordination, so that Foelix was taken prisoner by the Emperours admirall, and sent to Constantinople, where his eyes were put out,  he was ba~ished to Pontus. Against the Emp. Philippicus he contended, as one hauing authoritie to raze the name of the Emp. out of charters, as had bin already declared. This is the Pope who was Iudge betwixt the B. of Ticinum and Millane who contended for superioritie, and Constantine exemed the

shop of Ticinum from the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Mil|lan: but in such way, as he should be subject to the Church of Rome. The Emperour Iustinian the second, sent for Pope Constantine, who came to Constantinople, and from thence went to Nicomedia,Note. where he met with the Emperour, and the Emperour kissed his feete. Marke the growing, and daylie increasing pride of the Roman Antichrist.
After Constantine succeeded Gregorius the second, and con|tinued sixteene yeeres,Gregorius, the second. nine months, and eleuen dayes. Hee liued vnder the raigne of the Emperour Leo Isaurus, whom he rashly excommunicated for abolishing of images. Also he drew away from the obedience of the Emperour, the coun|tries of Hesperia, Aemilia, Liguria, and other parts of Italie, forbidding them to pay tribute to the Emperour, expresse contrary to Christes commandement, Matth. 22.21. where He saith, Giue vnto Caesar that which is Caesars, c. and this Christ spake concerning paying of tribute.
Gregorius the third.Gregorie the third gouerned ten yeeres, eight monthes, and twentie foure dayes: and followed the foote steps of his predecessor, both in aduancing the doctrine of worship|ping of images, and in with-drawing the people of Italie from the obedience of the Emperour. More-ouer, he gathe|red a Councell at Rome, wherein the worshipping of images had allowance. And the Emperour Leo was both excom|municated, and likewise, so farre as in him lay, depriued of his Emperiall dignitie. So early did the beast of Rome, euen in ciuill matters, vsurp autority ouer the Princes and Mo|narches of the world. In his dayes the towne of Rome was besieged by Luitprand king of Lombardis. But Carolus Mar|tellus, a noble prince in France, beeing sollicited by letters of Gregorie, to support the distressed estate of the Church of Rome, hee perswaded Luitbrand to desist from molesting  besieging the towne of Rome.
Zacharias the first.After Gregorie the third succeeded Zacharias the first,  co~+tinued ten yeeres, foure months, and foure dayes: In anti|christian pride hee surpassed all his predecessors, distribu|ting the Kingdomes of the world at his pleasure: For he

procured,Func. Comment. in Chron. lib. 8. that Pipinus, the sonne of Carolus Martellus (who was but a subject, and ruler of the kings house) should bee anointed king of France: and that Childericus, the lawfull successour of the kingdome, should haue his head shauen, and be thrust into a Monasterie. Likewise he procured, that Carolomnnus, the elder brother of Pipinius, should be a Monke of the Order of Saint Benedict, in the Monasterie of Cassinates. Rachis also, king of Lombardes, after hee had raigned 4. yeeres, gaue ouer his kingly authority, and entered to a Monasterie, and exhorted his wife and children to do the like: and so his brother Aistulphus obtained the kingdome. Pipinus was anointed king of France, by Bonifacius, at the commaundement of Pope Zacharias, anno. 750. or as Platina reckoneth Anno, 753. What recompence of reward Pipinus rendered to the chaire of Rome, for this beneuole~ce, or rather this manifest iniquitie of Zacharias, it will be declared in the description of the life, gouernememt, and carriage of Stepha|nus the second, if the Lord please.
After Zacharias succeeded Stephanus the second,Stephanus the second. and ruled fiue yeeres, and one month. In his time Aistul|phus, King of Lombardes besieged Rome, at two diuers times, and Stephanus implored the aide and assistance of Pipinus, King of France, at both times. At the first time Pipinus besieged Aistulphus in Papia the chiefe Citie of residence of the kinges of Lombardes, and compelled him to restore to the chaire of Rome all the townes and lands which by violence hee had taken from them. But at his second comming, he not only relieued Rome from the siege of the Lombardes, but also bestowed vppon the chaire of Rome the dominions of Rauenna and Penta-polis, appertaining to the Emperour of the East, and which they enjoyed since the death of Narses,Platina in vita Step. 2. 170. yeeres. In so doing, there was such bargaining betwixt the kinges of France and the Popes,Acts 12. as was of olde betwixt Herod and the Iewes, he gratified them with the blood of Christes Apostles, and they gratified him on the other part by giuing to him the glory of God: Euen so, Zacharias, bishop of Rome,

bestowed vpon Pipinus the kingdome of France, which duly appertained to another: and Pipinus againe bestowed vpon the chaire of Rome the dominion of Rauenna,  Pen|tapolis, which duely appertained to the Emp. of the East.
It shall not be amisse to make a particular rehearsall of the townes  territories bestowed vpon the church of Rome, by the donatio~ of Pipinus, but not of Constantine, as they haue rumored most fabulously many yeares agoe: In primis, Ra|uenna, Bononia, Imola, Fauentia, Commaclum, Hadria, Pompilii Forum, Leuii Forum, Cesena, Bobium, Ferraria, Ficoclas, and Gabellum: all these townes were vnder the dominion of Ra|uenna. And in Pentapolis, Ariminum, Pisaurum, Concha, Fa|num, Senogallia, Ancona, Auximum, Hummanam, Aesium, Sempronij Forum, Mons Feretri, Vrbium, Balmense territorium, Callas, Luceolos, Engubium, together with the Castles and lands appertaining to these townes, to wit, the Prouinces cal|led in our time Romandiola, Marca Anconitana, and of olde Aemilia, Flaminea, Picenu~. Thus we see what a rich reward the chaire of Rome obtained for their defection fro~ the Emp. of the East, and their fauour towards the kings of France. Al|so, for further confirmatio~ of friendship betwixt the bishops of Rome, and the kings of France, Pope Stephanus the 2. pro|cured, that he should be inuited to be witnes at the baptisme of the king of Fraunce his yong son, at which time, as a man couetous of vaine glorie,Note. he suffered, Pipinus, Charles his son, to kisse his feet,  to hold his stirrope,  to lead his horse by the brible: and finally, he was content to be mounted vp, and carried vpon the shoulders of men, leauing behind him an example of stinking pride to the posterity after follow|ing.
Paulus the first.After Stephanus the seco~d, succeeded his brother Paulus the first, who continued 10. yeeres, and one month. In antichri|stian pride he was nothing inferiour to his predecessours, for he sent Ambassadours to the Emperour of the East Constanti|nus Copronymus, to exhort him to restore againe the images of the Saints, which hee had demolished, with intermination of cursing, if hee refused to bee obedient to the popes

counsell. In his time Astulphus King of Lombardes dy|ed, and Desidrius the last King of Lombards raigned in his stead.
Constantine the brother of Desiderius King of Lombardis, succeeded to Paulus the first,Constantinus 2. a man admitted to the Pope|dome, before he received Ecclesiasticall orders: therefore hee was hated of the people of Rome, and denuded of his Papall dignity, after hee had continued one yeere and one moneth. Some writers affirme that his eyes were thrust out, and that hee was sent to a Monasterie: others affirme, that hee was burnt with fire, by the hatefull malice of the Ro|manes.
To him succeeded Stephanus the third, who ruled foure yeeres,Stephanus 3. fiue moneths, and twenty seven dayes. Hee gathe|red a Councell at Rome; in the which twelue Bishops of France, sent thither by Charles de Maine, were present, with the Bishoppes of Italy, who disauthorized Constantine his predecessor, and annulled all his decrees. Likewise, they damned the seventh generall Councell convened in Con|stantinople, by Constantinus Copronymus, wherein the wor|shipping of Images was disallowed. But in this Laterane Councel, assembled by Stephanus the third, the worshipping of Images got allowance. And it was thought, that God and the Saints were in worser case then mortall Princes, in case that Images might be made to represent mortall Princes, but not to represent God and his Saints.Platin. in vit. Steph 3. It was rumored in this Popes time, that Charles King of France, was of in|tention to marrie Bertha, the daughter of Desiderius King of Lombards. Stephanus fearing left this marriage should vndoe the friendship lately tracted betwixt the Bishops of Rome, and the King of France, disswaded Charles from the marriage aforesayd; as if the marriage of a woman of the kindred of the Lombards, were a mixing of darkenesse with light, and of Belial with Christ. And the menacing letter of Stephanus the third, prevailed so farre at the hands of Charles the Great, that he repudiated Bertha the daughter of Desiderius, his lawfull maried wife, after he had cohabited

with her one yeere: and hee married another woman, na|med Hildegarde, of the Dukerie of Sweue. These are the fruits of Antichristian pride,Note. to threaten the torments of hell against the Princes of the world for marriage, if so be they fore-see any damage may redound to the chaire of Rome, by the marriage of Princes.
After Stephanus the third, succeeded Adrian the first, and governed twenty three yeares,Adrianus. 1. Platin. in vit. Adri. 1. ten moneths, and seven|teene dayes. In his dayes Charles the Great came into Ita|ly with an army, and Desiderius King of Lombards, his wife, and children, to Lions in France, and vtterly subdued the kingdome of the Lombards; which had continued in Italy 204. yeeres. Now in the yeere of our Lord, 776. this king|dome was abolished and vndone, by Charles the Great, king of France, for the fauour he carried towardes the chaire of Rome. Likewise, hee augmented the donation of his fa|ther Pipinus, and he bestowed vpon the Church of Rome, the Isle of Corsica, and the places lying betwixt Luca and Parma, with the Dukedomes Spoleto and Benevento. This being done,Func. comment. in obon l. 8. Charles returned back againe to France, carying with him Bertha his brothers wife, and her children, who came to Adrian Bishop of Rome, hoping for favour at his hands, and that he should haue anoynted her sonnes to bee Kings of France, seeing Carolamannus their father was now dead: but he delivered them into the hands of Charles, and so Charles the Great raigned without exception, as absolute Commander of France. Irene the Empresse of the East, du|ring his Popedome, assembled a great Councell at Nice in Bythinia, where the adoration of Images was allowed. In this Councell the Popes Ambassadors were present, and his owne letter was read in the Councell: no man gaue greater allowance to the worshipping of Images, then Pope Adrian did, as shall be declared, God willing, in the head of Coun|cels. It is to be marked, that Platina, writing of the death of Constantinus Copronymus, is compelled to beare witnesse to the truth; and testifie, that the opinion of the leprosie of Constantine the Great, was a notable fable, and that it sprung

vp by occasion of the disease of Constantinus Copronymus, the father in law of the Empresse Irene.
To Adrian succeeded Leo the third,Leo 3. and governed one and twenty yeeres. He was hated by Pascalis and Campalus, who lay in wait for him at the Church of S. Silvester, threw him down to the ground, spoyled him of his pontificall gar|ments, beat him with many strokes, and finally, cast him in|to prison and bonds: but hee escaped by the meanes of a cubiculare, named Albinus, and lurked in the Vaticane, vn|till the time that Vnigisius, Duke of Spoleto, conveyed him safely vnto his bounds. At this time Charles King of France, had warres against the Saxons. The Bishop of Rome, who came to him to complaine of the iniuries which hee had re|ceived, was sent backe againe very honourably, accompa|nied with the souldiers of Charles King of France: and with promise that he should without delay, addresse his iourney towards Italy. When Charles came to Italy, the Popes ene|mies were so dashed with feare, they durst not appeare to ac|cuse him: and the Clergie of Rome thought meet, that no man should iudge of the Apostolike chaire, but the Bishop of Rome should bee his owne iudge. Leo tooke the booke of the Gospell in his hands,Hist. Magd. cent. 8. cap 10. and swore that hee was inno|cent of all the crimes obiected against him: and so hee was absolved: and Pascalis and Campulus, the friends of the late deceased Pope Adrian, were counted worthy of death: but Pope Leo interceded for safety of their liues: so they were banished to France. For this benefit, Leo caused Charles to be declared Emperour of the West, and crowned him with the Imperiall Diadem. And from that time forwards, the custome began, that Emperours should receiue their Coro|nation from the Bishop of Rome. Notwithstanding of this, it was ordained, that no man should be elected Bishoppe of Rome,Note. without advise of the Emperour of the West, and without receiving investment from him.



Patriarchs of Constantinople.
THe Patriarches of Constantinople in this Centurie, placed and displaced, according to the changeable con|ceits of the Emperours. Vnder th raigne of Iustinian the se|cond, Cyrus was Patriarch, whom Philippieus removed, and advanced one named Iohn, who had fore-told, that hee should bee made Emperour. This Iohn was infected with the heresie of the Monothelites, and was remooved by Ar|temius, by whom Germanus was advanced to the chaire of Constantinople. Germanus continued vntill the raigne of Constantinus Copronymus: Hee was deposed and excommu|nicated by the generall Councell assembled by Constantinus,Note. because he allowed the worshipping of Images.
To him succeeded Anastatius, who albeit hee disliked Images, yet hee was vnthankfull to the Emperour, and fa|voured the seditious attempts of the people of Constanti|nople, who advanced Artabasdus to the Imperiall dignity. Moreover, hee slandered the Emperour, as if hee had spo|ken against the divinity of Christ. Hee received a iust re|compence of his vnthankefulnesse: for he was deposed, and scourged, and set vpon an Asse, with his face towards the Asses tayle, and made a ridiculous spectacle to the people.
After him, Constantine a Monke, was made Patriarch, who at the first seemed to condemne Images: but afterward hee was found to bee a maintayner and allower of them. The Emperour banished him to Iberia, where hee spake contu|meliously both of the Emperour, and of the Councell holden at Constantinople: therefore he was brought back againe from banishment, and was beheaded, and his body was drawn through the town with a cord, and cast into a pit, where the bodies of malefactors were accustomed to be cast.
After him succeeded Nicetas, a man vnlearned, and advan|ced by the Emperor Const. Copron. for none other cause, but

onely for his zeale against the worshipping of Images. Af|ter him succeeded Paulus Cyprius, who in the dayes of Const. Copron. damned the worshipping of images: but afterward changed his minde: and vnder the raigne of Irene, entred into a Monastery, and lamented, that hee had consented to the abolishing of images. The vaine inconstancy of this ti|morous and superstitious man, was the chiefe occasion of the convocation of the second Councell of Nice, by the Em|presse Irene. To him succeeded Tarasius, who was present and gaue allowance to the adoration of Images.
The prevailing power of the Saracens in Alexandria, Antiochia, and Ierusalem, did so obscure the names of the Patriarchs of there cities, that I haue no remarkeable thing to write of them in this Centurie.


Of Pastors and Doctors.
IN this declining age, wherein spirituall grace dayly decay|ed, and nothing increased, except an heap of earthly trea|sures, which God permitteth to be poured into the bosomes of them who loue the wages of iniquity. Alwayes, even at this time, some men of good literature and learning, did manifest themselues vnto the world; such as Bonifacius Bi|shop of Mentz, Damascene, a learned Monke, Paulus Diaco|nus a learned writer of histories, and Beda a man counted venerable in his time: yet all these were miserably infected with the superstitions of their time, such as the opinion of Purgatory, invocation of Saints, worshipping of Images, and prohibition of Mariage.
Bonifacius was a man borne in England,Bonifacius. in place neere ad|ioyning to Excester: he was familiarly acquainted with fiue Popes, to wit, with Pope Constantinus the first, Gregorius the second, Gregorius the third, Zacharias the first, Stephanus 2. And by them he was advanced to many honours: First, to

be the Popes Legate in England, Germany and France, and afterwards to be Archbishop of Mentz. All his studies and travailes tended to this, to bring the people of England, Ger|many, and France, to the subiection of the Romane Bishop, and to a conformity of the superstitions of the Romane Church. In the name, and at the commandement of Pope Zacharias, hee disauthorized Childericus King of France, thrust him into a Monasterie, and anoynted Pipinus the son of Carolus Martellus, to be King of France. So zealous was he to performe all the desires of the Roman Bishoppes, by whom also his name was changed: for hee was first named Vinofridus, but the Bishops of Rome who delighted in his service, called him Bonifacius. After he had served the Ro|mane Bishops in slavish subiection 36. yeeres, he was slaine by Pagans, because he had anoynted Pipinus King of France, and for hope they had to enrich themselues by his coffers:Note. in the which, when they had opened them, they found no|thing except bookes, and reliques of Saints, whereof they made no account. And his body was buryed in the Mona|stery of Fulda.
Iohannes Da|mascenus.Damascene, a superstitious Monke, the disciple of Cosmas, lived vnder the Emperours Leo, and Const. Copron. hee was a long time in company of the Saracens, and with the Prince of Saracens he went to the sepulchre of Mahomet, and like vnto a timorous body,Hist. Magd. cent. 8. cap. 10. worshipped the bones of Mahomet, fearing to haue beene put to death, if hee had not done such homage. Hee was a patron of worshipping of Images, and was excommunicated in the generall councell assembled by Const. Copron.Note. It is written by Iohn Patriarch of Ierusalem, in the History of Damascenes life, that the Prince of Sara|cens was moved to indignation against him, by a deceitfull letter, sent from the Emperour Leo Isaurus, in the which Damascene was charged as a man willing to haue betrayed the towne of Damascus into the hands of the Emperor Leo. Vpon this occasion (saith Iohn Patriarch of Ierusalem) the Prince of Saracens cut off the hand of Damascene: and on the other part, Damascene, by humble kneeling before the

Image of the Virgin Marie, was miraculously cured, and restored againe to the power of his hand. But this is like to the rest of popish fables, and lyes: For Damascene writeth many notable fables, for co~firmation of adoration of Images. And in case a miracle had beene wrought in his owne per|son, by prostrating himselfe before an Image, Damascene had no manner of way ouer-passed with silence the memori|all thereof. But we haue to doe with adversaries, who are not ashamed of lies. Damascene was a diligent reader of the bookes of ancient Fathers, as appeareth by his foure bookes, De Orthodoxa fide: but not so diligent a reader of holy Scrip|ture, which is the ground of manifold errors. His history of Iosophat, King of India, is knowne to be a Monkish fable.
Paulus Diaconus,Paulus Dia|conus. of the kindred of the Lombards, became a deacon in Aquileia: hee was carryed captiue into France, in the dayes of Charles the great, who besieged Papia, bani|shed Desiderius, and made an end of the Kingdome of the Lombards. Afterwards he was accused of treason and con|spiracie, against Charles King of France. His malicious and hatefull accusers, were bent to haue had his hands cut off, or his eyes put out: but King Charles pitying him for his learning, was content that hee should bee banished to the Isle of Diomedes. From thence hee fled, and came to Be|neventum, where Arachis was dwelling, who had married Adelporga, the daughter of Desiderius. In his palace it is thought hee writ his sixe bookes, De rebus gestis Longobar|dorum. After the death of Arachis, hee came to the Mona|stery called Cassinense, where hee ended his life.
Beda,Beda. a man borne and brought vp in England, was cal|led venerable, and was in great account in his time. Onely, he was miserably intangled with deceitfull Antichristian er|rors, vniversally overspred in his dayes. In writing, reading, and praying. hee was a man of incessant paines. Nothing is found in him more commendable, then his patient suffe|ring of the agonies immediately preceding his dissolution, with a desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ.
Albertus Gallus,Albertus Gal|lus, with some learned men of Scotland, wit|nesse to the truth of God. a Bishop in some part of France, a lear|ned

and godly man, opposed himselfe mightily to Boniface, the foot-groom of the Roman Antichrist, with whom con|curred two learned men borne in Scotland, named Clemens Presbyter, and Samson, and offered to prooue both by word and writing, that Bonifacius was an author of lyes, a troubler of the peace of Christians, and a corrupter and deceiver of the people. But Pope Zacharias excommunicated them be|fore they were heard in lawfull Assembly, and gaue power to his foot-groome Bonifacius,Hist. Magd. cent. 8. cap. 10. to depose them, and procured at the hands of the King of France, that they should be cast into prison, and bound with bonds, as schismatickes, false teachers, and sacrilegious men. Such reward men received, who were witnesses to the truth of God, and reprehended any corruption of the Romane Church. In like manner Iohannes Mailrosius, and Claudius Clemens, learned men of Scotland, sent by King Achaius, to Charles King of France, and the first professors of learning, in the Academie foun|ded by Charles the great in Paris: these two likewise were disliked of the Roman Church, because they could not assent to all the supersti|ons of that Church in this age so miserably deformed.




CENTVRIE. IX.

Popes of Rome.
_AFter Leo the third succeeded Stephanus the fourth,Stephanus the fourth. and ruled seuen months. He was not elected with consent, and allowance of the Emperour, but onely by the Cler|gie and the people of Rome. Here it is well marked by Functius, that the Roman Church doth obserue their owne lawes so inuiolably,Func comment. lib. 9. that the priuiledge granted to the Emperour by Pope Leo the third, it is vndone againe euen in his first successors time: to wit, in Pope Stephanus the fourth his time. In the third month of his Popedome, he journi|ed toward France, for what cause it is not certaine: but it appeareth he would trie the Emperours minde, whether or no he was griued for this, that he had beene elected Pope without the consent and fore-knowledge of the Emperour. When he returned againe, finding that Ludouicus Pius the Emperour, was not greatly grieued at the matter, but accep|ted his excuse, he began to make Commentaries vpon the Decrees of Hadrian the first, and Leo the third: to wit, that they meaned not that the Emp. should bee first acquainted with the election of the Pope: but rather, that after his electi|on, the Emperour should be acquainted with the businesse, before the Pope were anointed. By such false Glosses and Commentaries, they were by degrees excluding the Empe|rour from all kind of medling with the election of the Pope.
After Stephanus the fourth,Pascalis the first. succeeded Pascalis the first, who was elected without consent of the Emperour. Hee sent Ambassadours to excuse himselfe to the Emperour

Ludouicus Pius, because the Clergie and people had compel|led him to accept the Popedome. The Emperour Ludo|uicus Pius on the other part, seeing how this matter went, and that he was troubled with the vnconstancie, ambition, and obstinacie of the Romane Church, he gaue them liber|tie to choose their owne Bishop,Note. without the fore-knowledge and consent of the Emperour in time to come. And Pas|calis, after hee had ruled seuen yeeres and seuenteene dayes, he ended his course.
Eugenius the second.Eugenius the second succeeded Pascalis, and ruled foure yeeres. His Popedome was in the time when Lotharius was appointed to gouerne Italie. His commendations are these, great Learning, great Eloquence, with a mixture of great Hypocrisie.
Valentinus the first.Valentinus, the successour of Eugenius, within the space of fourtie dayes after that he was elected, (of a Deacon) to be Pope, hee concluded his life.
To Valentinus, succeeded Gregorius the fourth, and ruled sixteene yeeres.Gregoriethr fourth. Ludouicke and his sonne Lotharius were Em|perours at this time: without whose consent hee would not accept his Popedome. Gregorie would haue seemed to haue beene a mediator betwixt Ludouicke and his sonnes: but he is marked with a note of shame in the Magdeburg history, as a man who encreased discord,Hist. Magd. cent. 9. cap. 10. rather than quenched it. What he did in the Conuention at Aken, which was conueened by the authoritie of the Emperour, it shall be declared, God willing, in its owne place.
To Gregorie the fourth succeeded Sergius the second,  ru|led three yeeres.Sergius the second. He seemed to be the first Pope, who cha~ged the name giuen vnto him in Baptisme: for he was called Os porci, that is, the mouth of the Sowe: and for the basenes of the name, he called himselfe by the name of one of his anteces|sours. Lotharius sent Ludouick his eldest son, acco~panied with many Noble persons, to be crowned Emperour: for Lotha|rius thought meete to enter into a Monasterie, and to lament for his by-past sinnes, especially, for grieuing the heart of his father Ludouicus Pius. Hee augmented the liturgie of

the Masse, with the addition of Agnus Dei, and ordained, that the Hostia should be diuided in three parts.
To Sergius the second, succeeded Leo the fourth, and ruled 8. yeares,Leo the fourth. Sergius a man of many trade. 3. months. He was a man of many trades, a builder, a warriour, and a Bishop. He compassed the Vatican with a wall, and made it in the similitude of a Towne: and builded bull-warkes in the passages of Tyber, as it issued from the towne. He was a warriour,  fought against the Saracenes: a|gainst whom also he preuailed. And finally, at some time he was a Bishop: and he gathered a Councell of 47. Bishops, in the which Athanasius, a Cardinall Presbyter was damned, for negligence in the worke of his calling. This is the first time, in the which mention is made of a Cardinall in the Historie: for the Decretall Epistles, as I haue alreadie declared, are but fabulous  lying writings. In this Popes dayes, Edelwulphus, King of England, came to Rome, for performance of a vowe that hee had made. He was courteously accepted by Pope Leo: for which cause hee ordained a tribute yeerely to be paide to the bishop of Rome: to wit, a pennie Sterling out of euery house, in England that kindled fire. It is well remarked by Philip Morney,Lib. Myste|iniquitatis. that Leo the fourth, in a certaine Epistle, written to the Bishops of Britannie, derogateth credit to all the Decretall Epistles assigned to the bishops of Rome, preceding the dayes of Pope Siricius, except onely to the Decretall Epistles of Pope Syluester. So all the au|thorities that are alleadged by the Romane Church, out of the Decretall Epistles, for the space of 384 yeeres, are of none effect, by the confession of Pope Leo the fourth.
After Leo,Ioane the eight. the fourth, succeeded Pope Ioane the eight, an English woman,Note. borne in the towne of Mentz. She went to Athens, cloathed with the apparell of a man, accompanied with a Learned man: and she profited in learning beyond her fellowes. When shee came to Rome, shee was regarded for her learning, and was promoted to the dignitie of the Popedome,Marian. Scon. lib. 3. chron. and ruled two yeeres, fiue months and foure dayes. About the yeere of our Lord 854 (being Pope)

she played the Harlot: and by the prouidence of God, this villanie of the Roman church, which cannot erre, was mani|fested to the whole world: For, in the time of a solemne Pro|cession, as she was going to the church of Latera~, she trauelled in birth,  died, and was buried without honour. Onuphrius, the Aduocate of all euill causes, cannot ouer-passe this matter with silence: but he bringeth an argument from the authori|ty of Anastatius, a writer of Chronologie, to infringe the credit of this historie, in this manner: Anastatius (saith hee) liued a|bout this time,  knew best who succeeded to Leo the fourth  he maketh no me~tion of Ioane the eight, but of Benedictus the third, as successor of Leo the fourth. To this Philip Mor|ney answereth, That an argument taken from authoritie, ne|gatiuely, hath no force. Anastatius maketh no mention there|of: ergo, it was not done: It followeth not, for he bringeth in the testimonie of Ranulphus,Ranulp. lib. 5. cap. 32. declaring the cause wherefore Anastatius omitted the name of the foeminine Pope: to wit, Propter deformitatem facti: that is, For the deformitie of the fact. The nature of a short Compend permitteth me not to insist: but let them, who are desirous accurately to trie out the veri|tie of this matter, reade that worthie Booke of Philip Mor|ney, called Misterium iniquitatis.
Benedictus the third.Then followed Benedictus the third, and ruled two yeeres, six months, and nine dayes. A man in honouring the Fune|ralles of the Clergie, with his presence, ready at all times: and desirous likewise, that the Funerall of the Bishop should bee honoured with the presence of the whole Clergie.
Nicolaus the first.To Benedict the third, succeeded Nicolas the first, and go|uerned seuen yeeres, nine months, and thirteene dayes. He subdued the Bishop of Rauenna to his obedie~ce. He suffered the Emperour, Ludouicke the second, to light from his horse,  to leade his bridle, vntil he came to the Campo, which was the space of a mile. He permitted diuorcement betwixt mar|ried persons,Hist. Magd. Cent. 9. cap. 10. for Religions cause, without consent of parties. And that persons in spirituall offices, should not be subject to the justice seates of ciuill Magistrates. Hee ordained also, that no man should receiue the holy Sacrament

from a married Priest. And that the Emperour should not be present at Ecclesiasticall Conuentions: except when que|stions concerning Faith should bee intreated. Likewise, hee ordained,Func. comment. lib. 9. That the seruice of God in all countries, should be celebrated in Latine: dispensing in the meane time with the Solauonians and the Polonians, to haue the seruice of God in their owne Vulgar Language. He added vnto the Liturgie of the Masse, Gloria in Excelsis.
Hadrianus the second, succeeded to Nicolas the first, and ruled 5. yeeres,Hadrianus the second. nine months, and twelue dayes. He vsed Anti|christian authoritie, not onely against Hincmarus, Bishop of Rhemes, but also against Carolus Caluus, king of France, whom hee commanded imperiously to present one Hinc|marus, Bishop of Laudunum, and nephewe to Hincmarus, Bishop of Rhemes, to the ende that his cause might bee judged by the Apostolike seate. The King tooke these let|ters in a very euill part, and writ vnto the Pope. That the Kings of France had euer beene Soueraigne Lordes, in their owne countrie, and not vice-gerentes  vassales to Bishops: and, That hee would not permit any man, who had beene damned in a lawfull Councell, in his owne country, to wit, in the Councell of Acciniacum, to make appellation to Rome. In this Popes time the eight generall councell was as|sembled, whereof I shal speake in its owne time, God willing.
Ioannes the ninth,Ioannes the ninth. succeeded to Adrianus the second, and gouerned ten yeeres, and two dayes. This is he who for rewardes crowned Carolus Caluus to be Emperour: and was cast into prison, because hee was more affectionated to Ludouicus Balbus, sonne to Carolus Caluus, and king of France, than to Carolus Crassus, king of Germanie. Neuer|thelesse, hee escaped out of prison, and fled to Ludouicke, king of France: whom also hee crowned to be Emperour. But Balbus, after his coronation, incontinent died: and Pope Iohn the ninth must seeke new acquaintance, because his olde friends were gone:Note. therfore, he crowned Carolus Crassus to bee Emperour. This was the first Pope who in time of his Popedome crowned three Emperours.
Martinus the second.Martinus the second, ruled one yeere, and fiue months.
Hadrianus the third.Hadrianus the third succeeded to Martinus: the time of his gouernment was also short: for he continued not aboue one yeere, and two months: yet neuerthelesse, men who are busie, may make much stirre in short time. He perfected that worke which his predecessours had beene busied in bringing to passe many yeeres preceding: namely, That the Clergie and people of Rome should not attend vpon the allowance of the Emperour, but they should freely choose whom they thought meetest to bee Pope. Hee tooke the greater bold|nesse to doe this, because the Emperour Carolus was occu|pied in warre-fare. The Nation of the Normandes were now so sauadge and mightie, and molested France with an huge Armie, that the Emperour was compelled to transact with them in manner as is aboue rehearsed in the Historie of the life of Carolus Crassus.
Another constitution was made by Pope Hadrian: to wit, That after the death of Carolus Crassus, who died without succession, the Emperiall Title, together whth the gouerne|ment of Italie, should belong to one of the Princes of Italie. This was the ground of vnsupportable debate, and of facti|ons, in Italy, euery man according to the greatnesse of his power, contending to be King and Emperour: But chiefely Albertus, Marques of Tuscia, Berengarius, Duke of Foroui|lium, and Guido, Duke of Spoleto.
This seditious plotte also perturbed the Ecclesiasticall e|state: For, after this, euery one of the Princes of Italie stroue with all their might, to haue such a man seated in the Pope|dome, as could best aduance his faction, as will clearelie ap|peare in the election of Pope Formosus.
Stephanus the fift.To Hadrian the thirde, succeeded Stephanus the fifth, and ruled sixe yeeres, and eleuen dayes. The lesse Holinesse, Lear|ning, and Vertue that he had, the greater audacitie and bold|nesse was found in him: for he made a constitution, where|of Gratian recordeth (Distinct. 19. Cap. Enim vero Quic|quid Ecclesia Romana statuit,Note. quicquid ordinat, perpetuo quidem,  irre-fragibiliter obseruandum est: that is, What|soeuer

the Romane Church doth statute and ordaine, it is perpe|tuallie, and without all contradiction, to be obserued.
After Stephanus the fifth (whom others doe call the sixth) succeeded Formosus,Formosus. and continued fiue yeeres, and sixe months. Hee obtained the Popedome, not without strife: For one Sergius, a Deacon, was his competitor, supported with the Tusculan faction. Alwayes, Formosus preuailed. It was supposed, that hee was one of them who conspired against Pope Iohn the ninth, and cast him into bondes. After this hee feared the authoritie of Pope Iohn, and fled into France: but Pope Iohn denuded him of all Ec|clesiasticall office, and put vpon him the habite of a Laicke person: which indignitie done vnto him, he tooke it so grie|uously, that he bound himselfe by an oath,Platima, in vita Forma. That hee should neuer see the Towne of Rome, nor returne againe to his Bishopricke: for hee was Episcopus Portuensis. But Pope Martinus absolued him from his oath, and repossessed him into his Bishopricke againe, and in the end he was made Pope, as is said.
Neuerthelesse, the faction of his competitor, Sergius, cea|sed not to vexe and molest Formosus: so that hee sent secret aduertiseme~t vnto Arnulphus, the Nephew of Carolus Crassus to come to Rome: who came with an Armie, and was crowned Emperour by Formosus, as hath beene alreadie declared.
To Formosus succeeded Bonifacius the sixt,Bonifacius the sixt. who conclu|ded his course, after he had continued twentie and sixe daies.
After Bonifacius the sixt succeeded Stephanus the sixt,Stephanus the sixt. and ruled one yeere, and three months: Hee not onely annulled all the Decrees of his Predecessor Formosus: but also caused his dead bodie to bee taken out of his graue, and cut off his three fingers, wherewith he was wont to consecrate persons admitted to spirituall offices, and threw them into Tyber: and caused all them,Note. who had receiued ordination by For|mosus, to receiue new ordination.
This fact of Stephanus the sixt, is so full of vncouth and vn|naturall inhumanitie, that Onuphrius denieth that any such

thing was done: whose impudencie Morneus discouereth by the testimonie of Luitprandus, who liued at that same time and was a Deacon of the Church of Ticinum, and maketh mention of this vile fact, not without horrour and detesta|tion thereof. Baronius is not so impudent as Onuphrius, and will not denie the fact, but extenuateth the atrocitie and vile|nesse thereof: for hee saith, Non fuit error in fide, sed violenta tyrannis in facto: that is to say. It was no errour in the faith, but a violent tyrannie in the fact.
And likewise, hee annulled the inauguration of the Em|perour Arnulphus, and annointed Albert, or Lambert, Marques of Tuscia, who followed the Popes course to bee Emperour. Now is the Popedome encreased to the measure of a full strength, when they dare authorise and disautho|rise, place and displace, Emperours at their owne pleasure. So that there remaineth nothing, but to enter into gripes with the Emperour, throw him downe to the ground, and to treade vpon the excellent honour of his Soueraigntie, which in the next Centurie will follow.
 Note.To Stephanus, succeeded Romanus, and continued onely three months. He abrogated the Decrees of Stephanus, his predecessour.
Theodorus the second.Theodorus, the successour of Romanus, continued in his Popedome twentie dayes onely. In this short time he allowed the Decrees of Formosus.


Patriarches of Constantinople.
PAtriarches of Costantinople, in this Centurie, were changed according to the dispositio~ of the Emperours, fauouring or disliking the worshipping of Images. Nicephorus was a de|fender of adoration of Images,  was banished by the Empe|rour Leo. Theodotus againe, Antonius, and Syngelus, who had bin Schoole-maisters to the Emperour Theophilus, were ha|ters of Images. But after the death of Theophilus, Theodora,

his wife, advanced Methodius, a superstitious man, and an obstinate defender of adoration of Images, and intercession of Saints. Concerning Ignatius and Photius, and the great troubles that arose about placing and displacing of them, occasion will be offered to speake of these things in the head of Councels.


Of other Pastors, and Doctors.
IN this corrupt and back-sliding age, wherein the Romane Antichrist had so great an vpper-hand, the head of Coun|cels will compell mee to make mention of the names of a number of learned men. At this time, the name of Claudius Taurinensis, putteth a great number of the refront of my re|membrance, because hee was a faithfull witnesse vnto the truth of God, in a troublesometime. He was a man borne in Spaine, vnder the raigne of Ludovicus Pius, he was made Bishop of Thurin, in Pimont. As his first entry to his Bi|shopricke, hee threw the Images out of his Church, affir|ming, that the Saints, who in their life-time were not con|tent to be worshipped, much lesse could they be content to haue their pictures worshipped after their death. In speciall, hee condemned the worshipping of the crosse: affirming, that if it should be worshipped, because Iesus died vpon it: then the Ship, in the which Christ sayled, the Asse, where|upon Christ did ride into Ierusalem,  infinit things, which Christ touched, by the like reason, ought also to bee wor|shipped. Concerning the Bishop of Rome, he sayd, that he was not to be counted an Apostolicke Bishop, who sate in the Apostolicke chaire:Note. but hee who fulfilled an Aposto|licke office.
Hinemarius, Bishop of Rhemes, lived vnder Carolus Mag|nus, and continued in office almost vntill the raigne of the Emperour Arnulph. Hee had great strife with his nephew Hincmarus Bishop of Laudunum, who refused to bee vnder

his Diosis: and appealed from him vnto the Bishop of Rome. Likewise, in the cause of Rhotardus Bishop of Soission, whom Hincmarus deposed, and removed from his office. Ni|colaus the first Bishop of Rome, absolved him. Hadrian 2. gaue him commandement to excommunicate C. Calvus King of France, his soveraigne Lord: but he refused to per|forme such an vnlawfull commandement: and writ vnto the Pope, to be circumspect, and not precipitate rashly his sentences of excommunication.
The question whereunto Hadrian 2. was so serious, was a|bout division of lands, betwixt C. Calvus, and his brother Lo|tharius. C. Calvus denyed, that he did vniustly invade any of his brothers lands, but lands duely belonging to himselfe by paction and covenant. And the Nobles of the country said, that it was a strange and an vnaccustomed thing, that the Pope would take, vpon him to be iudge in a controversie, concerning the Titles and Rights of kingdomes: because he could not be both a Bi|shop and a King.




CENTVRIE X.

Popes of Rome.
_TO Thedoricus succeeded Pope Iohn the tenth,Iohannes 20. hee abrogated all the decrees of Pope Stephanus the sixt, and allowed the decrees of Formosus: whereupon great tumult and vprore arose in Rome. For this cause, the Pope fled to Ravenna, and gathered a Councell of 74. Bishops, al|so Carolus Simplex King of France, was present at this coun|cell. There hee ratified the decrees of Formosus, and dam|ned the decrees of Stephanus. Here let vs marke that the Bi|shops of Rome doe both mocke God and the world,Note. in say|ing, that their Councels are guided by the holy Spirit, and cannot erre; in the meane time one of their Councels dam|ning another, and being altogether opposite one to another. After hee had come backe to Rome, he concluded his life, having ruled two yeeres, and fifteene dayes. To him succee|ded Benedictus the fourth, and continued three yeeres, and foure moneths.Benedictus 4.
After Benedictus ruled Leo the fift,Leo 5. and continued not in his Popedome aboue forty dayes: for he was cast into prison and bonds, by Christophorus his owne domestique servant. Christophorus by vnlawfull meanes attained to the Popedom,Christophorus. and lost it againe vnworthily, in the seventh moneth of his government, for hee was thrust into a Monastery, as the on|ly refuge of all disasterd people. Those monsters saith Pla|tina, God permitted them not long to liue.
After Christophorus,Sergius 3. Sergius the third, ruled seven yeeres,

foure moneths, and fifteene dayes. Hee raised againe the body of Formosus out of the graue, wherein hee had lien buried eight yeeres, and beheaded it, as if it had beene aliue, and cast it into the river Tyber, accounting it vnworthy of a buriall place.Note. Platina doth marke, that Formosus had been his competitor, and hindered Sergius from attaining to the Popedome, they who are so overtaken with ambition and hatefull malice, that they cannot moderate their owne af|fections, how shall they governe and rule, the vniversall Church of God. Beside this barbarous cruelty, he was a vile whoremonger, and begate Iohn the twelfth (who afterward was made Pope) with Marozia the wife of Guido, a famous harlot.
Anastatius 3.After him Anastatius the third, ruled two yeers, of whom nothing worthy of memory is written, except this, that he was not so malicious in damning the memorials of other men, as his predecessors had beene.
Landus.Landus succeeded to Anastatius, and ruled sixe moneths, and 21. dayes.
ohannes. 11.To Landus succeeded Iohn the eleventh, and ruled thir|teene yeares, two moneths, and three dayes. Hee was more martiall in exployts of warfare, then religious and expert in knowledge of heavenly things. For hee fought against the Saracens, who had been brought into Italy by the Grecians, and discomfited them. But when hee returned againe to Rome, hee incurred the hatred of Albericus, Marquis of Hetruria, who had fought with him against the Saracens, and could not abide the pride of a presumptuous Bishop, who in his triumph ascribed the whole praise of the victory to himselfe onely. This variance was the occasion of great trouble in Italy, for Albericus allured the Hungarians to en|ter into Italy, who did greater damage to the Countrey, then the Saracens had done before. On the other part, the Itali|ans, who could not avenge themselues by rendering like e|vill to the Hungarians, they poured out their wrath vpon Albericus, and killed him. The Pope also by the souldiers of Guido was cast in prison, and strangled, by stopping a

pillow in his throat. The villany betweene him and Theodo|ra a notable harlot: I haue overpassed with silence, fearing to be prolixe.
Leo the sixt followed, and continued seven moneths and fifteene dayes.Leo 6.
After Leo, followed Stephanus the seventh, and ruled two yeeres,Stephanus 7. one moneth, and twelue dayes.
The two preceding Popes, are supposed by Italian heights to be made out of the way, by Marozia, a notable harlot, to the end that her sonne Iohn the twelfth,Iohannes 12. whom shee had borne to Pope Sergius the third, might bee promoted to the Popedome; who ruled foure yeeres, ten moneths, and fif|teene dayes. Marozia was an incestuous harlot, who like vnto Herodias, was not ashamed to marrie two brethren, namely, Guido and Hugo: according as the verse made there|of witnesseth.
Nubere Germanis satagens Herodia binis.
Herein appeareth the terrour of the wrath of God, puni|shing the vngodlinesse of the Romane people: they were guided by the Popedome,Note. and the Popedome was guided by notable harlots.
After him succeeded Leo the seventh,Leo 7. and ruled three yeeres, six moneths, and ten dayes.
Stephanus the eight,Stephanus 8. was a Germane, and ruled three yeers, foure moneths, and ten dayes. Hee was mightily troubled with the seditions of the people of Rome, and was so mise|rably wounded, that hee was ashamed to come forth vnto publique places to be seene.
Martinus the third,Martinus 3. succeeded to Stephanus the eight, and governed three yeeres, six moneths, and ten dayes. Platina calleth him a devout man, and altogether bent to religion, because he repaired old Churches, that were tending to ru|ine and decay,Note. the substance of religion being lost, the care of the fabricke of the Church, and such other externall things, was counted the onely devotion.
Agapetus the second,Agapetus 2. successor to Martinus, continued in his Popedome nine yeeres, seven moneths, and ten dayes.

In his time Berengarius King of Italy, and his sonne Alber|tus, tyrrannously abused the countrey, not sparing those of the Clergie. So that Agapetus was compelled to send mes|sengers to Otto the first, whose fame was spread abroad in all Nations: and Otto without delay, addressed himselfe to Italy, and suppressed the insolencie of Berengarius, and his sonne Albertus, as hath beene already declared, in the histo|rie of the life of Otto the first.
Iohannes 13.To Agapetus succeeded Iohn the thirteenth, and governed nine yeeres, three moneths, and fiue dayes. A man from his very youth replenished with all kinde of abhominable vices, a libidinous beast, a monstrous varlet, of whom I haue made so frequent mention already, and the head of Coun|cels will cast vp the filthinesse of his infamous name of new againe: so that for the present I write the lesse. He was de|posed in a Councell gathered by Otto the first, and Leo the eight was placed in his roome. Pope Iohn had such an end as his most wretched life deserved, for hee was deprehended in adultery,Note. and the husband of the woman whom hee de|fyled, wounded him to the death, so hee concluded his vn|happy life.
Leo 8.Leo the eight was chosen Pope, with advice of the Em|perour Otto the first, and he ruled one yeere, and 4. moneths: albeit the seditious people of Rome reiected him, and accep|ted againe Iohn the thirteenth; and after his death they chose another, called Benedictus the fift: notwithstanding the Emperour Otto subdued those insolent and seditious people, and tooke Benedictus 5. prisoner, and banished him to Hamburg, where for very heart-griefe he ended his life. Leo loathing the manifold seditions of the Romane people, conferred againe the chusing of Popes to the Emperour.
Iohannes 34.Pope Iohn the fourteenth, ruled six yeeres, eleven months, and fiue dayes. Against whom conspired Godfredus, Count of Campania, and Petrus the chiefe Captaine of the citie, with two Consuls, and twelue Aldermen of the towne. They layd hands vpon the Pope, in the Church of Laterane, and detayned him prisoner eleven moneths. The Empe|rour

Otto and his sonne, made haste to come to Rome, and after due examination of this seditious attempt, he banished the two Consuls to Germany, hee commanded the twelue Aldermen to be hanged, and Peter the chiefe Captaine to be bound vpon the backe of an Asse, his face turned towardes the Asses tayle, and his hands bound vnder the same; thus hee was carryed through the whole citie, and scourged with rods, and banished.
Godfredus and his sonne, before this time, were dead and buried, but the Emperour caused their bodies to be raised out of their graues, and to bee cast into vnhallowed places. The abusing of Pope Iohn was punished with the greater se|verity, because hee was hated by the Romanes, for the loue hee carryed to the Emperour.The begin|ning of the a|buse of bapti|zing of Bels. In this Popes time began the vile superstition of baptizing of Bels, and giving vnto them peculiar names; and the Pope called the great Bell of the Church of Laterane, Iohn, according to his owne name.
Benedictus the sixt, was successor both to the place, and calamities of Pope Iohn.Benedictus 6. Cynthius a man of noble birth in Rome, imprisoned the Pope in the Castle of Saint Ange|li, where hee was strangled, after hee had continued one yeere and six moneths, in his Popedome. Platina writeth, that of all things there is a vicissitude, even so the Popes now doe include the noble citizens of Rome, into that same Castle called Saint Angeli, whereinto of old, they were in|cloased themselues.
Donus the second of that name,Donus 2. dyed in the first yeere of his government: nothing worthy of memory is written of him.
Bonifacius the seventh,Bonifacius. 7. continued not aboue seven months and fiue dayes in his Popedome: a man famous for sacrile|gious theft. For when he perceived that the Romane citi|zens conspired against him, he tooke with him all the iewels of the Church of Saint Peter, and fled to Constantinople, where he sold the Iewels, and acquired to himselfe a great summe of money, wherewith hee intended to corrupt the minds of the people of Rome, but incontinent he was cut off by death.
While Pope Bonifacius the seventh was in Constantino|ple, Iohn the fifteenth was chosen Pope,Iohannes. 15. and in the eight moneth of his Popedome, hee was inclosed in the Castle of Saint Angeli, called of old Moles Adriani, where he mise|rably ended his life.
Benedictus 7.Benedict the seventh ruled eight yeeres. He was Pope at that time when Otto the second dyed at Rome, and great de|liberation was had about the successor of the Empire. The Pope consented to the Germanes, whose opinion was this, that the sonne of Otto the second, albeit young in yeeres, should be declared Emperour. Other things (and namely, the processe of the deposition and restitution of Arnulphus Bishop of Rhemes) I referre to the head of Councels.
Iohannes 16.After Benedict the seventh, succeeded Pope Iohn the six|teenth, who hated the Clergie, and dilapidated all the Church|rents vpon his friends and kinsmen, hee dyed in the eight moneth of his Popedome.
Iohannes 17.To him succeeded, Iohn the seventeene, and continued ten yeeres, six moneths, and ten dayes. Hee was not free of popular seditions but fearing the cruelty of Crescentius, whom the Romanes wished that he should raigne, as Empe|rour and King of Italy: the Pope fled to Hetruria, from thence giving advertisement to the Emperor Otto the third, to support the distressed estate of the chaire of Rome. Cres|centius fearing the power of the Emperour Otto, allured Pope Iohn to returne backe againe to Rome, which done, Crescentius with the chiefe authors of the foresayd sedition, kissed his feet, and craved him pardon. Notwithstanding of this, the Emperor Otto set forward with his army toward Rome, and when hee heard that Pope Iohn was dead, hee presented to the Romanes one Bruno a Germane, and of his owne consanguinitie, whom, the Romanes (fearing the Emperour) durst not refuse, and called him Gregorie the fift.
Gregorius 5.Gregorie the fift, governed two yeeres, and eight moneths. The Romanes more seditious then wise, incited Crescentius againe, to take vpon him authority, and to eiect Gregorie

the fift, and to choose another whom they called Iohn the eighteenth, Gregorie fled to Germanie and complained to Otto the third of the iniuries done to him.
The Emperour led an armie to Rome of intention once to be avenged of the continuall sedition of the Roman people.
Crescentius fortified the Towne of Rome and the castle of S. Angeli, which after that time receiued the third name, not onely to be called Moles Adriani, and the Castle of Saint Angeli, but also the Castle of Crescentius: but all this preparation was made in vaine. Otto circumvened Crescentius and the new made Pope, putting them in hope of Pardon, but when they came forth, the new made Pope had his eyes thrust out, and was spoyled of his life, and Crescentius was hanged before the walles of the Citie. Gregorius was restored againe and made that constitution, about the choosing of the Emperour in time to come by the seuen Electors of Germanie, where|of I haue spoken in the life of the Emperour Otto the third.
After Gregorie the fift,Sylvester. 2. Sylvester ruled foure yeeres, one month, eight daies. Hee was first a Monke of Floriake: when hee left the Cloyster hee went to Spaine, and lear|ned Sciences, in the Towne of Sivill. Of a Disciple he became in short time a Master, and had the honour to be an instructer of Otto the third, who was made Em|perour, and Robert King of Fraunce, and Lotharie a noble man who afterward was Bishop of Senon. It was an easie thing for his Disciples being so potent and no|ble to advance him to all the honours hee obtained: first to be Bishop of Rhemes, secondly to be Bishop of Ravenna, and last of all to be Bishop of Rome. But his name is filthily spotted with Magicall arts, and hee was so familiar with the Deuill, that hee enquired of him (as Platina writeth) how long hee should continue in his Popedome, and the Deuill answered, euen, vn|till the time hee should say Masse at Ierusalem.
Now there was in Rome a Chappel, called, S. Crucis, and vulgarlie it was called Ierusalem. In this Chappel in time of Lent the Bishop of Rome was accustomed to say Masse, and when Sylvester the second,Note. (who before was called Gilbertus) was saying Masse in that place, hee found himselfe attainted with a vehement feuer, and remembering that the place was called Ierusalem, hee knew that hee was deceiued, and put in vaine hope of long liuing by the deuill. Hee called for the Cardinals and confessed his fault, and desired them to cut his bodie in pieces (as it iustlie deserued) and to lay it open vpon a Coach to bee buried in that place wherein the horses of their owne accord should draw the Coach. So the horses carried the Coach to the Church of Lateran, where hee was buried.
Onuphrius is weake in this, that neither can hee be silent, neither can hee defend the name of Pope Sylvester, with reason, but sayes hee was a learned man well acquainted with mathematicall sciences, and therefore vnlearned people counted him a Sorcerer. By such frivolous excuses all the Necromancers and Sorcerers in Europe might bee excused, against the testimonie of wise and learned Histo|riographers, who giue to cuerie man such prayse as their doings deserue.


Patriarches of Constantinople.
AFter Nicholaus and Euthymius, succeeded Stephanus Amasenus who continued aboue three yeeres.Stephanus. Amasenus. Tryphon. To whom succeeded Tryphon, admitted vpon this condition, that when Theophilactus the youngest sonne of the Empe|rour Romanus should come to perfect age, hee should giue place to him. But when the Emperours sonne was 16. yeeres old, Tryphon would not giue place vnto him, vntill he was circomuened by the craft of the Bishop of Cesarea, who pre|tending to be his friend said to him in this manner.
Seeing that the Courteours are in hope to haue you displa|ced in respect of your want of learning. I will giue you, faith he, my counsel, to write your owne name, together with all the titles and dignities of your calling in presence of many witnesses, and send this letter aforesaid to the Emperour, to let him vnderstand that yee are not so voide of learning as they talke of. To this Counsell Tryphon agreed, not foresmel|ling the subtilitie of the Bishop who gaue vnto him this Counsell:Note But the Courteours so soone as the letter came in their hands subioyned to the words; Tryphon Archbishop of new Rome, and Vniversall Patriarch, the words follow|ing, that he voluntarily ouergaue his Patriarchship in fauour of Theophilactus the Emperours youngest sonne. So was Tryphon by his owne handwritting displaced,Theophilactus. and Theophi|lactus seated in his roome. He was a young man of 16. yeeres old when he was made Patriarch, and ruled 23. yeeres. Hee was riotous,Note. and full of youthly conceits, and in hunting his horse so brused his body, that he vomited blood and ended his life.
To Theophilactus succeeded Polyenctus in the dayes of Nicephorus and Zimisces,Polyenctus. of whom God willing more shall be spoken in the head of Councels, and to him a Monke Basilius,Antonius Siu|dites. who ruled 4 yeeres, and after him Antonius Studites.


Of other Pastors and Doctors.
LVitprandus a famous Historiographer liued in the dayes of Hugo and Berengarius kings of Italie,Luitprandus. and in the daies of Otto the first Emperour of the west, and Constantine Em|perour of the East. His learning and skill in Musicke brought him in credit with Hugo King of Italie. Also Berengarius king of Italie found no man so meet to be em|ployed Ambassador to Constantine Emperour of Constanti|nople as Luitprandus, who did his message faithfully vpon the charges of his owne father in law. But Berengarius ren|dered

vnto him euill for good, for hee banished him. In time of his banishment he writ his historie of things done in Europe from the yeere of our Lord 858. vntill the 30. yeere of Otto Magnus, and dedicated it to Reginomundus a Bishop of Spain.
It is not certaine in what age Theophilactus liued: al|waies his name is inrolled in this Centurie. Hee was Bi|shop of Bulgaria, and writ in the Greeke Language fruite|full Commentaries vpon the foure Evangelists, and vpon all the Epistles of Paul, and vpon some of the small Pro|phets, such as Habacuk, Ionas and Nahum. Hee followed Chrysostome in his writings, so that his bookes are thought to be a short abridgement of the writings of Chrysostome. He sharpely refuteth old Heretikes, but the defection of his owne time hee doth not so neerely touch. Of the Antichrist,2 Thes. 2. hee thinketh that hee should spring vp in the decay of the Romane Empire; and of mar|riage that it was honorable, and a step to the chaire of a Bishop.Tit. 1. The names of other men who were more fa|mous then others, either for good or evill, will be found in the head of Councels.




CENTVRIE XI.

Popes of Rome.
_AFter Silvester ruled Pope Iohn nineteene yeeres,Iohn. 19. foure months, and twentie dayes: of whom no memorable thing is written.
To him succeeded Pope Iohn 20.Iohn 20. and continued foure yeeres, foure months. Platina for lacke of some remarkable thing in the historie of his life is compelled to remarke, the wisdome, magnamitie, learning, and deuotion of Robert King of France who was worthie to gouerne o|thers, because his owne heart was gouerned and ruled with reason,Note. but of Pope Iohn hee read nothing worthie of commendation.
To him succeeded Sergius the fourth who gouerned 2.Sergius 4. yeeres and 15. dayes.
To Sergius succeeded Benedict the eight and continued a eleuen yeeres,Benedictus 8. one month and thirteene dayes: in his dayes the pestilence so mightilie abounded that the number of them who died in.Note. the plague surpassed the number of them who were aliue. Which calamitie was signified by a fountaine of wholesome water in Loraine converted in|to blood.
The factious Romans remoued him from his Popedome and seated another in his place: but afterward they were re|conciled to him, and receiued him with great Pompe  ho|nor, to his Popedome againe.Note. These are the people who call the B. of Rome the vicar of Christ, the successor of Peter, the vniuersall Bishoppe, the ministericall head of the Church, yet will they make insurrection against him when they please, and they call others schismaticks,

when they fall from the obedience of the Bishop of Rome. But the Towne of Rome is the mother of scismes, no lesse is shee the mother of all spirituall whoredomes.
Iohn. 21.Iohn 21. succeeded to Benedict the 8. in the dayes of the Emperour Conrad the second and ruled eleuen yeeres, nine dayes. Platina commendeth his life, but without any particular commendation of his commendable ver|tues.
Benedictus 9.Benedict the ninth succeeded to Pope Iohn and gouerned ten yeeres, and foure months, and nine dayes: a man vnlear|ned and vitious in his conversation, who allured women to his lust by Magicall arts, therefore hee was thrust out of his Popedome:Silvester. 3. and Silvester the third was placed in his roome, who continued not aboue fortie dayes in his Popedome; for Benedict by force intruded himselfe againe into the Popedome, and fearing, to be expelled of new againe from his Papall dignitie, hee made merchandise of it and solde it to Gregorie the sixt,Gregorie 6. for a thousand, and fiue hun|dreth pounds waight of Gold. Many Historians, such as Martianus Polemus, Damianus and Platima, doe report, that after his death hee appeared in a monstrous simili|tude, more like vnto a beast, then a man, to represent the effigie of his beastlie conversation. The Emperour Henry the third entered into Italie, gathered a Councell at Sutrium, wherein all these three monsters were deposed and Suidigerius Bishop of Bamberg was made Pope whom they called, Clemens the second.
Clemens 2.After the Emperour Henry the third had placed Clemens the second in the Popedome, hee returned to Germanie. The seditious Romans returning to their wonted vomit poyso|ned him when hee had continued onely nine months in his Popedom, because he was not elected by themselues, but by the Emperour with aduise of the councel of Sutrium.
Damasus 2.After Clemens the second, succeeded Damasus the second,  continued not in the Popedome aboue 23. daies.
Leo. 9.After the death of Damasus the second the Romanes sent Ambassadours to the Emperour Henry the third to send vnto

them a worthy Pope. The Emperour made choice of Brun Bishop of Tullus, who being on his iourney towarde Rome in his Pontificall garments, the Abbot of Cluniake and Hildebrand a seditious Monke met him by the way, and perswaded him to lay aside his Pontificall garments,  to enter into Rome with the habite of a priuat man, lest hee should seeme to haue receiued the Popedome from the Emperour, and not by the election of the people,  Clergie, to whom rightly appertained the election of the Romane Bishop. Bruno obeyed their councell, and was the more gladlie accepted of the Romans, who called him Leo the ninth: he ruled fiue yeeres, and assembled coun|cels both in Rome and Vercellis against Borengarius, as shall be declared (God willing) in the head of Councels.
Victor the second succeeded to Pope Leo,Victor 2.  gouerned two yeeres, three months, and fourteene dayes. Hee was chosen Pope with the advice of the Emperour Henry, whom they feared to irritate by presenting vnto him new occasions of wrath and anger.
After Victor succeeded Stephanus the ninth,Stephanus 9. who died in the seuenth month of his Popedome.
To him succeeded Benedict the tenth,Benedictus 10. who continued not aboue nine months in his Popedome. He was compelled to denude himselfe of his Papaldignitie, because he was elected without the consent of Hildebrand: to whom the whole num|ber of Cardinals  Clergie had promised, that no new Pope should be elected before he had returned to Rome, for he had taken a iourney to Florence.
Nicolaus the second followed and ruled three yeeres,Nicholaus 2 sixe months, and twentie six dayes. This is the Pope who gathe|red a councell at Rome against Berengarius,  forced him to make recantation of his opinion of the Sacrament of the sup|per of the Lord as shal be declared God willing in its own place, To this Pope, Godfrid D. of Apulia, and Calabria, reco~|mended Bagallardus his son. But the Pope fauored Robert Ba|gallardus his vncle, the iust heire of the Dukedome;  co|uenanted with Robert, surnamed Guiscard, that hee should be

authorised to be Duke of Apulia and Calabria, providing he would bend vp al his forces to subdue the rebels of the Ro|man church which thing also Duke Robert seriously perfor|med:  rendered to the chaire of Rome the townes of Bene|ventum, and Troia, which he had added to his dominions, when he first eiected his brothers son from his inheritance. Also the Pope honoured Robert, by giuing vnto him a baner  standard, in token of confirmation of his Dukedom, which authoritie belonged to the Emp.  not vnto the Pope. But now as Funchus writeth,Note. Fur furem, Latro latronem iuvat, that is one thiefe helpeth another,Hist. Magd. Cent. 9. cap. 10.  one brigand supporteth an|other. In the end Pope Nicholaus the seco~d tasted of Brazates cup, this Brazutus was the familiar friend of Hildebrand, who within the space of 13. yeeres empoysoned 6.Note. Popes, to wit Clemens 2. Da~asus 2. Leo 9. Victor 2. Stepha~us 9.  Nicholaus 2.
Alexander 2.After Nicholaus succeeded Alexander the 2. whose name before his election to the Popedome had bin Anselmus B. of Luca,  he ruled 11. yeeres, 6. months. His competitor was Candalus B. of Parma, whom the Lumbards assisted with all their might and procured to him the allowance of the Emp. This was the ground of cruell warres betwene Alexander the 2. and Candalus, but the faction of Alexander preuailed. The Emp. sent Otto Archbishop of Colen to pacifie th vprors and tumults of Italie. At his first comming hee sharplie rebuked Pope Alexander because he had entered in the Popedome without the emperours consent. But Hildebrand according to his forme inclinable to furie  madnesse, could not abide vn|til Otto had made an end of speaking, but he interupted him, and answered, that the election of the Bishop of Rome be|longed not to the Emperour, but to the clergie and people of Rome. Otto on the other part (bearing as it appeareth more with the Clergie of Rome, then fauouring the Em|perours cause) condisended that this question should be entreated in a lawfull assembly at Mantua.
In that councel Alexander was declared to bee Pope, and Candalus had pardon granted to him. In the end Pope Alexander finding that he was set vp in the Papal dignity to

prepare a way to Hildebrands Popedome, hee sayd vnto the people in the time of the solemnity of the masse, that hee would not sit in the chaire of Rome, except hee had licence of the Emperour.Note. The angry humor of Hildebrand, a man borne for sedition, was so overcast with furie, that scarcely hee could abstaine from outrage, and putting hands vnto Pope Alexander, vntill the masse were ended. The masse being finished, he drew him by force into a chamber, where hee bussed him, before hee was devested of his pontificall garments, because he sayd, hee would seeke the Emperours favour. Finally, hee was cast into prison and bonds, and vnder the miserable indurance of Hildebrands wrath, hee fi|nished his life.
To Pope Alexander the second,Gregorius 7. succeeded Gregorie the seventh, called Hildebrand before his Popedome, who con|tinued twelue yeeres, and one moneth. He was craftie and subtle in bringing to passe, that thing which hee had ima|gined a long time before, to wit, in treading downe vnder the fet of the Romane Bishop, all civill authority. In the Councell of Mantua, by Hildebrands speciall advice, it was decreed, that no man should be admitted to a Prelacie, Be|nefice, or Eclesiasticall office,Note. by a secular person: and that it should not be lawfull for Priests to marrie. These grounds being layd by Hildebrands advice, before hee came to the Popedome, hee laboured with all his might to put them in execution, when hee was Pope. For this cause hee called the marriage of the Priests; the heresie of the Nicholaitans; and the acceptation of Prelacies from the hands of secular Princes,Note. Simony. And vnder colour of extirpating two heresies, hee most craftily travelled to bring vnder his sove|raigntie all men who were clothed with civill, or spirituall offices.
And first, for the abolishing of the marriage of Priests, hee sent strict commandement to the Bishops of France and Germany, and other places, that they should depose married Priests from their offices, vnder paine of cursing, and that they should accept no persons in their places, but those who

would binde themselues by a solemne oath, to perpetuall continencie. The Priests made greater reluctation to the Popes commandement, then the Bishops did; in so much that in the Councell of Mentz, convocated by the Archbi|shop for obeying of the Popes commandement: the Arch|bishop accompanied with the Popes Ambassadour, could finde no other meanes to saue their liues, but onely by fly|ing from the incensed wrath of marryed Priests. As concer|ning his other enterprise, in extirping the heresie of Simony (as hee called it) that no Prelat should receiue investment from Emperours and Princes, but onely from the Bishop of Rome. This could not bee brought to passe without the thunder-bolts of excommunication, whereby he so subdued the noble Emperour,Note. Henry the fourth, that hee was com|pelled in sharpe winter weather to iourney to Italy, and to seeke absolution from the Popes cursing.
It were too long to discourse of his sorceries, lying pro|phecies, and treasonable attempts against the noble Empe|rour. And the weake apologie of Onuphrius, will never be an vmbrage to couer the craft, malice, and divellish pride of this seditious Pope.
Victor 3.To Gregorie the seventh, succeeded Victor the third, who onely continued in his Popedome, one yeere and an halfe.
Vibanus 1.After Victor the third, succeeded Pope Vrbanus the se|cond, and ruled twelue yeeres, foure moneths, and eighteen dayes. Hee assembled a Councell at Clermont in France, and incited Christian Princes to vndertake a dangerous warfare against the Turkes and Saracens, for recovering of the holy Land; and for supporting of distressed Christians in those parts. A certaine Monke called Peter, who had gone on pilgrimage to Ierusalem, deplored to the Coun|cell in most lamentable manner, the pitifull estate of Chri|stians in Ierusalem. And many Christian Princes were mo|ued to vndertake an hazardous warre, against the Turkes and Saracens, vnder the conduct of Godfrey Duke of Lo|raine, Robert, Duke of Normandy, Robert Count of Flan|ders, and diverse other noble Princes, an army of three

hundred thousand Christian people, set forward toward Ierusalem, which they conquered out of the hands of In|fidels, with great effusion of blood, and Godfrey was crow|ned King of Ierusalem, with a crowne of thornes, An. 1099. as Functius recordeth.


Patriarchs of Constantinople.
BEcause I reade of no memorable thing done by the Pa|triarches of Constantinople, it shall suffice shortly to point out their names onely, and to set forward. In this Centurie we finde the names of these Patriarchs following, to wit, Antonius, Nicolaus, Sisinnius, Sergius, Eustachius, A|lexius, Michael, Constantinus Lithudes, Iohannes Xiphilinus, Cosmas Eustratius, and Nicolaus.


Of other Pastors, and Doctors.
PEtrus Damianus,Damianus. was brought vp in the Monasterie of Cassinates, and was made a Cardinall and Bishoppe of Ostia, by Pope Stephanus the ninth. Hee was deposed by Benedict the tenth, and deprived of his living, because hee disapproved his entry to the Popedome. Hee was cast into prison and bonds, and when he was set at liberty, he sought not restitution to his Bishopricke againe, but hee lived an heremiticall life. And when Pope Nicolaus the second, and Hildebrand an Archdeacon, obiected this fact against him opprobriously, he writ an apologie, and defended himselfe by the example of 36. Fathers, who had done the like.Note. He was very superstitious, and approved the custome of Monks who began to scourge themselues, very impertinently cy|ting the examples of Christ,Mat. 27.26. 2 Cor. 11.24. who was scourged by Pontius Pilat, and of the Apostle Saint Paul, who was thrice bea|ten

with roddes, and fiue times received thirty nine stripes; as if it were all one thing to scourge our selues, and to bee scourged by others. He was present at the Councel of Mil|lan, as substitute of Pope Nicholaus the second.
Ino.Ino Bishoppe of Charters in France, was counted lear|ned in his time; nothing is more commendable in all his life then this, when hee was cast in prison for disprooving the marriage of Philip King of France, the Noblemen dwel|ling about Charters, would haue by force delivered him, but hee disswaded them from any such attempts, onely wil|led them to pray to God for him.Note. His bookes are misera|bly spotted with the errours of his time, such as Tran|substantiation in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, In|tercession and merits of Saints in prayer, and diverse other errors.
Lfrancus.Lanfrancus was borne in Papia, a towne of Italy, and be|came Archbishop of Canterburie: hee was much reveren|ced for his learning. Hee writ against Berengarius, and de|fended the opinion of Transubstantiation. He was in great credite with William the Conquerour, King of England, in so much that all spirituall and civill affaires, seemed to bee ordered according to his appetite and pleasure. This great credite procured against him the hatred of many No|blemen, notwithstanding they could not prevaile against him all the dayes of King William. Rufus the sonne of King William, was of a more sterne and angry nature, and albeit Lanfrancus had taken paines vpon his education, notwith|standing his emulous competitours alienated the Kings heart somewhat from him, whereby hee fell into a sharpe fever and dyed.Ranul. in poly|chron. l. 7. c. 6. Ranulphus writeth of him, that he wished to conclude his life either by fever, or dysenterie, because in these sicknesses,Hist. Magd. cent. 11. cap. 10. the vse of a mans tongue continues often|times to the last breath. Hee continued in his Prelacie nineteene yeeres, and dyed in the third yeare of King Rufus.
Anselmus.Anselmus succeeded to Lanfrancus, both in place and learning; for hee was Bishop of Canterbury, and a singular

learned man. Hee was borne in a towne called Augusta, in the confines of Burgundie. Hee was the disciple of Lanfrancus: hee was first a Monke, and afterward an Ab|bot in a Monastery of Normandie, called Bettense; and foure yeeres after the death of Lanfrancus, the King of Eng|land promoted him to the Archbishopricke of Canterbury. Anselmus in his admonitions to the King (who at that time converted to his owne vse, the rents of defunct Bishops and Abbots) was free and plaine, and for his freedome incur|red great indignation: in so much that hee compared him|selfe vnto an Owle.Simile. For, saith he, like as shee hath pleasure when shee remaineth in her owne nest, and with her owne brood, but when shee flyeth abroad shee is miserably mis|used and beaten, with ravens, crowes, and other soules that forgather with her. Even so, saith hee, when I am in com|pany of you my familiar friends,Note. I liue in pleasure, but when I goe to Court, and am conversant with secular men, I am discontented, and as it were dilacerate with a multi|tude of secular cares. Hee was a stout defender of the au|thority of the Bishoppe of Rome, in so much that he was content to forgoe the favour of his Prince, and to bee ba|nished for the excessiue loue hee caryed to the priviledges of the Romane Chaire.
After the death of Rufus, Anselmus was received from banishment, by King Henry. But because hee would not admit and consecrate those Bishops who had received invest|ment from the King, but called them bastards, and abor|tiue births, whosoever received investment from secular men:Note. great contention arose betweene the King and the Prelat, the issue whereof was this; that the decision of the question was referred to the Bishoppe of Rome, who gaue sentence in favour of Anselmus, because Anselmus suffe|red trouble, for maintaining of the Popes authoritie. The King was irritate and exasperate with the Popes decree, and spoyled Anselmus of all his dignities. Who remained for the most part in Lions, during the time of his second banishment.
But the King reduced him againe from banishment, and was reconciled with him. After his returning from his second banishment, hee lived three yeeres, and di|ed in the yeer of our Lord, 1109. having continued Bi|shop of Canterburie thirteene yeeres.Anselmus de excellen. beata Mariae. In his bookes no errour is more intollerable then this, that hee equal|leth the Virgine Mary with Christ, attribu|ting to her all the treasures of wisedome, and knowledge, as the Apostle Paul atiributeth them to Christ our Saviour.Col. 2.3.




CENTVRIE XII.

Popes of Rome.
_AFter Vrbanus the second,Pascalis 2. followed Pas|chalis the second, and ruled eighteene yeeres, 6. moneths, and 7. dayes. Called before Reginerus, a man brought vp in the Monasteries of Italy: hee seemed to shun the high preheminencie of the Popedome, but the acclamations of the people, often repeating, that Saint Peter had chosen good Reginerus to be Pope, bowed his flexible minde, and incli|ned it to the Popedome: hee then putting on a purple gar|ment, and a Diadem vpon his head, was brought vnto the Church of Lateran, vpon a white pamphrey, where a Scep|ter was put in his hand, and a girdle tyed about him, ha|ving seven Seales, and seven Keyes hanging thereupon, for a recognizance of his seven-fold power, and seven-fold grace of God resting vpon him: to wit, of binding, loosing, shut|ting, opening, sealing, resigning, and iudging. He excom|municated the noble Emperor Henry the fourth, following the example of three of his predecessors; to wit, Gregorie the seventh, Victor the third, Vrbanus the second. Hee stirred vp Henry the fift, against his naturall father, Henry the fourth: and caused the body of the noble Eemperour Henry the fourth (who died at Leodim) to bee raised out of his se|pulchre, to be carryed to the towne of Spire, and to want the honour of Christian buriall five yeeres.Note. O Antichristi|an pride! O barbarous inhumanity! O cruelty and rage, ranscending the cruelty of Pagans, who persecuted the

Church of Christ for the space of three hundred yeeres.
In his time the Bishop of Florence taught, that Anti|christ was already borne and manifested to the world. Vpon which occasion Paschalis assembled a Councell at Florence, and with terrible threatnings put him to silence, and dam|ned his bookes. Also hee assembled another Councell at Tretas, a famous towne in Campanie in France, where hee ratified the decrees of his Predecessors, in condemning the mariage of Priests, as the heresie of the Nicolaitans, and re|ceiving Ecclesiasticall rents from Lay persons, as Simonie. Of his revocation of the priviledge of investment of Bi|shops, granted to the Emperour Henry the fift: I haue spo|ken already in the historie of the life of the Emperour. His Competitors were Albertus, Theodoricus, and Maginulphus, whom hee easily subdued.
Gelasius 2.To him succeeded Gelasius the second, and ruled one yeere and fiue dayes. He was elected without consent of the Emp. Henry 5. which procured vnto him great griefe. For Cincius a noble man of Rome, of the family of Frangepanis, invaded the Pope and Cardinals, and trod the Pope vnder foot, and cast him in prison and bonds, but the citizens of Rome relieved him, and threatned to destroy the familie of Frangepanis, if they set not the Pope at liberty. After this trouble, another followed; the Emperour sent an army to Rome, and authorized another to be pope: whom they cal|led Gregorius the eight. The Pope fled to Caieta, the place of his nativity: but when the army returned to Germany, hee came to Rome, where hee found his estate to be ieoper|dous. Therefore hee fled to France, and dyed of a plurisie, in the Abbey of Clumack.
Calixtus 2.After Gelasius succeeded Calixtus the second, sometime Bishop of Vier, and kinsman to the King of France, he go|verned fiue yeeres, ten moneths, and thirteene dayes. Hee compelled the Emperor Henry the fift, to agree to his electi|on: albeit Mauritius Burdinus, otherwise called Gregorie the eight (whom the Emperour himselfe had authorized) was yet aliue. Also hee compelled the foresayd Emperour

to ouergiue all right, which hee claimed to investment of Bishops, and election of Popes: so much did the Roman Antichrist prevaile by the thunder bolts of his curses, that hee compelled the Emperour by these means to stoupe vn|der his feete. Also he besiedged Sutrium a Towne of the Romans, wherein Mauritius Burdinus his Competitor had his remaining. Hee tooke the Towne, and his Compe|titor hee carried Captiue to Rome: setting him vpon a Camel, with his face toward the hinder-parts thereof, and in the end thrust him into a Monasterie. He assembled a Councell at Rhemes, wherein he renewed the ordinance against married Priests, ordaining that not onely they should be spoyled of their liuings and offices, but also that they should be debarred from the communion of Christian peo|ple. Like as these verses doe testifie.
O bone Calixte, nunc omnis clerus odit te.
Quondam presbyteri, poterant vxoribus vti.
Hoc destruxisti, postquam tu Papa fuisti.
Also hee held another Councell at Rome, where it was statute and ordained that it should not be lawfull to the people to repudiat their Bishop, or to choose another during his life-time:Rom. 7. grounding their ordinance vpon a place of Scripture, a wife is bound to the law of her hus|band, so long as her husband is aliue. After hee is dead shee is loosed from the Law of her husband.Note. So lear|nedly did these Aecumenique Asses expound places of holy scripture.
After Calixtus succeeded Pope Honorius the second,Honorius 2 and ruled fiue yeeres, and two months. In his time Arnulphus, an eloquent man,  a famous Preacher came to Rome: whether out of the wildernesse, or out of any other place wherein he had exercised a ministeriall office it is vncertaine, alwayes it is thought of all men that he was sent of God: hee sharpely re|buked the dissolute Loosnesse, incontinencie, auarice, and pride of the clergie of Rome; so that hee incenced their

hearts against him, speciallie for this, that hee said it was no wonder,Note. that they sought his life, for if Saint Peter him|selfe were aliue and did rebuke the lewdnesse of their conversation, they would not spare to take Saint Peters life also.
Moreouer hee sayd they were full of vncleannesse, and were blinde guides leading the people headlong to Hell: but the Lord would haue in remembrance their iniquities, and call their wickednesse to account. Thus the hatefull indignation of the Clergie being kindled against him for preaching the truth, they layed waite for him secretlie, and tooke him and drowned him.
Platina alledgeth that this fact displeased the Pope: alwayes there was no inquisition to know the authors of this fact, not punishment of malefactours who shed innocent blood in secret, that manifested vnto the world the Popes indignati|on. About this time was a booke written called Opus Tri|partitum the author whereof was vnknowne, but it is sup|posed to haue beene compiled by Arnulphus. It contai|ned great complaints of the manifold abuses of Church|men.
Innocentius 2.After Honorius succeeded Innocentius the second, and ru|led fourteene yeeres, seuen months, eight dayes. Hee was a man of a militarie spirit, albeit not fortunate in warfare. For he made warre against Rogerius Duke of Sicilie whom hee besieged also in a certaine Castle. But William Duke of Ca|labria Rogerius his sonne, not onely relieued his father, but also laid hands on the Pope and his Cardinals and made them Captiues and prisoners. Rogerius delt friendly with the Pope and his Cardnals and set them at libertie, and ob|tained at the Popes hand whatsoeuer hee pleased, except the name and title of a king. At this time when the Pope was busied in warrefare, the Romans advanced one called Peter the sonne of Leo, a man of noble birth in Rome to be Pope. And when Innocentius adressed himselfe to Rome, hee did finde the faction of his Competitor to be strong and mighty therefore he sayled to Pisca, and from thence to Geneua,

and from thence to France, where hee assembled Coun|cels at Clermont and at Rhemes, and deliuered his Com|petitor to Sathan. In the end hee was restored to his chaire againe by the Emperour Lotharius the second. In his time, the Towne of Rome being wearied with the tirnnie of the Popes,Note tooke resolution to be gouerned by Consuls. The Pope to obviat this conceite of the people, made an ordi|nance, that whosoeuer did violently put hands on any person of the Clergie, hee should be excommunicate, and no man should haue power to absolue him but onely the Pope.
After Innocentius,Coelestinus 2. succeeded Coelestinus the second. Hee was chosen Pope without the consent of the people, as witnesseth Onuphrius, he ended his course in the fift month of his Popedome.
To him succeeded Lucius the second,Lucius 2. and gouerned the Pestilentius chaire (as the Magdeburg historie recordeth) in a time when the Pestilence had great vpperhand in Rome. Hee concluded his course in the eleuenth month of his Popedome.
After Lucius succeeded Eugenius the third,Eugenius 3. sometime di|sciple to Bernard, and ruled eight yeeres, foure months, and twentie dayes. He so bestirred himselfe against the Senators of Rome, that partlie by cursings, and partly by force, hee brought them in subiection and compelled them to receiue such Senators, as the Pope by his authoritie pleased to as|signe vnto them.
But it came to passe that hee who was desirous to be terrible and awfull to the Romans,Note. hee feared them in like manner, that they were conspiring secretlie against his estate. Therefore hee fled to Tybur, and from thence to Fraunce, to leade an armie to the East, for the support of distressed Christians.
But this voiage had no good successe, notwithstanding that the Popes blessing, and Bernards Councell (who was Abbot of Clarauall, and much regarded at that time) were both interposed to advance this often reiterated warrefare against the Turks. When the Pope returned from France to

Rome accompanied with great forces, the people of Rome were affraid, but the Pope soone after concluded his course at Tybur.
Anastatius 4.Anastatius the fourth succeeded Eugenius who con|tinued in his Popedome one yeere, foure months, and twen|tie foure dayes.
Adrianus 4.To Anastatius succeeded Pope Adrian the fourth, a Monke of the English nation, employed by Pope Eugenius to goe to the people of Noroway, whom hee brought vnder the Roman superstition, and therefore was advanced by Pope Eugenius to the dignitie of a Cardinall, and after the death of Anastatius the fourth, he was promoted to the Popedome. Hee would not goe to the Church of Lateran to be con|secrated, vntill Arnoldus Bishop of Brixia, was driuen from the Towne of Rome: because hee had counceled the Romans to claime to the auncient gouernment of their Towne to be guided by consuls and Senators. But the proud Pope insisted so seriouslie against Arnoldus and the Romanes, that hee compelled them by the force of his multiplied curses not onely to expell Arnoldus out of the Towne of Rome,Note. but also to submit themselues ab|solutely to the gouernment of the Pope. The proud ca|riage of this Pope, towards the noble Emperour Fredericke the first, his bad successe in warrefare against the Duke of Sicilie, and his miserable death in the Towne of Anag|nia, hath all beene touched in the historie of the life of Fredericke. He ended his course after, hee had ruled foure yeeres, and ten months.
Alexander.After Adrian the fourth, succeeded Pope Alexander the third, who had great debate against his competitor Victor the fourth, (called before Octavianus,) in respect, the Em|perour, and the Princes of Germanie and a great number of the Clergie of Rome, adhered to Pope Victor. And on the other part to Pope Alexander adhered the kings of Eng|land, France, and Sicilie. And this scisme indured a long time, for remouing whereof the Emperour Fredericke ap|pointed one councell at Papia, and another at Diuion.
To the first hee would not appeare, because hee thought the Pope should be iudged of no man.
To the Second, he should not appeare, because the coun|cell of Diuion was not assembled by his owne authoritie, but by the commandement of the Emperour.
This Litigious decertation tooke this effect, that the Emperour and Bishoppes conuened at the foresaid Coun|cels: decreed Victor who appeared and was ready to submit hs cause to the iudgement of a lawfull assemblie, him (I say) they decreed to be Pope lawfully elected. Pope Alexander fled to France, and in the councell of Clermont hee excomunicated both the Emperour, and his Compe|titor Victor, these were the weapons of their warrefare against the Emperours and all others, whom they supposed to be their aduersaries.
After the death of his Competitor Victor, Pope Alex|ander being at Rome the Emperour Fredericke came with a strong armie thereto and Pope Alexander fled to the Ve|netians. What Tragedie fell out in Venice forcing the noble Emperour, to stoupe vnder the feete of the Pope for excessiue loue that hee caried towards his sonne, hath beene declared in the Historie of the Emperour Frederickes life.
In this Popes dayes was Thomas Becket Bishop of Canter|burie slaine,Note. Henry king of England, purged himselfe to the Pope that hee was innocent of his slaughter. Notwithstan|ding seeing his indignation against the foresaid Bishop was the occasion of his slaughter:Hist. Magd. Cent. 12. cap. 10. It was inioyned to the king of England, that hee should hinder no man in his kingdome from appealing to the chaire of Rome. And that in time to come, no man should be declared king of England without the Popes consent. Thus are the neckes, kingdomes, honours, and liues, of the mightie Monarchs of the world troden vnder the feete of the Roman Antichrist. After this proud Prelat had tyrannized 21. yeeres, and 29 dayes hee en|ded his course.
After Alexander the 3.Lucius 3. succeeded Lucius the 3. and gouer|ned

foure yeeres, two months, and eighteene dayes. Hee was no lesse desirous to abolish the consults of Rome, then his predecessours were; but his attempts succeeded not so well. For hee was driuen out of Rome with his complices, and a number of his fauorits were punished, by thrusting out their eyes. Others were carried thorow the streets vp|on Asses hauing their Miters vpon their heades, and their faces toward the hinder part of the Asse. The Pope fled to Verona, where he Lurked vntill he died.
Vrbanus 3.To him succeeded Vrbanus the third, and continued one yeere, ten months, and twentie fiue dayes. In his daies was Ierusalem recouered by Saladin a Prince of the Turkes, and commander of Aegypt; which tidinges so pierced the Popes heart with griefe that hee ended his life at Fer|rara.
Gregorius 8.Gregorie the eight followed, who continued not in his Popedome aboue the space of fiftie dayes.
Clemens 3.To him succeeded Clemens the third, and ruled three yeeres, and fiue months. In this time died William King of Sicilie without children, and the people of the Isle e|lected Tancredus a bastard sonne of Rogerius to rule ouer them.
After Clemens,Celestinus 3. succeeded Pope Celestinus the third, and continued six yeeres, seuen months, and eleuen dayes. In his time died Saladin a mighty Prince of the Turkes. And Pope Celestinus thinking it was a meete time to fight against the Turkes for the recouering of the holie Land, inci|ted the Emperour Henry the sixt, and the King of France to vndertake the ieopardous warfare against the Turks, where|in many had spent their blood and seldome with good successe.
The Emperour Henry sent the Duke of Saxonie and the Bishop of Mentz with a well appointed armie to the foresaid warrefare, but went not himselfe. The King of France was willing to haue vndertaken a iourney toward the East, but was stayed by the irruption of the Saracens who dwelt in Mauritania.
They had passed the straites, and invaded that part of Spaine, which was called Betica, and conquered it. The king of Fraunce then fearing left the Saracens should be puft vp in pride for their late victorie, and that they should invade his dominions, kept his armie at home in France for safegarde of his owne countrey. The Germane armie returned againe within short time, as hath beene de|clared in Henry the sixts life.


Patriarchs of Constantinople.
TO Nicolaus succeeded Leo Styppiota, and Michael, and Theodosius, and Basilius, Nicetas, and Leontius, and Dosi|theus: of whom I thinke not expedient to write any further, except simplie to insert their names.


Patriarchs of Alexandria.
IN this age the armie of Christians which went to fight against the Turkes, conquered out of their hands, not onely Ierusalem, but also Antiochia, and the region round about it. Whereupon it followed that the Patriarchs were established of new againe after long intermission in Antio|chia and Ierusalem. Not such as were accustomed to be of olde, hauing equall power with other Patriarchs within their owne bounds, but rather vassals and slaues to the Bishoppes of Rome, as may appeare by the Catalogue following.
The first of these Latine Patriarchs was Bernardus who ruled that church thirtie sixe yeeres.Bernardus. After him succeeded Radulphus who would not be subiect to the Bishop of Rome,Radulphus. but affirmed that both Antiochia and Rome were the chaires of S. Peter,Note Antiochia was before, and a more an|cient

chaire, and therefore should haue the prerogatiue a|boue Rome. Notwithstanding of all this, hee was ci|ted by his Aduersaries to appeare before the Bishoppe of Rome: and to answere to the faults that should be obiected against him. Namely for violent vsurpation of iurisdiction ouer churches belonging to the Archbishop of Tyrus, as Biblus, Tripolis, and Aradus.
This citation Raymond Prince of Antiochia compelled him to obey. He was sent backe againe to Antiochia, but the people and Clergie receiued him not. Therefore hee lurked in Monasteries, and in the ende was deposed from his office by a councell assembled in Antiochia.
Raymericus.After him succeeded Raimericus and ruled twelue yeeres. Hee was hated of Raynoldus gouernour of Antio|chia, because hee disallowed his marriage bound vp with Constantia.Note. Likewise hee was misvsed by him, and the balde part of his heade was ouerlaied with honey, and he was compelled to sit in the time of the feruent heat of the som|mer day, to be molested with the flies and waspes.
The king of Ierusalem hearing of this pitifull demea|nour of the Patriarch of Antiochia sent Ambassadors to Raynold, and so the Patriarch, was set at libertie, who dwelt at Ierusalem, forsaking Antiochia all the rest of his life|time.
Sotericus.After him Sotericus was Patriarch, who continued in of|fice short time.
Theodorus.To him succeeded Theodorus Balsamus, a very ambitious man, whom Isacius Angelus Emperour of Constantinople put in hope that he would promote him to be Patriarch of Constantinople, if the Canons of Church did not hinder. When all was done, the ambitious Prelat staied stil at home, for the Emperour did not sollicit him seriously, but was onely trying him to see if for hope of further prehemi|nencie he would violate the Canons of the Church. To whom succeeded Almericus.Almericus.



Patriarchs of Ierusalem.
THe first Latin Patriarch of Ierusalem, after it was con|quered from the Turkes, was Dabertus,Dabertus. sometime Bi|shop of Pisa. He crowned Godfrey the first King of Ierusa|lem, with a crowne of thornes.
To him succeeded Gibelinus,Gibelinus. sometime Bishop of Arls. Hee was sent to Ierusalem to decide the question that fell out betweene Dabertus and Ebremarus; but it happened that Dabertus about the same time dyed: and Ebremarus was remooved, because hee had intruded himselfe in office. Therefore with vniforme consent, Gibelinus was made Pa|triarch of Ierusalem.
To whom succeeded Arnulphus,Arnulphus. who for his vicious life, was called Mala corona. Pope Pascalis the second, hea|ring of his bad conversation, sent to Ierusalem the Bishop of Aurange, who deposed him from his office. Notwith|standing hereof, this vitious Prelat tooke iourney to Rome, and with flattering speeches, and largition of mony, prevailed so much at Rome, that he obtained his office againe.
After him followed Guarimundus,Guarimundus. a man more expert in warfare, then in his owne calling. For hee supplyed the place of King Baldwin, who was detained captiue by the Turkes. And hee was a couragious Warriour at the siege of Tyrus.
To him continued Stephanus,Stephanus. who continued not in of|fice aboue the space of two yeeres.
And after him Gulielmus ruled fifteene yeeres.Gulielmus.
After whom succeeded Fulcherus,Fulcherus. and continued Patri|arch twelue yeeres. Hee was hated of Raymond, master of the Templaries; who caused the bells to bee rung in the time when hee preached to the people, so that the people could not profit by hearing his Sermons. For this cause he

went to Rome, to complaine of the iniuries done vnto him, but some of the Cardinalls were corrupted with money, so that he obtained nothing at the hands of Adrian the fourth, who was Pope at that time: and so returned againe with shame.
Amalricus.After him followed Amalricus, and ruled two and twen|ty yeeres. In whose dayes Saladinus a Prince of the Turkes recovered Ierusalem out tht hands of the Chri|stians.


Of other Pastors, and Doctors.
FRom the beginning of this Compend, I haue kept this order, that I haue not overcharged a little booke with mention-making of all things that are written, neither haue I pretermitted in the heads which I entreat, matters of grea|test importance, so farre as my memory and vnderstanding could comprehend.
In this age the Scholastique Doctors began to arise, of whom Petrus Lombardus was the first,Lombardus. who afterward was made Bishop of Paris: but I supersede to write of them vn|till the next Centurie.
Arnulphus.Arnulphus was an eloquent man, and a mighty preacher, who reprooved the Clergie of Rome, for the lewdnesse of their conversation. Wherefore the Clergie hated him, and drowned him secretly in the night time, as hath been decla|red in the historie of the life of Honorius the second. At this time was set forth a booke called Opus Tripartitum: Ar|nulphus was supposed to bee the Author thereof. It contai|ned an heavie complaint of the enormities and abuses of the Church, of the number of their holy-dayes, and all lusts of vncleannesse, according to the saying of whores and naughty women, who bragged that they gained more in one day, then in fifty other dayes. Likewise it complai|ned of the curious singing in Cathedrall Churches, where|by

many are occasioned to spend much time in singing, which might bee better spent in more necessarie sciences. It also complained of the rabble and multitude of begging Fryers, shewing what idlenesse and vncomely behaviour, hath proceeded thereof. Also it toucheth the vnchaste and voluptuous behaviour of Church men, aggravating their faults by the similitude of storks, who are accustomed to beate those storkes out of their number, that having a mate ioyne themselues vnto another:Note. What then is to bee done with Church-men, who professing chastity, doe defile other mens houses; so that the stinke of their vncleannesse is knowne to the whole world. Finally, it wisheth reformati|on to begin at the Sanctuary,Ezech 9. as the Prophet speaketh.
In this age also was Vualdus,Vualdus. a Merchant-man of Lions in France, whom God enlightned with the true knowledge of his word, and remooved from the eyes of his minde the common vaile of ignorance, that overcovered the eyes of the most part of men, who liued at this time: in such sort, that albeit Antichrist was sitting in the chaire of Christ, yet very few either perceived him, or abhorred his tyrannie. This man Vualdus,Note. was stirred vp by God after this man|ner. Some of the chiefest heads-men of Lions were wal|king abroad, and it chanced one of them (the rest looking on) to fall downe by sudden death. This Vualdus being one of the company, and a rich man, beholding the matter more earnestly then the rest, was touched with a deepe and earnest repentance, whereupon followed a carefull study to reforme his former life: in so much that hee first begun to distribute large almes to the poore, and to instruct his familie in the knowledge of the Word of God, and to ex|hort all them who resorted vnto him to repentance, and a|mendment of life.
The Bishops envyed the travels of Vualdus, nothing re|garding the words of holy Scripture. Let the Word of God dwell plentifully in you,Col. 3.16. and edifie one another with Psalmes, and Hymnes, and spirituall songs. And being mooved with great malice against him, threatned to excommunicate him, if

hee ceased not from catechizing those who resorted to him. But Vualdus neglecting the threatnings of the wicked, sayd; hee must rather obey God then men. Whereupon followed cruell persecution of him, and of all his adherents. So that they were compelled to fly from Lions, and the Bishop sea|zed vpon their goods. These were called Waldenses, or Pau|peres de Lugduno.The articles of Vualdus, which he professed. The doctrine and articles which they professed, were these.

1. That onely the holy Scripture is to bee believed, in matters pertaining vnto eternall life, and that it contayneth all things necessary to salvation.
2. That there is onely one Mediator of God and man, the man Christ Iesus: and that Saints re not to be invoca|ted as Mediators.
3. That there is no Purgatorie fire, but all men are either iustified by faith in Christ, or else they are in the state of condemnation.
4. That all masses, namely, such as are sung for the dead are wicked, and to be abrogated.
5. That all mens traditions are to be reiected, at least not to be accounted necessary vnto salvation.
6. That constrained and prefixed fasts bound to dayes and times, difference of meats, such variety of degrees and orders of Priests, Fryers, Monkes, and Nunnes, superfluous holy-dayes, so many sundry benedictions and hallowing of creatures, vowes, peregrinations, with all the rablement of such rites and ceremonies brought in by man, should be a|bolished.
7. The supremacie of the Pope, vsurping aboue all Churches, and especially aboue all politique Realmes, and Governments, or for him to vsurpe both the swords, is to be denyed.
8. That no degrees are to bee received into the Church, but onely Priests, Deacons, and Bishops.
9. The Communion vnder both kinds to bee necessarie to all people, according to the institution of Christ.
10. That the Church of Rome is Babylon, spoken of in

the booke of the Revelation, and the Pope the fountaine of errors, and the very Antichrist.
11. The Popes pardons and indulgences to be reiected.
12. The mariage of Priests and men in spirituall offices, they hold to be lawfull and necessary.
13. Such as heare the true Word of God, and beleeue it, are the true Church of God, to whom the keyes belong; to driue away wolfes, to institute true Pastors, to preach the Word, and to administer the Sacraments.
These are the most principall articles of Vualdenses, to the which, the rest may be reduced.
14. Concerning the Supper of the Lord, their faith was, that it was ordayned to be eaten, and not to bee shewed and worshipped; for a memoriall, not for a sacrifice; to serue for the present ministration, not for reservation; to be recei|ved at the table, not to be caryed out of the doores in pomp. And this they proue by an old Chronicle, called Chronica gestoru~: and by the testimonie of Origen, who writing vpon Levit. saith thus. Whosoever receiveth this bread of Christs Supper vpon the second or third day after, his soule shall not be blessed,Ioshua 9. but polluted. Therefore the Gibeonites, because they brought old bread to the children of Israel, it was ioy|ned them to hew wood and beare water.

In this age also are found some learned men who detested the pride of the Bishop of Rome,Hildebertus. such as Hildebertus, Arch|bishop of Towrs, a disciple of Berengarius, and an excellent Poet, who made this distinchon of the towne of Rome.
Vrbs foelix, si vel dominis vrbs illa careret.
Vel dominis esset turpe carere fide.
Bernard,Bernardus. Abbot of Claravall, borne in Burgundie, was respected in his countrey aboue others, who although hee lived in a most corupt age, yet he was found in the doctrine of iustification: as may appeare by the words which hee vt|tered on a time being diseased, after this manner: I grant (saith he) I am vnworthy, and that I cannot obtaine the kingdome of heaven by mine owne merits, neverthelesse, my Lord hath a double right to it: First, by this right, that he is

his fathers heire. Secondly, by right of the merit of his suf|fering. With the first right,Note. he contenteth himselfe. The se|cond he bestoweth on vs, by whose free gift I claime a right thereto, and am not confounded. Hee detested the corrup|tion of manners, which abounded in his time, as may bee knowne by the words of Hugo Cardinalis.Hugo in postil. super. 1 Ioh. It seemeth (saith he) good Iesus, that the whole vniuersitie of Christian peo|ple, haue conspired against thee, and these are the chiefe persecutors, who haue the principall roomes in thy Church. Hee admonished Count Theobald, who bestowed great cost in building of Abbies,Note. and Churches, that he would rather support them who were of the houshold of faith, and that he would be carefull to build the immortall and everlasting ta|bernacles of God. Hee subdued his body by fasting, be|yond all measure; whereby his stomacke became so disea|sed, that oftentimes it rendered againe the small portion of food which it had received. Hee was very superstitious in receiving the reliques of the Saints. In so much, that when hee came to Rome, and the head of the Martyr Casarius was offered to him, to take of it what part hee pleased, hee was content to take one tooth onely. And when his associates could not draw out the tooth (it was so fast fastened vnto the Iawbone) Bernard counselled them to pray,Note. that the Mar|tyr would willingly conferre vnto them one of his teeth. Many visions and miracles are attributed to him, but they smell so much of superstition, as it is easily knowne, that the most part of them are invented and forged by the deceiving teachers of this age. He died in the 64. yeere of his age, lea|ving them that were about him three testamentall lessons. 1. That they should offend no man.Bernards testa|mental lessons. 2. That they should giue lesse credite to their owne opinion, then to the iudge|ment of other men. 3. That they should not be vindictiue, nor desirous of revenge for wrongs done vnto themselues. He esteemed much of the prophecies of Hildegardis, a Pro|phetesse in France, whose wordes Bernard thought to be in|dyted by divine inspiration.
Anselmus Ha|elburgensis.In this age also flourished Anselmus Bishop of Havelburg,

whom the Emperour Lotharius 2. sent to Calowannes Emp. of Constantinople. Hee disputed with Nichetes Bishop of Nicomedia,Anselmus his disputations a|gainst Nichetes. in the temple of Sophia, about the old error of the Grecians, who affirmed that the holy Spirit proceeded onely from the Father, and not from the Sonne. Hee refu|ted very learnedly, the obiections of Nichetes, who obiected that two fountaines and beginnings were set vp in the God|head, if the holy Spirit proceeded both from the Father and the Sonne. Wherevnto Anselmus answered, that when the Councell of Nice sayd,Note. Deus de Deo, lumen de lumine: They established not two Gods, nor two lights in the Trinitie. Euen so, when it is sayd, Principium de principio, there is not brought in two beginnings, but one only. And whosoever (saith he) denyeth that the holy Spirit proceedeth from the Son,Ioh. 17.21. denyeth also that he proceedeth from the Father. For the Scripture saith, I and the Father are one, I am in the Fa|ther, and the Father in me: and againe, Hee that seeth mee seeth the Father.
From this argument they went to another, concerning the supremacie of the Bishop of Rome. Anselmus prooved the supremacie of the Bishop of Rome by three arguments. 1. Because the Councell of Nice had preferred the chaire of Rome, to all other chaires, 2. Because Christ assigned superiority to Peter,Mat. 16.18.19 when hee sayd, Thou art Peter, and vp|pon this Rocke will I build my Church: and the gates of hell shall not prevaile against it. And I will giue vnto thee the keyes of the kingdome of heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt binde on earth, is bound in heauen, and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. 3. The chaire of Rome was free of heresies, when Constantinople and other Churches of the East were defiled with heresie.
To the first argument Nichetes answered, that the Coun|cell of Nice called the Bishop of Rome, the Bishop of the principall chaire, but not the principall Bishop, for that dig|nitie hee received from the Emperour Phocas, but not from the Councell of Nice. To the second argument, he answe|red, that the power of binding and loosing was not given

to Peter onely, but also to all the rest of the Apostles. And like as they were all partakers of that same heavenly grace,Acts 2. whereof Peter was partaker in the day of Pentecost: so like|wise they all received that selfe same power of binding and loosing. And Peter alone received not the power, like as he received not the grace alone. Thirdly, whereas it was al|ledged, that the Romane Church remained vnspotted with heresie, when as other Churches were defiled with it, Ni|chetes answered, that it was true, that Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, and Eutiches, did spring vp among the Grecians, and they likewise were chiefly refuted and suppressed by the the Grecians. And the fountaine of all heresies being hu|mane Philosophie, it was no marvell that greatest heresies sprung vp, where men of greatest learning and vnder|standing were found, and it is likely that the fewer heresies sprung vp in the West, because they were men of lesse learning, and not of so deepe vnderstan|ding as the people of the East.




CENTVRIE XIII.

Popes of Rome.
_AFter Caelestinus succeeded Innocentius the third, and ruled eighteene yeeres, he ex|communicated Iohn king of England, for not receiuing of Stephen Langtowne Arch|bishop of Canterbury being approued by the Pope, he brought the said king so low that he was in the ende constrained to re|signe his crowne of England and Ireland to the Pope, and to receiue the same backe againe from the Pope to him and his heires for yeerely payment of a thousand marks, He confir|med the order of the Dominike or blacke friers, and the or|der of Franciscans or begging Friers.
To him Henry the sixt when hee departed this life left the tuition and protection of his sonne Fredericke the second. But Innocentius followed the footesteps of Iudas, but not of Saint Peter, made Otto Duke of Saxon Emperour in pre|iudice of Fredericke who was committed to his protection. But thorow the prouidence of God, the spirit of dissen|tion fell betweene the Emperour Otto and the Pope, so that hee was excommunicated by the Pope, and the Em|pire was giuen to Fredericke. Also hee gathered a generall Councel at Rome called Lateranense, whereof hereafter.
After him succeeded Honorius 3. and ruled ten yeeres,Honorius 3. 7. months, 13. daies: he excommunicated the good Emperour Fredericke 2. and in this age it is to be noted that almost no Pope can be found,Note. who set not out his thunderbolts of cur|sings against kings and Emperours.
Next to him succeeded Gregorius the ninth,Gregorius. 9. and ruled one yeere,  three months, he caused the booke of the Popes de|cretalls to be compiled, and had cruell warres against the Emperour Fredericke whom hee excomunicated diuers

times, as hath at length beene declared in the life of Frede|ricke.
Caelestinus 4.Caelestinus 4. followed after him, who liued not in the Popedome aboue the space of 18. dayes.
Innocentius 4.To him succeeded Innocentius 4. and ruled 11. yeeres 12. months 12. dayes: he helde a Councell at Lyons, wherein he excommunicated the Emperour Fredericke of new againe and deposed him from his Emperiall dignitie, and gaue the same to William Count of Holland. Hee died mise|rably, for hee invaded the kingdome of Sicilie with an ar|mie, hoping to bring it vnder his subiection after the death of Fredericke, but was disapointed and repulsed by Man|fred, king of Sicilie. And as hee was in Naples a voyce was heard in the Popes Court saying, Surge miser ad iudicium, that is, rise, O wretched person, and appeare to iudgement,Note. and the day following he was found lying dead in his bed.
Alexander 4.To him succeeded Alexander the fourth who did fight a|gainst Manfred king of Sicilie vnprosperously, but being ouercome in battell, hee had refuge to his old armour of cursing, and excommunicated Manfred. He damned the Booke of William de Sancto amore, which hee writ against the order of begging Friers, and died in the seuenth yeere of his Popedome.
Vrbanus 4.After him followed Vrbanus the fourth, and ruled three yeeres; and one month. Hee stirred vp Charles Duke of Angeow against Manfred, and gaue vnto him the king|dome of Sicilie and Calabria, with the Dukedome of A|pulia to be holden of the Pope as superior, for yeerely paiment of a certaine duety to the Church of Rome; which was the occasion of great troubles which after follow|ed.
Clemens.To him succeeded Clemens, 4. and ruled 3. yeeres 9. months 21. daies. He finished the worke which Vrbanus begun, for hee gaue to Charles Count of Angeow not onely the Dukedome of Sicilie, but also the stile of the king|dome of Ierusalem; prouiding alwayes hee should pay

yeerely in few-farme to the church of Rome fortie thou|sand crownes. This Charles by instigation of the Roman Bishop first slew Manfred king of Sicilie, and afterward slew Conradinus sonne to Conrad who came to Italie to possesse the kingdomes duely appertaining to him. So was the kingdome of Sicilie taken from the posteritie of Fredericke, and put in the hands of Frenchmen.
After him Gregorius the tenth ruled foure yeeres,Gregorius 10. two months, ten dayes. He held a generall councell at Lyons whereat Michael Palcologus Emperour of Constantinople was present as will be hereafter delared, God willing.
He made peace beweene the Venetians and the Genuans who not onely at home, but also in Asia had bloodie warres one against another to the great encouragment of the Infidels. Also hee interdyted the Florentines from all holy seruice, because they eiected the Gibelius out of their towne, whom the Pope being in France had receiued in favour and brought backe from banishment. Hee was so highly displeased with them, that (passing by the towne of Florence vpon a time) being required of his fatherly cle|mencie to lose them from the foresaid interditment hee vt|terly refused to doe it.
Next after him Innocentius the fift,Innocentius 5. died after hee had ruled sixe months, ad two daies.
After him Hadrianus the fift died,Hadrianus 5. hauing ruled fortie dayes.
Ioannes 22. who succeeded to Adrian,Ioannes 22. died after he had ru|led 8. months. Hee was smothered by the sudden fall of a chamber newly built in the place of Viturbium for his solace and pleasure: and this iudgement fell vpon him immediatlie after he had foolishly promised to himselfe long life,Note. and said to his friends that he knew by the position of the starres that he would liue a long time in this world.
After him followed Nicolaus the third,Nicolaus 3. and ruled three yeeres, three months,  fifteene daies. He was a mortall ene|mie to Charles king of Sicilie, whom his predecessours, Vrba|nus and Clemens advanced. He tooke from him the lieutenan|rie

of Hetruria  the dignitie of a Roman Senator.
Likewise hee stirred vp Peter King of Arragon to claime the kingdome of Sicilie as iustly pertaining to him by right of Constantia his wife, Daughter to Manfred king of Sicilie.
And finally by his craft and wickednesse the countries of Flaminea and Bononia with the exarcht of Rauenna which had remained a long time vnder the Emperours iurisdiction were brought vnder the dominion of the Pope of Rome. In Religion he was verie superstitious and caused cases of siluer to be made wherein he put the skulls of Peter Paul.
Note.Next, vnto him followed Martinus the fourth, and ru|led foure yeeres, and one month. Hee receiued Charles king of Sicilie in fauour, and restored vnto him the digni|tie of a Roman Senator,Nicolaus. 4. which Nicolas his predecessour had taken from him, and was so contrarious in all his doings to Nicolaus, that whereas Nicolaus stirred vp Peter king of Arra|gon to claime the kingdome of Sicilie as belonging to him by right. Martinus by the contrarie exco~municated the king of Arragon as a spoiler of the Church-goods, because hee in|vaded the kingdome of Sicilie. Notwithstanding in this Popes time the Frenchmen, who were in Sicilie being hated of the people were pitifullie destroied: For they had agreed a|mong themselues that vpon a certaine day at euening time when a signe was giuen by ringing of a bell that they should cut off in one houre all the French blood that was found in Sicilie:Note. The Sicilians crueltie. which thing also they performed with such crueltie that they ript vp their owne countrie-women that were with child by the Frenchmen: to the end there should no remnant of French blood remaine among them, and from this exces|siue crueltie the Prouerb yet remaineth Vesperae Siculae.Vesperae Siculae.
This Pope also tooke the Concubine of his Predessour Nicolaus, and caused to abolish all the pictures of Vrses and Beares that were found in his palace: fearing left his harlot by a deepe imagination and impression of these Pictures should bring forth children rough like Beares as shee had done before.Note.
Honorius 4.Honorius 4. followed and ruled 2. yeeres  one month, he

ratified the sentence of excommunication giuen out against Peter king of Arragon for invading the kingdome of Sicilie.
After him followed Nicolaus the fourth;Nicolaus. 4. and ruled foure yeeres, one month: after whom the Chaire of Rome was va|cant for the space of two yeeres, and three months, because of the intestine discord of the Cardinals who could not condis|cend among themselues who should be chosen to succeede.
In the end Caelestinus,Caelestinus 5. the fift is chosen and ruled one yeere and fiue months: hee was an Heremit  had liued such a solitarie life that he was altogether vnmeet for gouernment in great and weightie affaires. Neuerthelesse he was a nota|ble Hypocrite and pretended a reformation of the abuses of the court of Rome, and namely in this that the Cardinalls  Bishops should ride not vpon horses  mules with Pom|pous traines, but vpo~ Asses following the example of Christ, who did ride to Ierusalem vpon one of them. But the Car|dinals were so farre from yeelding to this ordinance, howbe|it the Pope in his owne person gaue them example so to doe, that they counted him an old doting foole, and finding him to be a verie simple man so abused his simplicitie that they caused him voluntarily resigne and giue ouer his office.Note. For Caietanus a certaine Cardinall digged a hole thorow the Popes chamber and sounded in a voyce admonishing him to resigne his office to another who was more fit to gouerne then hee was: which the Pope supposing to be an Angeli|call voyce  an heauenly admonition, willingly resigned his office, desiring the Cardinals to choose another man more fit for the Popedome then himselfe was, who choosed there|after this same Cardinall Caietanus,Bonifacius 8. and named him Bonifacius 8. who ruled 8. yeeres 9. months, 17. daies. Besides the sub|tile policie wherby he attained the Popedome he ioyned Bar|barous crueltie, for his predecessor Caelestinus hauing dimit|ted his Popedome he returned againe to the wildernesse to liue a solitarie life as before. But Bonifacius brought him by force backe from the wildernesse,  emprisoned him where he died for heart-griefe. This Pope renewed the old factio~s of

the Gibelines  Guelses,  hated the Gibelines to the death, in so farre that he deposed the Cardinals that were found to be of the families of the Gibelines, and disposed their digni|ties, rents, castles, and heritages to others, and proceeded in hatred and crueltie against them, that he could abide no man that was of the stocke of the Gibelines. Insomuch that Por|thecus Archbishop of Geneua comming vnto him,  falling downe at his feete Die cinerum: hee would not lay the Ashes vpon his head, nor say to him, Memento homo quod cinis es,  in cinerem reuerteris, as the custome was but hee threw the ashes in his eyes,Note. and said Memento homo quod Gibellinus es,  cum Gibellinis in cinerem redigeris, that is, remember O man that thou art one of the Gibelines, and with them thou shalt be turned to ashes.The instituti|on of the Iubilie. He instituted the first Iubily that was kept at Rome, promising a full remission of all their sins to so ma|ny as would take paines to visit the Apostolike Sea. In solem|nising whereof the first day he shewed himselfe to the people in his Pontificall garments with S. Peters keies caried about him; but the second hee shewed himselfe vnto them in royall apparell, with a naked sword carried before him, and an Ha|rold proclaiming Ecce potestas vtrins, gladij, that is, beholde the power of both the swords, to wit both ciuil and spiritual, claiming to himself a soueraigne authoritie in al things both ciuil  ecclesiasticall. He excommuincated Philip king of France and his posteritie to the fourth generation, because he made an ordinance that no mony nor revennue should bee caried out of his countrie to Rome. But Philip assembled a Councel at Paris and appealed from the Bishop of Rome to the first generall Councell to be holden. And sent William Nogaretius steward of his house together with Scarra Colum|nensis one of the noble men of Rome whom the Pope perse|cuted because he was a Gibeline. These two I say he sent to Rome to publish his appellation against the Pope, but they had another purpose in hand as the euent declared. For Scar|ra disguised himselfe, entered in Italy with a seruants habite, and secretlie gathered a number of his friends  Gibelines; and set vpon the Pope by night as hee was lying at Anagnia

the towne of his natiuity. Nogaretius also co~curred with 200. horsmen, who brake in vpon him by night and spoiled al his rich treasures, and put himselfe vpon a wanton Colt with his face towards the taile, and made him a ridiculous spectacle to all the people. Soone after he went to Rome and died for dis|pleasure that he had loosed his riches,Note. and sustained so great shame. This is he of whom it was truly said, that he entered in as a Foxe, liued as a Lyon, and died as a Dogge.


Patriarchs of Constantinople.
AFter Georgius Xiphilinus succeeded Ioannes Cametarus,Ioannes Cameta|rus. Thomas Mauro|cenus. after him Thomas Maurocenus, who being made Patri|arch tooke his iourney to Rome,  receiued confirmatio~ of the Roman B. Innocentius 3. He was also present at the cou~cel of Lateran, holden at Rome in the yeere of our Lord, 1215.
Next to him succeeded Pantoleo Iustinianus,Pantoleo Iusti|nianus. Germanus and Arsenius.  after him Ger|manus and Arsenius, to whose tutorie the Emp. Theodorus co~|mitted his yong sonne Ioannes, but Michael Paleologus being chosen Emp. plucked out the eyes of the yong Emp. for the which he was exco~municated by Arsenius. Paleologus on the other part gathered a Councel of Bishops against him,  ac|cused him for suffering of Azetines the Sultan to be present at the holy seruice,Note.  for conferring with him in the temple. In this councell Arsenius was deposed, because he appeared not to answere to the foresaid accusation,  immediatly after was ba~ished by the Emp.  Nicephorus placed in his roome. After whom succeeded Germanus,Iosephus. and after him Iosephus, to whom the Emperour confessed his sinnes of periurie and crueltie, in plucking out the eyes of Ioannes the son of Theo|dorus Lascaris, and receiued absolution from him.
But when he perceiued how the Emperour was purposed to make an agreement with the Bishop of Rome, hee would not consent thereto, but voluntarily dimitted his office and entered into a monasterie where hee ended his life.
Becus.After him followed Becus whom the Emp. traueled to per|swade to giue his consent to the foresaid agreement with the B. of Rome, but all in vaine, for which cause the Emp. impri|soned him, there giuing him many books to reade, confir|ming the opinions of the Latine church, which made Becus change his opinion, and both by word and writ defend the doctrine of the Latin church.Hugolinus. To whom succeded Hugolinus.


Of other Doctors.
IN this age many were found who taking example of Petrus Lombardus invented subtile and intricat disputations: que|stionin~g, reasoning, and calling all things in doubt after the maner of the Academik Philosophers,Note. insomuch that there was no head of doctrine howbeit plaine in it selfe which they did not obscure and darken with the mist of vaine Philoso|phie,  curious disputation. And that which was more la|mentable the pure foundations of the word of God were vt|terlie forsaken,  Theologues began to reuerence Aristotle,  his writings as if hee had bin a Prophet of God,  the Apo|stle of Iesus Christ. Yea things co~tained in the holy scripture were counted vulgar, common, base  of little importance, but they who were deeply learned in Aristotles Philosophie and in the volumes of the ancient doctors were counted ex|cellent teachers, Angelicall and Geraphicall Doctors. Then were set out prolixe commentaries vpon the master of Sente~|ces by Albertus, Aquinae, Alexander, and Scotus, and all the schooles were filled with contentious disputations.Albertus Magnus. This Al|bertus was a Dominik frier, who for his great learning was called Magnus,  was made B. of Ratisbon by Pope Alexan|der 4. but he being wearied with the painefull trauels of that calling returned home again to Colen to spe~d his time more quietly in reading and writing of bookes. Where hee writ those commentaries vpon the Master of Sentences,  vpon Aristotle with many other volumes. Also hee defended his

owne order of friers against Guil. de S. Amore who impugned the same as shalbe hereafter declared God willing: before he died he pointed out a place for his owne burial and dailie vi|sited it,Thomas Aqui|nas. Et viglias pro se ac si vita snctus esset, legit. Thomas de Aquino otherwaies called Angelicus Doctor, was disciple to Albertus Magnus, and profited in Theologie and Philoso|phie beyond others, while he was yong at the schoole he was quiet  stil more inclined to heare al men then to speake,  was called by his condisciples Bos, that is a kow because hee was so silent. Neuerthelesse afterward by his penne this kow lowed louder then all his co~disciples,  filled al nations with the sound of his Doctrine. He was of the order of the Domi|nike or preaching Friers,  defended his order against Willi|am de S. Amore as Albertus his Master had done before. He died in the way as he was iourneying to the cou~cel at Lyons,  was canonised by Pope Ioannes 22. and was supposed to haue wrought miracles after his death, because this age was full of lying miracles.Alexander Neckam other|wise called Ingenij Miracu|lum. Alexander Neckam was learned in Phi|losophie, Poetrie, Oratrie and Theologie,  obtained a glori|ous name to be called Ingenij Miraculu~, hee was made Abbot of Excester in England, vpon whose Sepulchre when hee died were written these Barbarous verses.
Eclipsin patitur sapientia, Sol sepelitur:
Cui si par vnus, minus esset flebile funus.
Vir bene discretus,  in omni more facetus,
Dictus erat Nequam, vitam duxit tamen aequam.
Ioannes Duns otherwise called Scotus Subtilis was a man borne in Dunce a towne of Scotland,Scotus Subtilis. who departed from his natiue countrie and ioyned himselfe to the companie of the gray friers in Oxford, from thence he passed to Paris,  from thence to Colen, where hee died being yet yong in yeeres. Hee was called Subtilis from the subtilitie of his wit. In his commentaries vpon the Master of Sentences hee en|treateth largely of the head of the Sacrament of the supper,

where it may be seene that hee would neuer haue condis|cended to the opinion of Transubstantiation, if hee had not beene induced thereto by the authoritie of the church of Rome.
Alexander de ales.Likewise in this age liued Alexander de Ales an English man brought vp in Paris and expert in Philosophie  Theo|logie, who amplified the doctrine of Petrus Lombardus with many subtile arguments and was called Doctor irrefragabi|lis. In the end hee tooke vpon him the habit and order of the Graye Friers vpon this Occasion. Hee had vowed, that hee should doe all things which he was required to do in the name of the blessed Virgin,Note. if so be they were possible to be done, and vpon a time hee forgathered with a beg|ging Frier, seeking almes who besought him for the Loue of our Lady to ioyne himselfe to their order, because they had no Master to gouerne and rule them. Thus Alexan|der de Ales without delay tooke vpon him the habit of a graye frier and became their doctour. He died at Paris and was buried in one of the Abbacees of the graye friers.
Now in this time of most palpable darkenesse the Lord lacked not witnesses of his truth, but stirred vp many who damned the grosse ignorance and superstition of those times. Of this number was Arnoldus de Nova Villa a Spainard,Arnoldus de noua villa. a man famously learned and a great writer, whom the Pope with his Clergie condemned among Heretikes, for holding  writing against the corrupt errours of the Popish Church. His teaching was that Sathan had seduced all the world from the truth of Christ Iesus.
The articles which he maintained.First, That the faith which then Christian men were com|monly taught, was such a faith as the Deuils had.
Secondly, That Christian people were led by the Pope to hell.
Thirdly, That all Cloysters are voyde of Charitie, and that they doe all falsifie the doctrine of Christ.
Fourthly, That the Diuines doe euill in mixing Philo|sophie with Diuinitie.
Fiftly, That the Masses are not to be celebrated, and that

they ought not to sacrifice for the dead. Certaine other opinions there be which the slaunderous sects of Monkes and Friers doe attribute to him (as is their custome) rather of envious taking then of any iust cause giuen.
In this number also was the worthy and valiant Cham|pion of Christ and aduersary of Antichrist Guilielmus de S. Amore a Master of Paris,Gulielmus de S. Amore. and a chiefe ruler then of that Vniuersitie. He in his time had no small adoe, writing a|gainst the Friers and their Hypocrisie, but especiallie against the begging Friers, both condemning their whole Order and also accusing them as those that did disturbe and trou|ble all the churches of Christ, by their preaching in churches against the will of the Ordinarie Pastors, by their hearing of confessions, and executing the charge of ordinarie prea|chings in their churches. All the testimonies of Scripture that make against the Antichrist, hee applied them against the Clergie of Prelats and the Popes spirituallie.
The same Guilelmus is thought to be the author of the booke which is attributed to the schoole of Paris and intitu|led De Periculis ecclesiae, where hee prooueth by 39. argu|ments that Friers be false Prophets. Moreouer he doth wel expound this saying of Christ. If thou wilt be perfect, goe and sell all that thou hast and come follow mee, declaring there, pouertie to be inioyned vs of Christ, non actualem sed habitualem, not in such sort as standeth in outward action when no neede requireth, but in inward affection of heart when neede requireth, as though the meaning and precept of our Lord were, not that wee should cast away actuallie all that wee haue, but that when the confession of the name of Christ and his glorie shall so require,Note that then wee be readie to leaue all things for his sake, as when hee requi|reth in vs after the like phrase the hatred of father and mo|ther and of our owne liues, hee biddeth vs not to dishonour our father or mother, much lesse to hate them, but that then when it is required we set all things behind the loue of Christ.
Many other worthy workes hee compiled wherein albeit

hee vttered nothing but what was truth, yet notwithstan|ding hee was by the Antichrist and his rable condemned for an heretike, exiled, and his bookes burnt.
Laurentius Anglus. Petrus Ioannis.Of this number also was one Laurence an Englishman  Master of Paris, and Petrus Ioannis a Minorit who taught and maintained many things against the Pope, prouing that hee was Antichrist, and that the Synagogue of Rome was great Babylon, whom because the Pope could not burne aliue, after his death his bones were taken vp and burned. Also Robertus Gallus is to be added to those before mentio|ned, who being borne of a right noble parentage,Robertus Gallus. for de|votions sake, was made a Dominik Frier about the yeere of our Lord 1290.
This man (as appeareth by his writings) had diuerse and sundrie visions al tending against the spirituallitie of Rome: for hee called the Pope plainely an Idole, who hauing eyes neither saw nor desired to see the abhominations of his peo|ple nor the excessiue enormitie of their voluptuousnesse, but onely to heape vp treasures to himselfe. And hauing a mouth did not speake himselfe but sayd, I haue set good men ouer them which is sufficient, to doe them good ei|ther by himselfe or others.
Hee notably describeth in one of his visions the curiosi|tie and vanitie of the Scholastig, Doctours who flourished in this age, comparing them to a man, who hauing good bread  good wine hanging on both his sides was notwith|standing gnawing hungerly on a flint stone: thereby signifiyng that they leauing the wholsome foode of their soules contained in the Scriptures, busied themselues with subtile questions, containing no edification in them nor comfort to the soule of man.
Robertus. Gostred.In this age also is reckoned Robert Gostred Bishoppe of Lincolne in England, a man of great learning, godlinesse, and constancie: who liued in the daies of Pope Innocentius the fourth and constantly resisted his vnlawfull request. For this Pope had recommended vnto him a yong Italian boy, to bee admitted to the first vacant prebendry of his diosie.
But Robert Gostred would not agree to the vngodlie desire of the Pope, but did write backe an answere to him, declaring that next after the sinne of Lucifer there is not nor can bee any kinde of sinne so repugnant and con|trarie to the doctrine of the Apostles and holy Scripture, and to our Soueraigue Christ himselfe more hatefull, de|testable, and abhominable, then to destroy and kill mens soules by defrauding them of the misterie of the Pastorall office, which by the ministerie of the Pastorall cure ought to saue and quicken the same. Which sinne by most euident places of Scripture such men are descerned and knowne to commit, who being in the authoritie of that Pastoral dignity doe serue their owne carnall desires with the benefite of the milke and wool of the sheepe and flocke of Christ, and doe not minister the same Pastorall office to the benefite and saluation of those their sheepe. And whereas hee perceiued that the Bishop of Rome delt in all his requests
imperious|lie, rather commaunding, nor requesting any thing to bee done, hee answered in the end of this letter that the pow|er which was giuen by God to any Bishop was to build the house of God, and not to destroy it, hereby blaming the Bishop of Rome, as one who abused his authoritie to the destruction of the Church of God, by placing young boyes in offices neither apt to teach nor wel acquainted with the maners and language of the people.
This ansre being returned to the Pope hee was great|ly moued with indignation, and sware that except hee had beene restrained by his owne naturall clemencie, hee would hurle him downe to such confusion as to make him afable, a gazing stocke, and a wonder to the world.
Not long after thus it pleased God to visit this reue|rend father with sicknesse, in the time whereof hee called to him a Frier of the preaching Order, named Master Iohn Giles, a man expert and cunning both in Physicke and Diuinitie, partly to receiue from him some comfort to his body, and partly to conferre with him in spirituall matters. Thus vpon a certaine day the said Bishop con|ferring

with the said Master Iohn, and reciting to him the doings and proceedings of the Pope, did grieuously re|buke his fellow brethren the Preaching Friers, and the other Order also of the Minorites. Because their Order be|ing planted in wilfull pouertie of the Spirit, to the intent they should more freely, carpe and reproe the vices of the mightie, and not to flatter or to spare them, but sharpely to rebuke and reprehend the same: yet the said Friers contra|rie to their profession did not boldly enough cry out and invey against the abuses of their superiours and men of power, not did vncouer nor detect their faults and wicked|nesse. And therefore the B. said I udge them to be no bet|ter than manifest heretickes. And added moreouer (deman|ding of Master Iohn what is heresie) that hee would giue him the true definition of it. Whereat when the Frier did stay and pause not remembering the solemne definition of that matter, the Bishop therevpon inferreth, giuing this definition in Latine by the true interpretation of the Greeke word.What heresie is. Heresis grac, Latine electio, est sententia humano sensu electa scripturae sacrae contraria, palam docta, pertinaciter desensa; that is, heresie is a sentence taken and chosen of mans owne braine contrarie to holy Scripture, openly maintained and stflie defended. And this definition especiallie hee ap|plied against the Romans who commit the charge of soules vnto their kinsfolkes being, both in age vnworthie, and in learning insufficient, and so stiflie defend this their wic|ked opinion that if any dare presume to withstand the same, hee is suspended and excommunicated, and open warre proclaimed against him.
Therefore hee to whom the whole definition of an he|retike doth agree, hee is a verie heretike. And euery Chri|stian man ought to set himselfe against an heretike as farre as hee may yea and that person who can resist him, and doth it not, hee sinneth, and seemeth to be a fauourer there|of according to the saying of Gregorie.Note. Hee lacketh not conscience of secret societie, who ceaseth to resist open impietie, and the Apostle writeth to the Romans, saying

not onely they who commit such things, but also they that consent, are worthie of death. Therefore it may be con|cluded that aswell the Pope (Vnlesse he cease from that vice) as also the same Friers, vnlesse they shew themselues more earnest and studious in repelling the same, are both worthy of death, that is, perpetuall damnation.
Item sayth the Canon Decretall that vpon this vice of heresie the Pope both may and ought to be accused.He reproueth the enormities of the Church of Rome. After this the vehemencie of his disease more and more increasing and because the nights were somewhat longer, the third night before his departure the Bishop feeling his infirmitie to grow vpon him, willed certaine of his Clergie to be called vnto him, thereby to be refreshed with some conference or communication, vnto whom the Bishop (lamenting in his minde for the losse of soules through the auarice of the Popes court) said on this wise, as by certaine Aphorismes.
Christ came vnto the world to saue and to winne soules, Ergo he that feareth not to destroy soules, may hee not worthily be counted Antichrist.
The Lord created the world in six daies, but in the re|storing  of man he laboured more then thirtie yeeres: where|fore hee that is a destroier of that about the which the Lord so long laboured, is not hee worthy to be accounted the enemie of God, and Antichrist.
These and many other enormities of the Roman Church when the Godly Bishop had reproued, as all kindes of Auarice, Vsurie, Simonie, Extortion, and all kindes of fil|thinesse, fleshly lust, gluttonie and their sumptuous appa|rell, then sayth hee this old verse may be truly verified of the Court of Rome.
Eius avaritiae totus non sufficit Orbis.
Eius Luxuriae meretrix non sufficit omnis.
Afterward hee went about more to prosecute; how the foresaid Court like a gulfe neuer satisfied, euer gaping so wide that the flood of Iordan might run into his mouth,

aspired how to vsurpe the goods of them that die vntested, and of Legacies beqehed without forme of law, whereby more licentiously to bring this to passe they vsed to ioyne the king to be fellow and partner with them, in their spoiles, extortions, and robbings.
Neither sayth he shall the Church be deliuered from the serutude of Aegyp, out by violence and force, and with the bloodie sword. And albeit sayth hee, those be yet but light matters, yet shortly more great and grieuous things then these shall be seene. And in the end of this his prophecying, which he scarcely could vtter with sighing and weeping, his tongue and breath begun to faile. And so the Organ of his voyce being stopped made an ende both of his speech and life.
This is that Bishop who not onely in his lifetime resisted the pride and insolencie of the Bishop of Rome, but also af|ter his death God made him a terrour to the Pope, who dreamed that Robert Gostred came to him and with his staffe strake him on the side and said vnto him; Surge miser, veni adiudicium,Note. after the which dreame within a few dayes hee ended his life. Others doe adde that a voyce was heard in the palace where the Pope lay at Naples, saying Surge miser, vem adiudicium, as hath beene declared in the life of Innocen|tius Quartus.


Of Monkes.
BEcause the orders of Monkes most abounded in this age, albeit they begun long before, therefore haue wee casten in this treatise in this Centurie, howbeit wee declare the Order of Monks that sprang vp before or at this time.
Of the Bene|diu Monkes.About the time of the raigne of Iustinus the elder (as hath beene declared in the seuenth Centurie) Pope Iohn the first being Bishop of Rome, Benedict a father and fauour|rer

of Monkes gathered together all scattered religious per|sons and begun a peculiar order vpon the Mount Cassinus, where he built a most renowned Cloister giuing them there, a rule, prescript, and forme of liuing.
Afterward the same Bennet hauing much people resorting to him built 12. other Monasteries, and filled them with re|ligious men. Of this order is reported to haue beene 24. Popes of Rome. 182. Cardinalls, 1464. Archbishopps and Bishops. 15000. and 70. renowned Abbots as sayth Pope Iohn the 22. There hath beene of this Order 5655. Monkes canonised and made Saints.
This Bennet also invented an order for his sister Scolastica and made her Abbesse ouer many Nunnes. Her cloathing was a blacke coate, cloake, coule, and vaile, and lest the scrip|ture should deceiue her, and Hers, it was commanded that none should read it without the consent and permission of their superiour. Here is to be seene how God is sought in all monasticall orders when as amongst them his holy word is expelled.Note. This order of Bennedictin monkes, when it was nerely decaied in shaddow of Godlines, was quickned againe by one Otlon or Otho and was called the order of Clumacensis.Of the Clu|macensis or|der. Howbeit their cloathing and rule was according to the ap|pointment of Bennet. And this monkish order was richly en|dewed with great substance and yeerely rents by a certaine Duke of Aquitania called Guillidinus in the yeere of our Lord 913.
In the yeere of our Lord 850. Pope Leo the fourth gouer|ning the Sea of Rome:Of the Camal|dinensis order. the monkish religion of Camaldinensis was devised by Romoaldus of Rauenna in the mount Apen|ninus. Their coule and cloake and all their cloathing was white. They kept perpetuall silence. Euery wednesday and fry day they fast on bread and water, they goe bearefoo|ted, and lie on the ground.Of the Hiero|nimians or|der. Pope Innocentius the 7. being B. of Rome the monkish order of Hieronimians began vnder the name of S. Ierome, who leauing his natiue countrie went vn|to Iury  there not far from Bethele~ builded him an house where he liued very devoutly in the later end of his life.
Those Apes and counterfeites of S. Ierom weare their cloa|thes of white and a cope platted about their coate girded with a lether girdle. The order was endewed with diuers priui|ledges and liberties by certaine Bishops of Rome, as Gregorie the twelfth and Eugenius the fourth.
Of the Grego|rian Order.Pope Gregorie the first, borne of a noble stocke and very rich, forsaked all and became a Monke. After the death of his father he builded six religious houses in Sicilie, giuing them a forme and rule of liuing.
He built another within Rome in the name and honour of S. Andrew, wherein he dwelt with manie monkish bre|thren which from time to time keeping his rule diligentlie are called Gregorians. Their habit is a copper-colloured cloath according to their rule.
Of the shad|dowed valey order.Pope Gregorie the sixt bearing rule, Ioannes Gualbertus, a Knight, begun this order in a certaine mou~taine called Vallis Vmbrosa that is to say a shaddowed valley vnder Bennets rule, with adding thereto and changing of blacke cloathes into gray, In the yeere, 1038.
Of the Gran|dimontensis order.Pope Alexander the second being B. of Rome the sect of the Grandimontensis Monkes was invented by Stephen of Auernia. Their order is to lead a strict life as Monkes vse to doe, to giue themselues to watching, fasting, and praying, to weare a coate of Mailes vpon their bodyes, and a blacke cloake therevpon.
Of the Cister|tiensis order.Pope Vrban the second bearing rule. Robert, Abbot of Molisme in Cistert in a wildernesse, or forrest in Burgundie did institute the order of Cistertians, albeit some ascribe this to one Ordingus a Monke that perswaded the aforesaid Monke to the same. They weare red shoes, and white Rot|chets on a blacke coate, all shauen except a litle circle. In the yeere of the Lord 198. Of this Religion was that great Clarke S. Bernard.
Of the Humi|liats order.Pope Innocentius the third, confirmed and allowed the Order of Humiliats, first of all deuised by certaine persons exiled by Fredericus Barbarossa: who when they were resto|red to their countrie apparelled themselues all in white and

promised to goe in lowlie and simple cloathing. The men and women to be separated each from other, and to labour euerie one in that wherein hee was most skilfill. They had one commune purse amongst them. They professed S. Ben|nets rule. This Order in processe of time hath increased so both in goodes and persons, that it was confirmed and en|dewed with many priuiledges of diuers Bishopps of Rome in the yeeres of our Lord, 1166.
Pope Celestinus the fift,Of the Celesti|nes Order. willinglie gaue ouer his Bishop|rike and returned againe to his solitarie life, wherein he qui|etly liued before his Papacie. Certaine superstitious per|sons counterfeited this Bishop, taking vpon them an order of S. Bennet in a wildernesse, and called themselues Celestines after Celestine. The garment which they weare, cloakes, coule and cape are blew: in the yeere, 1297.
Pope Eugenius the fourth bearing rule:Of the Gilber|tines order. S. Gilbert in Eng|land at Sirington and Semphring hame began an order of Monkes called after him Gilbertines, in the yeere, 1148.
Pope Eugenius the fourth, confirmed the religion of the Iustinians,Of the Iusti|nians order. adorning the same with manie liberties and priui|ledges. It was first of all invented by Lewes Barbus a coun|sellors of Venice, and practised in the parts of Treuisa in the Cloyster of S. Iustine by the citie of Padua. They professe Monke Bennets rule, but in habit and apparrell they dif|fer.
Pope Gregorie the seuenth being Bishop of Rome;Of the Char|terhouse Monkes. Bruno of Colen that Philosopher and diuine, whom Bernard cal|leth a faire pillar of the church, did institute the Order of charterhouse Monkes in the Diocesse of Gratianopolis at a place named Curtusia: Their life was outwardly full of pain|ted holinesse in forbearing flesh, in fasting with bread and water euery Friday, in wearing hairie cloathes next to their body, solitarie, much silent, neuer going out, refusing all womens companie, c.
Pope Gelasius the second bearing rule:Of the Tem|plars order. Their origi|nall. the order of the Templars begun in Ierusalem and continued almost 200. yeeres, whose beginning was thus.

Templars begun in Ierusalem continued almost 200. yeeres whose beginning was thus.
After that Godfrey Duke of Loraine had conquered Ieru|salem, certaine Knights perceiuing that such Pilgrimes as came to them of their devotion were robbed and mur|thered by the way, made a band among themselues to serue God in chiualrie. At the beginning they were but few and gaue themselues to wilfull pouertie, and their chiefe master was the keeper of the Temple doore, whence they were called Templary. They dwelt together not farre from Christs Sepulchre lodging the Pilgrimes, keeping them from mischiefe, and shewing them much kindnesse, bring|ing them from one holy citie to another. The badge of their order was a white cloake with a red Crosse. S. Bernard made them a rule according to the appointment whereof they framed their liues. Afterward they became verie rich through the gifts of noble men and Pilgrimes. But Pope Clement the fift put them downe, and destroied them all in one day,Why they were put downe. partly because (as they writ) they renounced the faith of Christ, and conspired with the Turke, and partly for other notable crimes. Notwithstanding some say that this rooting out of them, was more because of envie of their prosperitie and royaltie, then for their faults. For when their grandmaster Iames Burgonion was burnt at Paris with many of his brethren he affirmed that hee was neuer guiltie of the accusation laied against him. Thus perished this order of Templars, all in one day, their lands and pos|sessions being distributed and giuen to others, in the yeere of our Lord, 1110.
Of the pre|monstratenses order.Pope Calixtus the second, allowed and approued the monkish order of premonstratenses, which was first of all deuised by a certaine man borne at Colen called Notorober|tus a Priest: they be vnder the rule of Bennet the Monke, they be clothed all ouer in white to declare their vnstained virgi|nitie Anno, 1119.
Of the order of the white Monkes of Mount OliuetPope Gregorie the 12. raigning: the Monkes of Mount O|liuet sprung vp through the deuice of Bernardus Ptolomeus.
Their cloathing is all white, their rule is Bennets, with some additions vnto it. In the yeere of our Lord, 1406.
Pope Gregorie the 12. raigning,Of the Geor|gian Monkes. confirmed and established also the order of S. George of Alga by Venice, which was be|gun by a spirituall man, the Patriarch, Laurence Iustinian, a man of an incredible strictnesse of life. These Monkes are vnder S. Peters rule and the first order, with certaine ordinan|ces ioyned thereto. In the yeere, 1407.
Pope Vrban the second bearing rule,Of the white Monkes. the order of white Monkes begun, first deuised by one Stephen Harding, and af|terward in the yeere of our Lord, 1135. it was brought into England, by a certaine man called Waiter Especk: who built an Abbey of the same order called Meriuale.
Pope Honorius bearing rule,Of the Ioan|nitts order. Raymound, a man of Nobilitie first of all invented the Order of S. Iohn Baptist at Ierusalem about the yeere, 1130.
Pope Clement the sixt being Bishop of Rome,Of the order of scourgers. a certaine Pestilent sect of false religious persones, sprang vp in high Almaine, who called themselues Penitentes Cruciferi, seu fla|gellatores, that is patient crosse-bearers, or scourgers of them|selues. Their maner was to goe from place to place, hauing a banner vpon the Crucifixe borne before them, and neuer to tarrie in one place, but vpon the Sabboth: euery day also they did pennance both morning and euening, by scourging themselues before the people with a great whippe, of three coards full of knotts vpon their bare bodies, affirming that it was reveiled vnto them by an Angel from heauen, that they thus scourging themselues, should within thirtie dayes and twelue houres, thorow the suffering of those paines, be made so cleane and free from sinne, as they were when they were Baptized. Anno. 133.




CENTVRIE. XIIII.

Of Popes.
Benedictus 8._AFter Bonifacius the eight, succeeded Bene|dictus the eleuenth, and ruled eight months, and seuenteene dayes.
Clemens 5.To him succeeded Clemens the fift, and ruled eight yeeres, ten months, and fifteene dayes, who translated the Popes Court from Rometo Aviniogue in France where it remained 74 yeeres. At the Coronation of this Clement, Philip king of France  Charles his sonne, and Iohn Duke of Britaine were present, who being in the middle of their Pompe and Procession, a great wall brake and fell vpon them,Note. by which Duke Iohn and 12. others were slaine, king Philip hurt, the Pope striken from his horse, hauing lost out of the miter on his head a carbuncle esteemed to the value of 6000.The order of the Templars abolished. florence. By him also the order of the Templars were put downe at the counsell of Vienne who for better collowring of so cruell an act, was not ashamed to say these words in the councell, Etiamsi non licet per viamiustitiae, tamen licet per viam expedientiae, that is, although it be not lawfull by way of iustice, yet is it meet to doe it, as a thing expedient to be done.
Andrnicus Paleolgus ex|communicated by the Pope.He exercised his tyrannie and power of excommunicati|on against Andronicus Paleologus Emperour of Constantino|ple, declaring him a schismaticke and heretike, because hee neither would nor durst suffer the Grecians to make their appeale from the Greeke Church to the Pope, neither would acknowledge him for his superior. For the Greci|ans euer constantly refused to be subiect to the Romane bi|shop, except in that short time wherein the Frenchmen had

the Empire, of the East, and in the time of Michael Paleo|logus who in the Councell at Lyons submitted himselfe to Gregorie the tenth, whereby he procured vnto himselfe such hatred, that after his death the Grecians denyed vnto him the honour and place of buriall, as hath beene declared.
In like manner hee excommunicated the Venetians for preferring Azada to the estate of Ferrare,The Venetia~s excommuni|cated by the Pope. yea Francis Da~dalus Ambassador from the Venetians to the said Clement for pa|cifying his furie, and obtaining that absolution, suffered a chaine of iron to be tyed about his necke,Note. and to lye downe vnder the Popes table, there like a Dog to catch the bones which fell from the table, vntill the Popes furie was assua|ged.
And lest he should be inferiour to his predecessors in sub|duing all powers vnder his feet, hee ordained that the king of the Romans should not enioy the title and right of an Emperour without confirmation giuen by the Pope.
Next to Clement followed Pope Iohn the two and twenti|eth.Ioannes 22. After that the chaire of Rome had beene vacant for the space of two yeeres, and three months; hee ruled nineteene yeeres,  foure months: and was verie much giuen to heape vp riches, so that hee proclamed them to be heretickes who affirmed that Christ and his Apostles had no possessions in the world.
He would not condiscend to the Coronation of Lewes the fift, Duke of Bauaria, to be Emperour, because hee vsed the Emp all dignitie in Italie before hee was authorised by the Pope which cause Lewes tooke his iourney to Rome,Two Popes at once. and the crowned by the Cardinalls, and set vp another Pope in  called Nicolaus the fift, against Iohn who was then resid at a Auiniogue in France, and so the church of Rome  begun to haue two heads.
Pope  the twelfe followed,Benedict 12. and ruled seuen yeeres,  and seueneene dayes.
 Pope Clement the sixt;Clement 6. and ruled ten,  twentie eight dayes: hee reduced the  was kept on the hundred yeere to the

fiftieth yeere: and to allure men to goe to warre for reco|uering of the holy land hee set forth blasphemous bulls, commaunding the Angells to convey euerie mans soule to Paradise who died by the way,Note. giuing also power to all and singular persons signed with the Crosse to deliuer three or foure prisoners whom they pleased best, out of the pains of Purgatorie.
Innocent 6.After Clement the sixt, followed Innocentius the sixt, and ruled nine yeeres, eight months, and six dayes. Hee impri|soned a certaine frier called Ioannes de rupescissa, because hee Prophecied of the fall of the Pope and his Cardinalls, by the parable of a bird, cloathed with other birds fethers, which in respect of her pryde were all plucked from her.
Vrbanus 5.After him succeeded Vrbanus the fift, and ruled eight yeeres, and foure months. In whose time the order of the Iesuits begun.
Gregorie 11.Next to Pope Vrban succeeded Gregorie the eleuenth, who reduced the Papacie againe out of France to Rome, after it had continued there aboue 70. yeeres, moued hereunto vp|on this occasion. Hee had reprooued a certaine Bishoppe who stood by him from long absence from his charge,Note. to whom the Bishop replyed againe, that the Bishop of Rome himselfe who ought to be a patterne to all the rest was lon|ger absent from the place where his Church did tye him, whereby the Pope tooke occasion to remoue his court from Fraunce to Rome.
When hee returned hee found the estate of Italie greatly disquieted with cruell warres, and specially betwixt the Venetians and the Genoans, whom the Pope threatned with excommunication if they both desisted not, but be|fore hee was able to accomplish this worke he ended his life after he had ruled seuen yeeres,  fiue months; after whose death followed a great schisme in the Church of Rome. For the Cardinalls of Italie choosed an Italian Pope whom they called Vrbanus the sixt, and the Cardinalls of France choosed a Pope of the French nation whom they cal|led Clemens the seuenth. This scisme continued for the

space of 38. yeeres, vntill the generall Councell holden at Constance, during which time were found at least two Popes raigning at one time, the one in Auiniogue and the other in Rome.
In the dayes of this Pope Vrbane sprang vp Iohn Wick|liffe in England (of whose doctrine somewhat shall hereaf|ter be spoken God willing) whom Pope Vrbane (such was the prouidence of God) could not attend to suppresse,Iohn Wicklisse. being otherwise busied in suppressing his Competitor Clement the seuenth, insomuch that this litle sparkle which begun in England, enkindled forth with flames in the kingdome of Boheme, and many other places to the great hurt of Anti|christs kingdome.
To Vrbane after hee had ruled vnhappily (as Platina writeth) a eleuen yeeres and eight months,Platina. succeeded Bonifacius the ninth,Bonifacius. 9. and ruled foureteene yeeres, and nine months, hee was impudent in selling of Pardons that hee brought Peters keyes into great contempt.
After him succeeded Innocentius the seuenth,Innocentius 7. and ruled two yeeres.


Of other Doctors.
IN this age God raised vp manie witnesses of his truth, as also made the knowledge of letters  the studie of tongues to spring vp againe, after it had bin suppressed many yeeres in the Roman church: for some learned men of the Grecians fearing the crueltie of the Turke fled vnto Italie, by whose fruitfull trauaills, learning begun againe to reuiue and spread it selfe thorow all parts of the West. Of this number was Emmanuell Chrysoloras of Byzantium,Emmanuel Chrysoloras, Theodorus Gaza, Georgius Tra|pezuntius Theodorus Gaza of Thessalonica, and Georgius Trapezuntius, with many moe, whose names are worthie to bee kept in good remembrance, because they brought a good treasure

with them out of Grecia where with many afterward were en|riched.
Marsilius Pata|vinus oppo|seth himselfe against the Pope maintai|ning these Articles.Amongst those witnesses of the truth Marsilius Patavi|nus is iustly numbered: who taking the defence of the Empe|rour Lewes aginst the Pope who did excommunicate him, affirmes in his booke called defensor pacis that the Pope hath no authoritie ouer other Bishops, much lesse ouer the Empe|rour.
 Secondly, that the word of God ought only to be iudge  in all causes Ecclesiasticall.
 Thirdly, that the Clergie and Pope should be subiect to Magistrates.
 Fourthly, That the head of the Church is Christ, and that hee neuer appointed any vicar or Pope ouer his vni|uersall Church.
 Fiftly, That Bishops ought to be chosen by their owne Church and Clergie.
 Sixtly, That the Mariage of Priests may be lawfully per|mitted.
 Seuenthly, That S. Peter was neuer at Rome.
 Eightly, That the Clergie of Rome is a den of Theeues.
 Ninthly, That the doctrine of the Pope is not to be fol|lowed, because it leades to eternall death.
In another treatise he disputes of free iustification by grace, and that workes are no efficient cause of Saluation, Sed causa sine qua non, for the which doctrine hee was condemned by the Pope.
Diuers others discouer the Apostasie of the Roman Church.I passe by a great number, who clearelie discouered, the corruptions and Apostasie of the Church of Rome, such as Ioannes de Gunduno, Gregorius Ariminensis, Andreas de Castro, Dantes an Italian, Taulerus a Preacher of Argentine in Ger|manie, Franciscus Petrarcha a man famouslie learned, who in his workes in Italian verses, speaking of Rome, calles it the whoore of Babilon, the schoole and mother of errour, the Temple of heresie, the nest of treacherie, growing and increasing by the oppression of others.
Likewise Ioannes de rupe scissa, who was cast in prison by

Pope Innocentius the sixt, also Conradus Hager a Germane of the citie of Herbipoli, Gerardus Ridder, Michael Cesenas Provinciall of the Gray friers, Petrus de Corbaria, with one Ioaxnes de Pliato. This foresaid Michael general of the gray friers writ against the tyrannie, pride, and primacie of the Pope; accusing him to be Antichrist, and the Church of Rome to be the whoore of Babilon, drunken with the blood of the Saints. He affirmed there were two Churches, one of the wicked florishing wherein raigned the Pope, the other of the Godly afflicted: also that the veritie was almost vtterlie extinct, and for this cause hee was depriued of his dignitie and condemned by the Pope. Notwithstanding he stood constant in his assertions, and left behind him many fauourers and followers of his doctrine, of whom a great part were slaine by the Pope. Some were condemned as William Ockam who writ both in defence of the Emperour Lewes whom the Pope excommunicated, and likewise in de|fence of Michael generall of the gray friers whom the Pope had cursed for an heretike, and some were burned, such as Ionnes de Castellione, and Franciscus de Arcatara. Likewise Armachanus a Bishop in Ireland, and Matthias Parisiensis, Ioannes Montziger, rector of the Vniuersitie of Vlme, Nilus Bishop of Thessalonica, Iacobus Milnensis, and one Milezius, Henricus de Iota, and Henricus de Hassia.
Likewise in this most desperate time when the estate of religion was vtterlie corrupted, and the onely name of Christ remained amongst Christians, his true and liuely doctrine being vtterly vnknowne, and turned into an heape of sha|dowed Ceremonies which so increased that there was no end of heaping vp of ceremonies invented by man: at this time,Iohn Wickliffe opposeth him|selfe against the Pope. I say, the Lord raised vp Iohn Wickliffe, a professor of Diuinitie in the vniuersitie of Oxford, who seeing that er+ror by long vse and custome had beene so deeplie rooted in the hearts of men, that it could hardly be plucked out, hee medled not with all at once, b firs bgnne to touch the matter of the Sacraments, and discoer  rrours that men were fallen into, in this head of , but this byle

could not be touched without the great griefe and paine of the whole world.
For first of all the whole rabble of Monkes and begging Friers were set on rage and madnes against him, and after them the Priests, and then after them the Archbishop, Simon Sudburie tooke the matter in hand, who for the same cause depriued him of his benefice which then he had in Oxford. Notwithstanding being supported by the friendly assistance of the Duke of Lancaster sonne to king Edward the third, and some other friends whom God raised vp for his pro|tection, he bare out the malice of the Friers and Archbishop. Likewise Pope Vrbane was so busied with suppressing of an|other, Pope Clement the seuenth, set vp against him, that he could not spare any time to suppresse Iohn Wickliffe, and so it came to passe, thorow the prouidence of Almightie God, that the enemies of the true light with fretting minds were compelled to see the sparkles thereof, not being able to quench them.
The heads of Wickliffes doctrine.The chiefe heads of doctrine which hee maintained a|gainst the Roman church were these.
 That the substance of bread remained in the Sacrament of the altar after the words of consecration.
 That it is not found in the Gospell that Christ instituted or confirmed a masse.
 That it is a presumptuous Speaking to affirme that the infants of the faithfull who die vnbaptised are condemned.
 That in the time of Paul there were onelie two orders of Clerks, to wit Elders and Deacons, neither was there in the time of the Apostles any distinction of Popes, Patriarches, Archbishops, Bishops, but these the Emperours pryde did finde out.
 That the causes of diuorcement for spirituall consangui|nitie or affinitie are not founded on the scriptures, but onely by the ordinance of men.
 That he who is most seruicable and humble in the church and most inamored with the loue of Christ, the same is the neerest vicar of Christ in the militant Church.
If corporall vnction were a Sacrament then Christ and his Apostles would not haue left the ordinance of that vn|touched.
Whatsoeuer the Pope and Cardinals doe command which  they cannot deduce cleerely out of the Scriptures, the same is to be accounted hereticall and not to be obeyed.
That it is but a follie to beleeue the Popes Pardons.
That it is not necessarie to saluation, to beleeue the church of Rome to be supreme head of other Churches.
A Deacon or Priest may Preach the word of God, with|out  the authoritie of the Apostolike sea.
The Church of Rome is the Synagogue of Sathan, nei|ther is the Pope immediatlie the vicar of Christ, nor of the  Apostles.
That the Emperour and Secular Lords are seduced, who  so inrich the Church with ample possessions.
If any man enter into any priuat religion (whatsoeuer it  be) hee is thereby made more vnapt and vnable to obserue the commandements of God.


Of Monkes.
POpe Clement the sixt, bearing rule: Iohn king of France sonne of Philip invented the sect and order of those Monkes which in Latine are called Stellati, whose maner is alwayes to weare a starre vpon their brest, signifying thereby that there is nothing in them but the light of per|fection, and the cleere shining of good workes. Yea that they themselues are the light of the world, according to the saying of Christ, vos eslis lux mundi, yea are the light of the world. Item, That they shall rise againe at the later day all shining and glistering as the most cleere and pleasant starres,Dan. according as it is written by the Prophet. They that informe many into righteousnes shall be as the starres world without end, In Anno, 1336.
Pope Boniface the ninth raigning: a certaine man called Ge|rardus being of great learning, and vertuous conversation, or|dained a certaine fraternitie or brotherhood of learned god|lie men to teach schollers, and to bring vp youth, not onely in good letters, but also in good maners, that by those means there might be learned men alwayes in store to beare rule in the Church of Christ, and to gouerne the common-wealth according to the praescript and rule of Gods word.
This Gerardus being but a Deacon preached the word of God purelie and feruently, and when hee was moued by his friends to be a Priest, hee alwayes answered, that he was vn|worthie to haue such an high office,Note. affirming that hee would not haue the cure of soules not so much as by the space of one night for all the gold of Arabia, In Anno, 1379.
Of the order of the Iesuits.Pope Vrbane the fift, greatly allowed the order of Iesuits, and gaue vnto them many great and singular priuileges, co~|manding the Monkes of that order to weare a white kirtle, and a russet coule, and that they should be called of all men Clerici Apostolici, that is the Apostles clerks.
This order of Iesuits was the invention of Ioannes Columbi|nus in Se~a a citie of Hetruria. They were not at the beginning Priests or consecrated persons, but were men of the lay sort giuen and addicted willingly and freely to prayer, and to la|bour, getting their liuing with the trauell of their hands and sweate of their browes, liuing as it were in common, after the example of Christ and his disciples. They are called Iesuits, because the name of Iesus should be often in their mouths, In Anno, 1368.
Of the order of white-Dawbet Monks.Pope Boniface bearing rule: the order which is called Ordo Dealbatorum, was invented by a certaine Priest in Italie, who pretended such a modestie, and grauitie, both in words and countenance, that euery man tooke him for a Saint. The professors of this order were cloathed with long white linne~ euen downe to the ground, hauing coules vpon their heads like vnto Monkes. The chiefe point of their profession was to lament the state of mankind, to bewaile the sinnes of the people, to pray for redresse of the same at the hands of God.

They neuer went abroad without a Crosse with the Image of the Crucifixe caried before them, which Crosse the Lu|censes keepe at this day with great reuerence, as a most preci|ous relike, and daylie make vowes, and offer gifts therevn|to.
But Pope Boniface aforsaid conceiuing that they should doe no good to his honorable estate if they continued,Note. for|asmuch as they all appeared before men righteous, good and Godlie, and the Pope with his complices most wicked, euill and vngodlie, caused the author of this order a seditious person to be beheaded at Viterbium. Some say that hee was burnt as a superstitious Hypo|crite and attainted of some heresie, In Anno, 1400.




CENTVRIE. XV. Of Popes of Rome.
The Cardinals labour for vnitie in the Roman church._AFter the death of Innocentius Sephinus, the Cardinalls perceiuing the great schisme that was in the Church of Rome, by rea|son of diuers Popes ruling at one time, bound themselues together by horrible oathes that they would endevour by all their might, to haue the Church of Rome restored againe to her wonted vnitie, and for this cause they elected Gergorie the twelfth to be Pope, after they had caused him to sweare that hee would by all possible meanes trauell to restore the peace and vnitie of the Church.
Gregorius 12.But Gregorie although hee writ to Benedict the thirteenth Pope in Avinion, exhorting him to vnitie and peace, and Benedict on the other part with pleasant words protested his earnest desire of peace and vnitie,Note. yet both the one and the o|ther kept their dominions and Popedomes, and continued the Schisme.A Councell at Pisa. So that the Cardinalls thought it expedient to gather a Councell in the towne of Pisa, wherein they depo|sed the two aforesayd Popes, Gregorie and Benedict as per|sons who by conclusion amongst themselues sought ra|ther their own gaine then the vnitie of the Church of God, and they elected Petrus Cretensis Cardinall of Millan to be Pope,Alexander 5. whom they called Alexander the fift, but he continu|ed not aboue the space of eight months, in his Popedome. He was counted verie liberall, and gaue so large and ample benefices to others, that he left almost nothing to himselfe, and was accustomed to speake of himselfe that he was a rich Bishop,Note. a poore Cardinal, and a beggerly Pope.
After whose departure Ionnes 23. is chosen Pope, howbe|it

the two other Popes who were deposed in the Councell of Pisa were yet aliue, and had great sway, and nothing reguar|ded the decrees of the Councell of Pisa, because that Coun|cell was convocated by a number of Cardinalls only, who had no lawfull power to appoint a generall Councell. Thus was the scisme augmented rather then empaired by the Councell of Pisa, and in stead of two Popes then, three afterward were ruling at one time.
In this Popes daies the Emperour Sigismund, tooke great trauell to quiet the estate of the Church and to remoue the scisme, but found none other way how this matter might be brought to passe,At the Coun|cell of Con|stance Ioannes 23. Gregorie. 12. and Bene|dict 13. were deposed. but onely by gathering a generall Councell in the Towne of Constantia. At this Councell Ioannes 23. was personally present, and was re|quired to giue ouer his Popedome farre contrarie to his ex|pectation, for he looked for ratification of his Papacie, be|cause he was more obedient to the Councel then the other two, but finding that the Councel was fullie bent to depose all the three Popes,  to set vp one whom they should chose in place of them all, he begun to be grieued at his owne pro|ceedings, that he had hazarded to come to the Councel,  to their iudgement to submit himselfe  his honorable estate, wherefore he thought best secretly to flie out of the towne, but flying could not availe him any thing, for hee was brought backe againe by the Emperour from Friburge to Constantia, and cast into prison and deposed by the Coun|cell: after hee had ruled foure yeeres, and ten months.
The other two Popes, Gregorie the twelfth, and Bene|dict the thirteene, although they were absent yet sustained the like sentence of deposition,Martinus 5. Martinus 5. was chosen Pope: after whose election, the Emp. Sigismund was so filled with gladnesse, that the scisme was now taken away and peace re|stored to the Church, that forthwith he did remoue to the conclaue (where the Cardinals  Commissioners of coun|tries were assembled for election of the Pope)  fell downe before him  kissed his feet. After his election earnest sute was made for reformation of the corrupt maners of Eccle|siasticall

persons, and that Bishoppes, Abbots, and other Prelates, might bee compelled to attend vpon their owne callings, that superfluous feastings, and abuses of fasting, and canonisation of Sainctes, might be abrogated, and that the orders of Monkes daily multiplying might ee redu|ced to a more tolerable number. But no reformation at all was obtained. Onely Pope Martine thought meet to dis|solue the Councell of Constance. And for satisfaction of the hearts of all men, and to put them in hope that some re|formation was intended, the Pope consented in the Councell of Constance that immediatly after the issue of the Councel, another should be kept in Papia within the space of fiue yeeres, immediatly following the same, and againe after the issue of that Councell seuen yeeres after an other generall Councel should be kept, and after that third Councell an or|dinarie forme should be obserued of assembling generall Councells euery tenth yeere, whereby reformation of abu|ses in the Church might bee more easilie obtained. This Pope Martine after hee had gouerned 14. yeeres, and 3. months, died at Rome.
Eugenius 4.After him succeeded Eugenius the fourth  gouerned six|teene yeeres. In his time was the Councell of Basile kept, which the Pope with aduice of his Cardinalls was minded to translate to Bononia. But the Emperour Sigismund and other Princes and Prelats assembled at Basile, were so high|ly offended against the Pope, that they warned himselfe and his Cardinalls to appeare before the generall councill otherwise they would proceed against them, as persons contumacious and disobedient to the voyce of the Church.
This warning so terrified Eugenius, that hee gaue out his Apostolike letters to ratifie and approue the Councell of Basile: neuerthelesse after the Emperours death, the authoritie of the Councell being greatly empaired, hee tooke vpon him greater boldnesse to transferre the Coun|cell to Ferraria, and from thence also to Florence, pretending that the Emp. of Co~stantinople Paleologus  the rest of the

Grecians who were now to be present at the generall coun|cell, would not trauell beyond the Alpes, but would abide in some neerer place.
The Councell of Basile on the other part, proceeded to the deposition of Eugenius 4. For his contumacie, and placed Amecdeus Duke of Sauoy in his roome, whom they called Foelix 5. Thus was the peace of the Roman church troubled of new againe,Foelix 5. Dissention in the Roman Church. some following Eugenius and others followed Foelix, and the third sort being Neutralls neither following the one nor the other, because they were so tossed with the contrarie decrees of the councell of Basile and Florence, that they knew not what to follow.
This Pope as Platina writeth was bent to warres, not being seemely in a Bishop: for besides those which hee made in Italie, hee stirred vp the Dolphin of France to invade the towne of Basile with an armie of horsmen, of purpose to dissolue the Councell there, and finallie hee stirred vp Vladislaus King of Poloma to fight against Amurathes King of Turkes; contrary to his promise and truce taken betweene them,Note. to the great shame and hurt of Christianitie as hath beene declared.
After his death,Nicolaus 5. Nicolaus the fift, was chosen to be Pope and ruled eight yeeres.
To him Foelix quintus, who was elected Pope in the Councell of Basile was content to submit himselfe, prouiding alwayes that hee might haue the dignitie of a Cardinall, and that hee should bee appointed the Popes Legat in Germanie, and in his owne countrey of Sauoy. The Cardinalls also whom hee had made in his time should keepe their dignities and honours. This hee did at the earnest desire of Frederike the Emperour, in the yeere of our Lord, 1449. In the which yeere also Nicolaus the fift set forth a decree of approbation of the Councell of Basile, howbeit neither this Pope nor any other fol|lowing him will, bee subiect to the authitie of gene|rall Councells, yet did hee approue the Councell of

Basile, wherein it was ordained that the Bishop of Rome should bee subiect to the Councell, as a child is subiect to the voyce of his mother.
Calixtus 3. An nemie to the Turkes.After Nicolaus succeeded Calixtus the third, and gouer|ned three yeeres, three months, sixteene dayes: hee was ve|rie bent to fight against the Turkes, and sent Messengers to all Christian Princes in Europe to stirre vp their hearts to make warre against the Turke with one consent of minde, and to stay his further progresse and conquest in Europe, but all his trauailles were spent in vaine, for the Princes harkened not to his Councell.
Likewise hee sent messengers to Vsumcassanus king of Armenia and Persia, whom with supplications and gifts hee stirred vp to make cruell warres against the Turke, which warres also haue since that time continued vntill our dayes, to the great disturbance of the crueltie of the Turke intended against Europe.
Pius. 2.After him succeeded Pius the second, who before his Popedome was called Aenas Syluius, a man of great witt, learning, and eloquence, and gouerned six yeeres. Hee was no lesse bent to make warre against the Turkes, then was his Predecessour before him, but his enterprise was staied by the dissention which was amongst Christi|an Princes, for then and long after was great warre be|tweene Ferdinand of Naples and the Duke of Angeow, and in diuers other parts of Italie Likewise.
These wise and worthie sentences vttered by him de|clared that he had a great gift of vndersta~ding  knowledge.
 Hee said that popular men should esteeme learning as siluer, and noble men should count it like gold, and Prin|ces should count it in steade of pearles and precious stones.
 Also that like as all riuers haue their courses to the sea and poure in their waters into the Ocean: euen so great Courts are the maine Ocean, receiuing the floudes of all kind of vices.
 Likewise, that if there seemed of old great reason to inhibit

the marriage of Priests, there was now greater reason to permit it.
Also, that hee who giueth too great libertie to his  child, fostereth a domestike enemie within his owne bo|some.
That lust dishonoureth in euery age, but vndoth him vt|terlie  in his old age. He died in the towne of Ancona; where he was minded to haue blessed the armie which was to haue gone against the Turkes.
After Pius succeeded Paulus the second,Paulus 2. and gouerned six yeeres, ten months. Likeas he was not very learned in his own person, so was hee also an aduersarie to learning, and coun|ted all men that were learned, in humanitie, to bee here|tikes: as Platina (who writeth this of the Pope) had good proofe in his owne person, for hee was cast in pri|son, and cruelly tormented by the Pope without a cause, and in the ende lest his crueltie against many learned men should make him to bee hated of the people, hee accu|sed them of heresie,Note. hauing no better ground for it then this, that they accounted much of the old Academique Phi|losophers. For he laied this as an vnfallible ground, that who soeuer would once make mentio~ of Academia, either in ear|nest or iesting words, he was to be reputed an heretike.

Of other Doctors.
IN this age sprung vp Iohn Husse in the cou~try of Bohemia,Iohn Husse. who by reading of the bookes written by Wickliff, attained to knowledge and deprehended many grosse errours of the Roman church:Alaxander 5. and Ioannes 23 seeke to sup|presse Iohn Husse. in so much that Pope Alexander 5. hearing thereof begun at last to direct his bull to the Archbishop of Suinto requiring him to see to the matter in due time,  to prouide that no man in churches, schooles, or other places should maintaine any such doctrine, citing also Iohn Husse to appeare before him.
After whose death Pope Iohn 23. in like maner sought by all meanes to suppresse Iohn Husse, because he seemed more willing to teach the Gospell of Christ then the traditions of Bishopps, and therefore by his Cardinall de Columna Iohn Husse was cited to appeare at Rome, where hee ap|pearing by his procurators was notwithstanding, excom|municated as an obstinate Heretike, because hee appeared not personallie at the appointed day. The Bohemians not|withstanding cared litle for all this, but grew in knowledge daylie.
Iohn Husse excommuni|cated by the ope.In the meane time it hapned by the occasion of Ladi|slaus king of Naples, who had besieged the Popes townes and territories: that Pope Iohn raising vp warre against the said Ladislaus gaue full remission of sinnes to all them who would warre on his side to defend the Church.
When this Bull of the Popes indulgences was come to Prague: Iohn Husse and his fellowes not able to abide the im|pietie of those pardons began manifestly to speake against them. And albeit Winceslaus king of Bohemia who then fauoured the Pope gaue out strict commaundement that no man should speake against those indulgences, yet of Iohn Husses companie were found three Artificers, who hearing the Priest speaking of the forsaid indulgences did openly speake against them, calling the Pope the Antichrist; wherefore they were brought before the Senate and com|mitted to prison.
But the people ioyning themselues in armes required them to be let loose. The magistrates one the other part albeit they satisfied the people with gentle wordes and faire promises for a time, yet when the tumult was asswaged they sent to the prison, and secretlie beheaded the three fore|said artificers: whose names were Iohn, Martine, and Staston.
The people hearing of this, tooke their dead bodies and with great solemnitie buried them in the Church of Beth|leem, at whose funerall, diuers Priests fauouring that side did sing thus.
These be the Saincts which for the testimonie of God

gaue their bodies,Diuision in the citie of Prague about the death of three Artifi|cers: some fa|uoring the Pope others Iohn Husse. c. Thus the citie of Prague was di|vided.
The Prelats and greatest part of the Clergie, and most of the Barons who had any thing to lose, did hold with the Pope, especially Steuen Pallats being chiefest doer of that side. On the contrarie part the communes with part of the clergie and students of the vniuersitie went with Iohn Husse. Winceslaus the king fearing lest this should grow to a tumult, being moued by the Doctors, and Prelats, and Counsell of his Barons, thought best to remoue Iohn Husse out of the citie, who had beene excommunicated before by the Pope.
The people on the other part began mightilie to grudge and to cry out against the Prelats and Priests, who were the workers hereof, accusing them to be Simonits, coue|tous, whoremasters, adulterers, proud, not sparing also to lay ope~ their vices to their great ignominie  shame, where|vpon it came to passe that the king seeing the inclination of the people, being also not ignorant of the wickednesse of the Clergie, vnder pretence to reforme the Church, began to re|quire great exactions from such Priests  men of the clergie as were accused,  knowne to be wicked liuers. And thus the Popish clergie while they went about to persecute Iohn Husse were intrapped themselues in great tribulation, brought in contempt, and hated of all men.
At this time were three Popes raigning together, by rea|son whereof a generall Councell was ordained and holden at Constance in the yeere of our Lord 1413. And this coun|cell being called by Sigismund the Emperour for the taking away of the schismaticall dissention of so many Popes, ruling at one time to the great disturbance of all Christian nations it pleased the said Emperour to send vnto Iohn Husse, Bacheler of Diuinitie in the countrie of Bohemia,Iohn Husse desired to ap|peare before the councell of Constance. his safe conduct, and letters of protection: inviting him to come to the Councell, and promising him a libertie of safe returning vnto his owne country, without any maner of empeachment,

trouble or vexation.Iohn Husse im|prisoned. Notwithstanding as soone as he came to Constance he was cast into prison before he was heard. And when he was brought forth to the Councell there befell a strange and shamefull matter, for his aduersaries had scar|sly read one article, and brought forth a few witnesses of the same, against him, but as he was about to open his mouth to answere, all that were about him began so to cry out, that he had no leasure to speake a word.Iohn Husse by reason of the noyse could not be heard. The noise and trouble was so great and vehement, that a man might well haue cal|led it a noyse of wilde beastes  not of men, much lesse was it like a congregation of men gathered together to iudge and determine so graue and weightie matters. The next time he was brought foorh to the convent of the Franciscans,Iohn Husse de|sired by the Emperour to submit him|selfe to the Councell. His answere. where the Emperour himselfe was present, and exhorted Iohn Husse to submit himselfe to the generall councell, otherwise (said he) my safe conduct cannot nor should not be a protection to any who maintaine hereticall doctrin.
The day after which was the eight of Iune, he was brought out againe to the same place, and in his presence there were read thirtie nine Articles, the which they said were drawne out of his bookes, which were iudged by the councell to be hereticall, and hee of new againe was required by the Em|perour to submit himselfe to the councell.
Iohn Husse answered that hee would not maintaine any opinion with obstinate minde, but if the Councell would instruct him clearlie that any of his Articles were repug|nant to the holy scriptures of God, he would renounce and forsake the same, affirming also most constantlie that the most part of all those thinges that were alledged against him were falsly forged, and neuer thought nor vttered by him: when they saw that by no exhortation Iohn Husse could be moued to acknowledge his doctrine to be erro~eous,  to recant the same, vpon the sixt day of Iulie he was brought to the head church of the citie of Constance,  there in presence of the Emperour and councell was degraded of all Priestly orders and dignities, and a definitiue sentence was giuen out against him wherein hee was condemned as an heretike, for that hee

preached and openly defended the articles of Iohn Wickliffe which were condemned by the Church of Rome, and like|wise had appealed to the Lord Iesus Christ, as the most high Iudge, which appellation they counted a great con|tempt of the Apostolique Sea, and the Ecclesiasticall Cen|sures and Keyes.Iohn Hus con|demned to be burnt as an Heretique. After this hee was put into the Secular Iudges hands to be burnt as an Heretique, having vpon his head a crowne of paper, with vgly pictures of divels pain|ted thereupon. Which rebuke, as also the torment of fire, hee most patiently sustained, with Psalmes and spirituall Songs, lauding God vntill the winde droue the fire vpon his face, and choaked his breath. And after his bodie was consumed with fire, they cast the ashes of the burnt body into the river of Rhene. Thus died Iohn Hus the faithfull Martyr of God, the sixt of Iuly, 1516. Now while as Iohn Hus had beene lying in prison, and so hardly handled, his faithfull companion Ierom of Prague, came to Constance the fourth day of Aprill anno 1415. who there perceiving that Iohn Hus was denyed to be heard, and that watch was layed for him on every side, hee departed to Iberling a Citie of the Empire, a mile distant from Constance, and from thence caused a letter to be directed to the Councell,Ierome of Prague writeth to the Coun|cell. and to bee af|fixed vpon the doores of the chiefe Churches, Cloysters, and Cardinalls houses in Constance, bearing in effect that hee was ready to come to the Councell, and to answer vnto any of his accusers, who would stand vp to accuse him of erro|neous and hereticall doctrine, providing alwayes that hee might haue sure and safe accesse. But when hee saw that through such intimations, being set vp, as is before sayd, hee could haue no safe conduct, hee thought meete to re|turne backe againe to Bohemia, taking with him the letters patents of the Lords of Bohemia that were at Constane, for a testimonie and witnesse of the premises. As hee was in his iourney, by treason and conspiracie of his enemies, hee was taken in Hirsaw by the officers of Duke Iohn, and sent backe to the Councell,Ierom impriso|ned by the Councell. bound with chaines, where hee was cast into prison, and so hardly vsed, that hee fell sore sicke

almost to the death. But after he was recovered, and Iohn Hus was already put to death, they brought forth Master Ierome, whom they had long kept in chaines in the Church of Saint Paul, and threatning him with death, being instant vpon him,Recanteth, be|ing compelled thereunto. they forced him to abiure and recant, and con|sent vnto the death of Master Iohn Hus, that hee was iustly condemned and put to death by them. Neverthelesse, his enemies perceiving that this abiuration was not made sincerely from his heart, but onely for feare to escape their hands, they gaue in new accusations against him. And in the yeere of our Lord, 1416. the 25. day of May, the sayd Master Iereme was brought forth vnto open audience be|fore the whole generall Councell, vnto the great cathedrall Church of Constance. Where many things were layd to his charge that day, as likewise the third day after (which was another Diet assigned to him for answering) where hee refuted his adversaries with such eloquence and wisdome, that the hearts of all the Fathers of the councell were mar|velously bent and mooved to mercy toward him. But in the end hee entered to the praise of Iohn Hus,He maintai|neth the doc|trin of Wickliffe and Hus. and affirmed that whatsoever Iohn Hus and Wickliffe, had holden and written specially against the pompe and pride of the Clergie, hee would affirme even to the death. And likewise hee added, that of all the sinnes that ever hee had committed, the sinne of his recantation did most grievously gnaw and trouble his conscience, especially in consenting to the wicked con|demnation of that good and holy man, Iohn Hus, which fault as hee did it through weakenesse of faith, and feare of death; so did hee vtterly deny and revoke that wicked re|cantation.
After this, hee was led away againe to prison: and the Saturday before the ascention day, hee was brought to the Cathedral Church before the Congregation, where the sen|tence of his condemnation was given out against him, and a paper with pictures of red divels was brought to bee put vpon his head, which hee himselfe receiving, put it there|upon, saying; Our Lord Iesus Christ when hee suffered

death for me, most wretched sinner, did weare a crowne of thornes vpon his head,Note. and I for his sake will willingly weare this miter, and cap. Afterward hee was layd hold on by the secular power,Ierom of Prague con|demned and burnt and carried to the place of execution, where his body was burnt with fire, which paine he suffered, with a lowd voyce praising God in the midst of the fire, and commending his soule to the gracious custodie of the Lord Iesus. And finally, his ashes were diligently collected, and throwne into the river of Rhene.
In this age also was Hieronimus Savonarola a man,Hieronymus Savonarola, preacheth a+gainst the evill life of the Spi|ritualty. no lesse godly in heart, then constant in profession, who being a Monke in Italy, and very learned, preached against the evill life of the Spiritualty, and specially of his owne order. Which thing the Pope perceiving, and fearing that the said Hierom (who was already in great reputation amongst all men) should diminish and overthrow his authority: he or|dained his Vicar or Provinciall to see reformation in those matters, who with great superstition began to reforme them: But the sayd Hierom did alwaies withstand him, whereupon hee was complained of to the Pope, and cursed by him. Notwithstanding hee continued preaching in the towne of Florence. And albeit hee was cited to appeare be|fore the Pope, he made his excuse, and came not. Then was hee againe forbidden to preach, and his doctrine pronoun|ced and condemned as pernicious,Hironimus si|lenced by the Pope. false, and seditious. Thus Hieronimus forseeing the perils  dangers that might come, for feare left off preaching.
But when the people which sore hungred for the word of God, were instant vpon him that hee would preach a|gaine: hee began againe to preach in the yeere 1496. and albeit many counselled him,He againe preacheth. that he should not so doe with|out the Popes commandement, yet did he not regard them, but constantly went forward of his owne good will. When the Pope and his shavelings heard newes of this, they were grievously inflamed and incensed against him, and now a|gaine cursed him as an obstinate and stifnecked heretique.He is cursed by the Pope as an heretique. Notwithstanding all this, Hierom proceeded in preaching

and instructing the people, saying, men ought not to regard such curses as are against the true and common profit of the people.
In all his teaching he desired to teach none other thing, but the onely pure and simple word of God: making often protestation, that all men should certifie him if they had heard him teach or preach any thing contrary thereunto. For in his owne conscience,Note. he knew that he had not taught any thing but the pure Word of God. What his doctrine was, all men may iudge by his bookes which hee hath writ|ten. After this, in the yeere of our Lord, 1498. hee was ta|ken and brought to Saint Markes Cloyster, and and two o|ther Fryers with him, named Dominicke and Sylvester, who favoured his learning, and were carryed to prison, and from thence were brought forth by the chiefe Councellors of Florence, and the Popes Commissioners, who had gathe|red out certain articles against them, whereupon they should be condemned to death, which were these:

1. The first article was, as touching our free iustification through faith in Christ.
2. That the Communion ought to bee ministred vnder both kinds.
3. That the Indulgences and Pardons of the Pope, were of none effect.
4. For preaching against the filthy and wicked living of the Cardinals and Spiritualty.
5. For denying the Popes supremacy.
6. And that hee had affirmed that the Keyes were not gi|ven to Peter alone, but vnto the vniversall Church.
7. That the Pope did neither follow the life nor the doc|trine of Christ, for that hee did attribute more to his owne pardons and traditions, then to Christs merits, and therfore he was Antichrist.
8. That the Popes excommunications are not to be fea|red, and that hee who doth feare or flie them, is excommu|nicate of God.
9. That the auricular confession is not necessary.
10. That hee had mooved the Citizens to vprore and sedition.
11. That hee had neglected and contemned the Popes citation.
12. That he had shamefully slandred and spoken against the Pope.
13. That he had taken Christ to witnesse, of his naughti|nesse and heresie.
14. That Italy must be cleansed through Gods scourg, for the manifold wickednesse of the Princes and Clergie.

These and such like articles were layd to their charge and reade before them. Then they demanded of the said Hierom and his companions, whether they would recant, and giue over their opinions. Whereunto they answered, that tho|row Gods help, they would stedfastly continue in the mani|fest truth, and not depart from the same. Then were they degraded, one after another, by the Bishop of Wasson, and so delivered to the secular rulers of Florence, with strict com|mandement to carry them forth, and handle them as obsti|nate and stifnecked Heretiques.Hieronymus with two o|thers, hangd  burnt as here|tiques. Thus was that worthy wit|nesse of Christ, with the other two aforesayd, first hanged vp openly in the market place, and afterward burnt to ashes, and the ashes gathered vp, and cast into the river of Arum, the 24. day of May, 1499.
In this age likewise,Lauren, Valla. Picus Miran|dula Comes. Angelus Po|litianus. sprang vp many men of great eru|dition and learning; as namely, Laurentius Valla, Picus Mi|randulae Comes, Angelus Politianus, with many others, whose names, for learning are worthy rememberance.
The meane whereby learning so exceedingly increased in this age, seemeth to bee the Art of printing, found out in Germany by a certaine Gold smith,The invention of printing. named Iohn Faustus, in Strausbrugh, and Guttemberg his copartner, as some write: but whosoever was the inventer of it, it is certaine that this faculty was given to the vse of man by the providence of almighty God, at what time the Bishop of Rome, with all the whole and full consent of all the Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Lawyers, Doctors,

Provosts, Deanes, Archdeanes, assembled together in the Councell of Constance, and had condemned poore Iohn Hus, and Ierom of Prague to death for heresie, and after sub|dued the Bohemians, and in a manner the whole world, to be vnder the supreme authority of the Romih Sea. In the very time, so dangerous and desperate, where mans power could doe no more: The blessed wisedome and omnipo|tent power of God, began to worke for the Church, not with sword and target, to subdue his exalted adversary, but with printing,The benefit of printing. writing, and reading, to convince darknes by light, error by truth, ignorance by learning. So that by this meanes of printing, God hath heaped vpon the proud kingdome of Antichrist, a double confusion. For whereas hee could not abide to haue the enormity of Prelats liues to be condemned by Iohn Hus, who neither denyed his Tran|substantiation, nor his Purgatory, nor yet spake any thing against his Masse, but onely exclaimed against his excessiue and pompous pride, his vnchristian, or rather antichristian abhomination of life. Now of late dayes God hath found a way by this faculty of printing, not onely to confound his life and conversation (which before hee could not abide to be touched) but also to cast downe the foundation of his standing, that is, to examine, confute, and detect his doc|trine, lawes, and institutions, in such sort, that albeit his life were never so pure, yet his doctrine standing as it doth, no man is so blinde, but may see the Pope to be Anti-Christ. For by this Art, Tongues are knowne, knowledge groweth, iudgement increaseth, bookes are dispersed, the Scripture is seene, the Doctors are read, the stories bee ope|ned, times compared,Note. truth decerned, falshood detected, and with the finger pointed at, and all (as I haue said) God hath wrought by the benefit of printing.




CENTVRIE XVI.

Popes of Rome.
_AFter Paulus the second,Sixtus 4. succeeded Sixtus the fourth, and ruled thirteen yeeres, and foure dayes. Hee changed the custome of keeping the Iubilie every 50. yeere, and would haue it kept every 25. yeeres.
After him succeeded Innocentius the eight,Innocentius 8. and ruled seven yeers, ten months, and twenty seven dayes.
After him Alexander the sixt,Alexander 6. ruled eleven yeeres, and eight dayes. Hee was a notable tyrant, and a scourg of God to all Italy, and in speciall to that corrupt Colledge of Car|dinals, which had chosen him to be Pope; not for his good graces and vertues, but for the heapes of gold which hee had distributed amongst them,Note. of whom some he banished, others hee caused to be impoysoned, and cruelly slaine.
In his time Charles the eight, King of France, clayming right to the Kingdome of Naples, entred into Italy with a mighty army, and without great resistance, came to the towne of Rome, and from thence to Naples. Alphonsus King of Naples, at this time finding himselfe to be hated of all men, had denuded himselfe of the Kingdome, and given it to his sonne Ferdinand, and hee himselfe was fled into Si|cilie. Also his sonne Ferdinand not being able to resist the puissant army of King Charles,Charles King of France con|quereth the Kingdome of Naples. was likewise compelled to flie to the little Island of Istria, for safety of his life: and the whole kingdome of Naples was in short time ouer-run, and subdued to the King of France.
This victorious conquest so hastily atchieved, made the name of Charles to be terrible to other Princes, even to the Duke of Millan, and Estate of Venice, who had beene his confederate friends,  assisters in this warfare. Notwithstan|ding, fearing lest his increasing power should in time be the overthrow of their Estates, they conspired with the Pope, and the Emperour, and the King of Spaine against him: and as hee returned backe againe to France, fought against him at Fornovo, not farre distant from the towne of Parma. The victory was vncertaine: notwithstanding Ferdinand King of Naples,Ferdinand re|couereth the kingdome of Naples. was so encouraged with this encounter, that hee recovered againe all his kingdome which hee had lost.
Likewise in this Popes time, Lewis the twelfth, who suc|ceeded to Charles the eight, came into Italy, claiming right not onely to the kingdome of Naples, but also to the Duke|dome of Millan. He had before bound vp a covenant with the Pope, the King of Spaine, and the Venetians vpon these conditions that having possessed himselfe first in the Duke|dome of Millan,Lewis King of France, obtai|neth the duke|dome of Millan. hee should give Cremona a famous towne in the Dukedome of Millan, to the Venetians: and hee should assist Caesar Borgia Duke of Valentinois, and sonne to Pope Alexander the sixt, to eiect out of Romagna the Lords presently bearing sway in that Countrey; to the end, that all might come vnder the Soveraignty and commandement of this Duke of Valentinois only: and finally, that he should divide the Kingdome of Naples, betwixt himselfe and Fer|dinand King of Spaine. Vpon these conditions, was King Lewis assisted by the Pope, the King of Spaine, and the E|state of Venice; and so with little adoe obtained the Duke|dome of Millan, and carryed away Lodovick Sforce Duke of Millan, with his brother Askanius, captiues and prisoners to France.
This Pope as hee was fraughted with many great faults in his owne person,Alexander the sixt, a favourer of his chil|drens vices. so is he likewise noted to haue beene a fosterer of the wicked vices and villanous behaviour of his children: namely, of Caesar Borgia his sonne, who not only

cast off his Religious apparrell, and became of a Cardi|nall a Duke and warriour, but also most vnnaturally slew his owne elder brother Duke of Gandia, and became cap|taine and leader of his fathers armie in his brothers place.
Also the vilde conversation of Lucretia his Daughter, and her familiar conversation both with her father and brethren, maketh this Pope to be more famous for wic|kednesse then many other.The iust iudgement of God vpon the Pope in his death. His end in the righteous iudge|ment of God answered well vnto his life, for as hee had de|stroied the liues of many by poyson, so vpon a certaine time through the ouersight of the Butler the empoysoned wine, that was prepared for to destroy the liues of some Cardinals who were bidden to the banquet, was put in the hands of the Pope and his sonne Duke of Valentinois. The Pope immedi|atlie thereafter died, and the Duke although he vsed manie conterpoysons and other remedies, yet fell he into a sharpe and dangerous disease, and carried about all his time the re|membrance of that nights banquet.
To Pope Alexander succeeded Pius the third,Pius 3. who imme|diatly after his admission to the Popedom finished his course the 26. day after his inauguration.
After him followed Iulius the second,Iulius 2. and ruled nine yeeres, and a eleuen months: hee was a sharpe warriour and not onely recouered from the Venetians the townes of Ari|minuim, Faventia,He warreth a|gainst the Ve|netians, and re|couereth ma|ny townes from them. and Ravenna, which townes belonged to the Church, but also by cursing them  making a couenant with Maximilian the Emperour and the king of France and Spaine in Cambrey against the Venetians, he brought them so low that in short time they were spoyled of all the Domi|nion which they had by land in Italie. For Verona, Vicentia, and Padua, and the territories of Carinthia, were alloted to Maximilian the Emperour, also Bergama, Brixia, Cremona, and Crema, were possessed by Lewis king of Fraunce, also the townes of Tranmu, Monopolis, and Barletta in Apulia, were giuen ouer to the king of Spaine. Also the Duke of Ferrare recouered Rodigium,  the Duke of Mantua recoue+red Asula from the Venetia~s. Thus was the flourishing estate

of Venice in this Popes time vtterlie abandoned and brought to nought. Notwithstanding hee receiued againe the Venetians into fauour and relieued them of his inter|ditment and cursing,The Veneti|ans receiued in fauour. and thereby procured against him|selfe the great hatred and indignation of the king of France and the Emperour:The king of France  the Emperour hate the Pope. who both being willing to abandon the pride of the Pope, and to abrogate his authoritie, and to substitute another in his roome, appointed a generall Councell to be holden at Pisa, and warned the Pope to be present thereat the first day of September.
But the Pope on the other part to frustrate all the attempts of his adversaries, appointed a generall Councell to be hol|den at Rome in the Church of Lateran, wherein all things that were done in the Councell of Pisa were disanulled and abrogated. Also he stirred vp the kings of Spaine and Eng|land to make warre against the king of France, and the Pope with the Venetians and Switzers ioyned their forces toge|ther to eiect him out of Italie.
The king of France by the Popes meanes be set with enemies.Thus the king of France being beset with enemies on all sides, thought meete to try his cause by the sword first in Italie, and gaue commandement to the Generall of his ar|mie named Gasto Foiesseius a valiant Captaine and an expert warriour to giue battel to the enemies. Thus was a cruell battell fought, neere vnto Ravenna, wherein the number of 20000. men were reckoned to haue beene slaine.The French|men put the Popes, and confederats army to flight. And although the armie of the Pope and the confederates was put to flight, yet the Frenchmen bought their victorie deere with the losse of their Chieftan Foiesseius, and an hundreth and fiftie moe of the noble men of France, besides a great number of others that were slaine in this battell. Yea this victorie was with so great dammage to the forces of the king of Fraunce in Italie, that within the space of 70. dayes after the victorie, they were compelled to retire backe out of Italie:The Dukedom of Millan re|couered from the French|men. So was the Dukedome of Millan in a verie short time plucked out of the hands of the Frenchmen and was possessed by Maximilian Sforce sonne to

Lodonike Sforce. In the end this restlesse Pope brea|thing battells and warres euen vnto the day of his death, con|spired of new againe with the Emperour against the Ve|netians, because they would not render vnto the Emperour the Townes of Verona and Vicentia, and the Venetians on the other side, entered in league and couenant with Lewis king of Fraunce, who stirred vp a new faction of Car|dinalls and Bishops against the Pope, and this Pope Iulius assaied all possible meanes to diuert the Venetians from their new league bound vp with France. But when hee perceiued that his trauells availed nothing, and fearing the power of his aduersaries, hee fell sicke and died; in the verie time of the Councell of Lateran which was begunne vnder Pope Iulius, and ended vnder Leo 10. his successour. Pope Leo the tenth was a learned and eloquent man,Leo 10. of the house of Medices, and ruled eight yeeres, eight months, and twentie dayes. He delighted in Musicke; and loued, and aduanced learned men. The Councell of Lateran which was begun in his Predecessors dayes was ended by him. He receiued in, those Cardinalls who were degraded by his Predecessour (after they had abiured their schisme, and damned their couventicles, at Pisa, Millan, and Lion) and restored them to their former dignities.
In this Popes time,The king of France againe obtained the Dukedome of Millane. Francisse de Valloise king of Fraunce came into Italie for recouering of the Dukedome of Mil|lan, and ouercame his enemies in battell. Sforce the Duke of Millan rendered himselfe to the king, and was sent pri|soner to Fraunce, and the Dukedome was againe recoue|red, and the Townes of Parma and Placentia were recoue|red out of the Popes hands,The Pope and Emperour re|couer it a|gaine. and ioyned to the Dukedome againe, yet within a short time after, the Pope and the Emperour banded themselues together for expelling of the Frenchmen out of Italie. For restoring the Dukedome to Francisse Sfortia, and finallie for restoring of the townes of Parma and Placentia to the Pope, and when the enterprise succeeded well and the Victorie was atchieued, the report of those glad tidings so exhilarated the Popes heart that for

heart that for excessiue gladnesse hee died,Note. or as others write he contracted an ague, whereof immediately after he died He sent Caietanus his Ambassadour to Germanie,Caiesanus sent to sup|presse Luther. to suppresse the Doctrine of Martin Luther, but by the prouidence of God, his rigorous dealing against Martin Luther made him to search out the scriptures better, and to discouer greater impieties in the Church of Rome, then hee did at the be|ginning.
Adrianus 6.After him succeeded Hadrian the sixt, a man of Holland and Schoolemaster to Charles the fift, Emperour. He ende|voured to correct some abuses of the Church of Rome in maners, but not the abuses and errours of Doctrine, for hee also sent his Ambassadour Cheregatus to Germanie, with menacing letters to the Duke of Saxonie because hee main|tained Martin Luther. But his time was short, for hee died before hee had ruled two yeeres in his Popedome.
Clemens 7.To him succeeded Clemens the seuenth, and ruled ten yeeres, ten months, and seuen daies. Hee was a man ve|rie inconstant in his friendship to the Emperour Charles the fift, but secretlie bou~d vp friendship with the king of France, but this deceitfull doing redounded to the Popes great hurt.Rome taken and the Pope besieged by Charles Duke of Burbone. For Charles Duke of Burboune, chiefe Captaine to the armie which the Emperour had in Italie, besieged the towne of Rome and tooke it, and albeit the Duke himselfe was slaine, yet the rest of the armie invaded the Towne, slew great numbers of men, defloured women, spoyled houses and temples, and besieged the Pope himselfe and his Cardinalls seuen months, till at length the Pope was free from his Captiuitie by commaund of the Empe|rour.
About this same time of the Popes besieging, Charles the Emperour was banqueting and reioycing for the Natiuitie of his sonne Philip, but hee stayed all ban|queting, playing, and reioycing, when the tidings of the Popes besieging was carried vnto him, and com|maunded to set him at libertie. Manie great sinnes are imputed to him by writers, and amongst o|thers

that hee destroyed the liues of manie by poy|son, and that in end hee receiued the same recompence himselfe.
After him followed Paulus the third,Paulus 3. who ruled fifteene yeeres, and twentie nine dayes. It grieued him to see the Gospell take so deepe roote, and to be ouerspred in many nations, and namelie in England by king Henry the eight, who abrogated the authoritie of the Bishop of Rome in England,  called himselfe supreme governour ouer Christ, in all Ecclesiasticall causes within the bounds of his owne countrie.
The Pope being destitute of all other revenging wea|pons, drew forth the old accustomed weapon of the chaire of Rome against Princes,King Henry the eight cur|sed by the Pope. and cursed king Henry the eight. This Pope ratified the order of the Iesuites and appointed a generall Councell to bee kept in Trent, a Towne of Italie bordering neere to Germanie. This Councell beganne to be kept in Trent in the yeere 1546. but hereafter was transferred to Bononia as shall be de|clared,A Councell ordained at Trent. God willing.
The Protestants of Germanie were desired both by the Emperour and the Pope to bee present at the Councell, but they would not acknowledge it to be a lawfull generall Councell wherein the Pope or his de|putie did sit as a iudge,Note. who was indeede partie, and whom they were to accuse of false and erroneous doc|trine, of abusing of the Church of God, and vsurping the honour which was onely due to Christ, before this Coun|cell ended, hee concluded his dayes.
Iulius the third succeeded in his place:Iulius 3. who ruled three yeeres. one month, and sixteene dayes. Hee reduced the ge|nerall Councell of Bononia, backe againe to Trent where it began, but the sudden report of the armie of Mau|rice Duke of Saxonie (who tooke armes against the Emperour Charles, for detaining the Lantgraue of Hesse his father in law in prison) dissolued the Councell

againe for a time, because they feared lest the Dukes ar|mie should haue come to Trent, and set vpon them.
England em|braceth Pope|rie in the dayes of Queene Marie.In this time the Church of England returned backe a|gaine to the Popes obedience in the raigne of Queene Marie, and the Pope sent Cardinall Poole to England, to absolue that countrie from that curse and interditment which was layed vpon it in the dayes of Paulus ter|tius.
Marcellus 2.After him succeeded Marcellus the second, and ruled twen|tie two dayes.
Paulus 4.After him followed Paulus the fourth, and ruled foure yeeres,He opposed himselfe a|gainst the Emperour Charles. two months, and twentie foure dayes. Hee was ve|rie contentious, and hated the Emperour Charles, and brought into Italie 1000. footmen and 2000. horsemen of the french nation, vnder the conduct of the Duke of Guise. Also hee brought into Italie an armie of Swizers. Notwithstanding the Emperour had sent to Italie the Duke de Albe, who had taken a great number of townes belon|ging to the Pope, before the Duke of Guise entred into Italie. And in the ende the Pope was well content to ac|cept conditions of peace, and to receiue backe againe the townes, which hee had lost in the warre.
In his time the Emperour resigned the Emperiall crowne to his Brother Ferdinand,  entered into a Monasterie, where hee concluded his daies: but the Pope neither approued nor ratified this election of Ferdinand, and Ferdinand on the other part made light account of the Coronation which his Predecessours had receiued from the Pope, and was obey|ed in Germanie, although he wanted the Popes blessing and coronation.
Pius 4.After him ruled Pius the fourth, who continued fiue yeeres, two months, and fifteene dayes. In his time the coun|cell of Trent (which was begun in the dayes of Paul the third) was finished.Queene Eliza|beth would not permit the Popes Ambas|sadors to enter into her Realme. He sent an Ambassadour to England to invite the learned men of that countrie to the Councell. but Queene Elizabeth would not permit the Popes Ambas|sadour to enter into her Realme. Likewise hee sent Ambas|sadours

to the Dukes of Germanie professing the reformed Religion. They entertained the Ambassadours honorablie, but sent them backe with this answere: that they marue|led how the Pope could send an Ambassadour to them, who acknowledged not his authoritie in such matters.
From the first meeting of this Councell to the dissoluti|on thereof, intervened the space of eighteene yeeres, but the time of meeting, consultation, and sitting, of the fathers of that Councell was onely the space of fiue yeeres, namely vn|der Paulus the third, two yeeres; vnder Iulius the third, one yeere; and vnder Pius the fourth, two yeeres.
In this Popes time the reformation of religion in Scotland began,The begin|ning of the re|formation of religion in Scotland. images were broken and burnt, altars cast downe, Mo|nasteries dimolished, and the masse abolished. The noble men, who were the principall authors of this reformation, were assisted by Elizabeth Queene of England, and defended from the intended persecution of the Frenchmen.
This Pope made a bloodie massacre in a Towne of Italie called Montalto,A Massacre in Montalto a towne of Italy by the Pope. against a number of Christian people secret|lie met together, for hearing of the word of God, so that one after another were drawne out of the house where they met and their throates cut with a knife in the hand of a bloodie executioner. In this massacre were martyred 80. persons and not one of all the number for the feare of death did forsake the true fayth of Christ.
The Islie of Malta invaded by the Turkes.In this Popes time was the Isle of Malta invaded by the Turkes, but they were strongly resisted, and left the siege of the Isle, after they had lost 23000. of their num|ber in that siege. The disputation of Poissne, and grieuous commotions in France after that disputation, began in this Popes time, whereof is spoken before.
Pius 5. The Isle of Cyprus taken by the Turkes.After him followed Pius the fift, and ruled seuen yeere. In this time the Isle of Ciprus was taken by Mustapha Captain of Selims armie, but with so great effusion of blood (for it is supposed that 80000. Turkes were slaine in the siege of Nicosia and famogusta two prin|cipall townes of the Isle) that Mustapha considering the

number that were slayn, violated his promise made to Bra|gadinus, chiefe captain and defender of the Isle of Cyprus, and cruelly martyred that valiant Captaine. This calamitie of Cyprus made the Venetians very much bent against the Turke, and they banded themselues with Philip King of Spaine, and with Pius the fift Bishop of Rome, by whose sup|port and assistance a Navie was set forth to the Sea;The battell of Lepanto. and a no|table victorie was atchieued vnder the conduct of Iohn de Austria at Lepanto, of which before.
Gregorie 13.Gregorius the thirteenth followed, and ruled thirteene yeeres, one month, and three dayes. Hee founded a new Colledge for Iesuits in Rome,A new Col|ledge for Ie|suits in Rome. and bestowed great revenues vpon it, chiestie for this cause, to be a Seminarie of Learned Schollers, to convert the countrie of Germanie to the Ro|man religion againe.
The massacre of Paris.In this Popes time fell out that horrible murther of Paris in the yeere of our Lord 1572. which was well liked of by the Pope, who also sent to Charles the ninth king of France the summe of 40000. Ducates to maintaine and set for|ward the warre against the Hugonits, as they called them.
The king of Portugall slaine.In his time Sebastian king of Portugal was slaine in Mauri|tania beyond the straits,  Philip king of Spaine who was his neerest kinsman, obtained the kingdome after him by strong hand, and by driuing out of the land Duke Anthonie whom the people had chosen to be king.A new Calen|dar set forth by Gregorie. Sixtus 5. He excommu|nicateth the king of Na|varre and Prince of Condie. The Pope in|tendeth a pro|cesse of excom+munication a|gainst Henrie the third. Gregorie also set forth a new Calendar, and corrected the olde Roman Calendar, which new alteration bred many contentions speciallie in Germanie.
To him succeeded Sixtus 5. who in the beginning of his Popedom, exco~municated the king of Nauarre  Prince of Condie: fearing that which indeede came to passe hereafter to witt that king H. 3. dying without children the kingdome shuld come to the house of Burboune. Likewise he inte~ded a processe of exco~municatio~ against H. the third king of France for slaying of the Cardinal of Lorain,  his brother the D. of Guise at Bloyes,  for detaining Captiues the Cardinal of Burbon  the Archb. of Lions. This proceeding of the Pope

encouraged others against the King, so that a Iacobin Fryer called Clement, came out of the towne of Paris, when the king was besieging it,K. Henry the third killed.  killed the King with an impoisoned knife, as hath beene declared before. Yet after the death of the King, when H. the fourth, King of Navarre succeeded to the kingdome, and besieged the towne of Paris, this Pope gaue no subsidue to those of the League, that were banded together against the King, fearing that if the King prevailed in France,Note. he would be a strong adversary to him, if he had supported his enemies: whether this was the cause as Onu|phrius writeth, or another that mooved him so to doe, yet this matter so displeased Philip King of Spaine, and the Lea|guers, that they were minded to haue made a solemne pro|restation against the Pope, if he had not prevented their in|tention, by excusing himselfe in the Consistory of his Car|dinals. Hee was a very vigilant and actiue Pope, and vsed often to make mention of that speech of Vespasian, That a Prince should die standing on his feet, meaning that a Prince should be vigilant, and ever doing some part of his calling. He died after he had ruled fiue yeeres, foure moneths, and three dayes, and left behinde him fiue millions of gold.
After him succeeded Vrbanus the seventh,Vibanus 7. and ruled on|ly thirteene dayes, for he died before his inauguration.
To him succeeded Gregorius the fourteenth,Gregorius 14. and ruled nine moneths, and ten dayes.
After him Innocentius the ninth,Innocentius 9. and ruled onely two moneths, and one day.
After him Clemens the eight:Clemens 8. The King of France absol|ved by this Clemens. hee absolved the King of France from the sentence of exco~munication, pronounced by Pope Sixtus the fift, against him. For that the Kings O|ratours in his name, had renounced and abiureed that doc|trine, which the King in his young yeeres had so long pro|sessed: and after they had accepted such conditions, as it pleased the Pope to impose to the King; namely, that hee should receiue the Councell of Trent,  make it be obeyed in all parts of his kingdom: also that hee should deliver the young Prince of Condie, a childe of nine yeeres old, to be

brought vp by Bishops or Abbots, in the Romane religion, and that hee should certifie by his letters, all Catholique Princes, of the abiuration of his former religion, with many other conditions, which were all accepted by the Kings Orators, and ratified by the King himselfe.


Of other Doctors.
IN this age God having compassion of the miserie of his poore sheepe, led out of the way by blinde-guides, raised vp many faithfull and learned men, by whose labours the clowds of grosse ignorance, was remooved: the vsurped au|thority of the Bishop of Rome, that was counted the mother Church of all others, was discovered to be the Synagogue of Satan.Martin Luther. Amongst whom Martin Luther a German borne in Islebia in the Countie of Mansfelt, steppeth forth as it were a couragious Captaine in the forefront of the army, whom God drew forth out of the very Cloyster of the Au|gustinian Monks, to be an instrument to reforme his house. The bitternesle of Pope Leo the tenth, and Pope Adrian the sixt, and their Ambassadours, who would not suffer the cor|ruption of the Romane Church to be pointed out afarre off in selling of pardons, made this man of God more diligent in searching, and more couragious in defending the truth of God; so that at last the Pope tooke it to heart, that his kingdome should fall,The Duke of Saxonie Mar|tin Luthers friend. if Martin Luther were not rooted out, yet the Lord raysed vp the Duke of Saxonie to bee his friend; by whose favourable assistance the Gospell was deeply rooted in Germany, and Martin Luther himself was preserved from the fury of all his enemies, till at last he dyed in Islebia, the towne of his nativity, in the yeere 1546. and in the 17. day of the moneth of February.
Iohn Calvin Preacher at Geneva.Iohn Calvin was borne in Noyen, a towne of Picardie, anno, 1509. the tenth day of the month Iuly, and was a Prea|cher of Christs Gospell, in Geneva, three and twenty yeers.

His learning, and painfull travels, in writing are knowne by his bookes. The blessing, accompanying his travels, is knowne by the reformation of many Churches in France, by his advice and counsell, as also of the kingdome of Scot|land. The power of the grace of God in him, is knowne by the malice of adversaries, who railed against him in his life|time, and after his death; as if hee alone, and none other had troubled the kingdome of Antichrist: and finally, his painfull travels, in teaching his owne flocke of Geneva, is knowne by the disease which he contracted, by great fasting, watching, writing, and teaching, whereof also hee dyed, anno, 1564. on the 27. day of May.
I passe by the rest of those learned and holy men of God, by whose labours the kingdome of Christ hath bene proro|gated in Europe, because their names, like as they are worthy of perpetuall remembrance, so likewise are they registred in sundry volumes, na|mely, by Theodorus Beza, in his booke intituled Icones.
Here endeth the second booke.






THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE HISTORY of the Church, containing a short summe of all the Heretiques and Heresies, which sprang vp since the dayes of Christ, vntill this present.

CENTVRIE I.
_AS it is the accustomed dealing of Satan, to pervert men by draw|ing them from the simplicity of Gods truth: So it standeth well with the iustice of God, to giue over men to strong delusions, who will not beleeue the truth of God. Therefore in the third head we are to speake of Heretiques, that sprang vp in this age.What heresie is. Heresie I count to be an opinion repugnant to the grounds of our

Christian faith, obstinately maintained by those that pro|fesse the name of Christ. As touching them who lead an e|vill life, yea and in effect deny the Sonne of God, by a pro|phane conversation, but maintaine an opinion that it is law|full so to doe, they may be counted Atheists, or carnall Gos|pellers, and not Heretiques.A difference betwixt carnal Gospellers, In|fidels, weake Christians,  Heretiques. Iewes and Turkes also who deny the divinity of Christ, because they doe not professe the Name of Christ, we call them Infidels, but not Here|tiques. And the Corinthians, who erred in some funda|mentall points of the Christian faith; yet seeing they main|tained not their error with obstinate mindes, but yeelded to the wholesome doctrine of Paul, no man doth count the Corinthians Heretiques, but infirme and weake Christians. And the Apostle himselfe writing to them, calleth them Gods building,1 Cor. 3.9. and Gods husbandry. But when these three things concurre together, that men professe the Name of Christ, and yet they maintaine opinions repugnant to the very grounds of true faith, and will not receiue instruction, but obstinately persevere in their error, they are to be coun|ted Heretiques. Of this number was Simon Magus the fa|ther of Heretiques,Simon Magus. who being confounded in Samaria, by the great power of God which appeared in the Ministery of Philip,Act 8. and of Peter; hee fled from the East to the West, and came to Rome, where hee prevailed so farre, in short time hee was counted a god, and an image was set vp for him, with this superscription, Simoni deo sancto, that is, to Simon an holy God. Thus the Romanes who, in the dayes of Ti|berius, refused to acknowledge the divinity of Christ, in the dayes of Claudius they honoured a Sorcerer,Note. and a sedu|cing Heretique with divine honours. He taught them who followed him, to fall downe before pictures and images, and in speciall to worship his owne image,Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 13.  14. and the image of He|lena, a certaine woman who accompanied him in his iour|ney form Asia to Rome.
After Simon sprang vp another Suppost of Satan, called Menander,Menander. like to his master Simon in many things; for he was both a Samaritane, and a Sorcerer, but in absurdity of

monstrous opinions, hee was farre beyond Simon: for hee sayd that the world was created by Angels, and that he him|selfe was sent from aboue to saue the world, and by vertue of his Baptisme, men should bee made immortall, euen in this world;Euseb. l. 3. c. 26. in such sort, that they should neither waxe old, nor taste of death. This heresie Epiphius compareth to Aspido-gorgon in Egypt, a great Serpent inclosed into a ves|sell of Earth, with many other Serpents;Simile. after hee hath de|voured all the rest of the Serpents, hee beginneth to gnaw his owne tayle for hunger,Epiph. contra heres. and to destroy himselfe: so did this heresie vndoe it selfe, by promising great things, which Menander could not performe, neither in himselfe, nor in others.
In this age also sprang vp Ebion,Ebion. who denyed the divini|tie of Christ, and sayd hee was onely a man, begotten be|tweene Ioseph and Marie, and that the observation of Moses Law was necessary to eternall life: his followers were called Ebionites, either by the name of their master Ebion, or else as Eusebius thinketh, for their poore and beggerly opinion they had of Christ,Euseb. l. 3. c. 27. supposing him only to be a man: for E|bion in the Hebrew language, signifieth one that is poore. These Ebionites damne all the Epistles of Paul, and count him an Apostate from the law, and they admit no part of the New Testament for Canonicke Scripture, except the Gos|pell of Matthew.
Cerinthus about the same time was the author of strange revelations,Cerinthus. which hee sayd hee received from the Angels, that after the resurrection from the dead, Christ should haue an earthly kingdome in this world: and that the subiects of Christs kingdome should eate and drinke, and marry, and keepe holy dayes, and offer sacrifices; for hee himselfe was a man given to fleshly lusts, and hee imagined that the plea|sures of Christs kingdome should consist in fulfilling the concupiscence of the flesh.Euseb. l. 3. c. 18.
Likewise in this age sprang vp the errour of the Nico|laitans, vpon this occasion,Nicolaitans Strom. 3. act. 6. as Clemens Alexandrinus doth write. One of the Deacons chosen by the Apostles to haue

the oversight of the poore, had a beautifull woman to his wife, and was accused of over much iealousie. To purge him selfe of all suspition of that fault, hee brought his wife into the midst of his brethren, and sayd, he was content that any man should marrie her. Of which words many tooke occasion to liue promiscuously like beasts, no man having his owne proper wife, but making them all common.
Howbeit, Nicolaus is sayd to haue lived himselfe in ma|trimoniall chastity,Euseb. l. 3. c. 29. contenting himselfe with his owne wife alone. Neverthelesse his foolish and vnadvised speech, were the occasion of a most wicked and damnable error of the Nicolaitans, whereof the Lord speaketh in the Revelation of Iohn,Apoc. 2. that he hated it. This is that heresie which Gregorie the seventh imputed to all married Priests, but with what equity, marriage ordained by God, and hono|rable among all men, can bee called an heresie, or hated of the Lord, Let the Christian Reader iudge.



CENTVRIE II.
IN this second Centurie Satha~ enuying the propagation of the Gospel, sent forth a pernicious swarme of heretikes, such as Saturninus of Antiochia,  Basilides of Alexandria, the one of them thorow Syria,  the other through Egypt dis|persed the venome of their heretical doctrine. To whom Eusebius addeth Carpocrates,Euseb. l. 4. c. 7. Gnostici. most properly counted the father of the heretikes called Gnostici, they receiued this name, because they professed a knowledge of darke and hid mysteries. The golden age of the Apostles  Euangelists was now spent,  false teachers tooke the greater incouragement to teach a doctrin of deuils, disallowing marriage  co~man|ding fornication,  practizing abominable  filthie things, which mine owne heart abhorreth to thinke vpon. What ne|cessity droue Epiphanius in particular to manifest to the world the detestable and execrable misteries of those Heretikes I cannot tel,Epiph. contra heres. One thing I know, that it shuld not be comely in my person to offend the chast eares of Christians by renuing the memorial of that beastly vnclea~es wherof Epiphanius ex|presly writeth.August. Index haeres ad quod vult deum. They were justly called Borboritae or Caenosi because they were filthily pollued in the mire of vnclea~nes. The followers of Carpocrates had in secrete places, images of gold  siluer, which they called the images of Iesus  there|with al the images of Pithagoras, Plato, Aristotle;  they wor+shipped the~ al.Epiph. contra heres. So that the worshipping of images  the ado|ratio~ of the image of Iesus himself is not a custome borrow|d fro~ the ancient fathers of the first 300. yeeres, but rather a custome borrowed fro~ old heretikes, such as Carpocrates and his follower Marcellina. By their vnhonest  filthy conuer|sation it came to passe, that the true professours of the Gos|pell were vilely slandered by persecuting Pagans, objecting to Christians the bankers of Thyestes, and the chambering of Oedipus as is said before.Euseb. l. 4. c. 7. This superlatiue degree of exces|siue vncleannesse could not indure long, because euery one of these Heretikes; Saturninus, Basilides, and Carpocrates, with augmentations of new inuented absurdities, changed the fa|shion and countenance of their error, and so in the ende it e|uanished.

But the beautie of the true Church of Christ,Note. euer like vnto it selfe, in grauitie, sinceritie, libertie, temperancie, and holinesse of vnreprouable conuersation, brightly shined among the Grecians and Barbarians.
Euseb. ibid.The countrie of Valentinus was vnknowne to Epiphanius. Hee was brought vp in learning in the schooles of Alexan|dria.Valentinus. In his foolish opinion of the pluralitie of Gods as well masculine as feminine, the multitude of heauens, and ages or eternities, which he called  thirtie in number, deepe|nesse and silence being beginning of all the rest. In this his opinion (I say) Epiphanius conjectureth that he hath followed Hesiodus in his Theogonia:August. Index haeres. yet the man, being ambitious, by permutatio~ of names, he would seeme to haue bin the author  finder out of these mysteries. Against whom Ireneus hath written fiue bookes wherein hee both discouereth and also refuteth the vanitie of his errour.Marcus Marcus one of his disci|ples a notable sorcerer inuented a new forme of Baptisme, to baptize in the name of the vnknowne father of all things,  in the name of the veritie the mother of all things, and in the name of him who descended vpon Iesus.Euseb. eccles. hist. l. 4. cap. 11. All the disciples of the schoole of Valentinus are called Gnostici with the forena|med Heretikes, Saturninus, Basilides, and Carpocrates, they all denied the resurrection of the body, and supposed that saluation did belong onely to the soule of man. Valentinus and his disciple Marcus, with Colorbasus and Heracleon, all their opinions were so intricate and obscure, that men of meane vnderstanding could not conceiue them, and men of deepe iudgement would not conceiue them, because they had not spitted out their braines (as Epiphanius speaketh) that is, their head was not so voide of wisdome as to hearken to the new inuented toyes of braine-sicke men.
Cerdon. Marcion.Cerdon and Marcion were authors of the opinion of two gods, or two beginnings, the one they called the authour all good things, the other the author of all euill things. They denied the verity of Christs humane nature and the veritie of his sufferings, whereupon of necessity followeth this conclu|sion, that we are not saued indeed, but only (to vse Marcions

own words) putativ, that is in fantasie or supposition. The death of Christ is the true ground of our saluation, if he only seemed to die,  died not indeed, then we seeme to be saued but are not saued indeed. They denied also the resurrection of the body.August. Index haeres. Marcion was justly called by Polycarpus Primo|genitus diaboli,Euseb. l. 4. c. 14. that is, the first borne of the deuill. This here|sie by the worke of that old serpent was dispersed in Italy, E|gypt, Palestina, Arabia, Syria, Cyprus, Thebaida, Persia,  in many other places. This is the cause wherefore Tertullian,  after him, Epiphanius inveighes so sharply against this pestile~t heretike Marcion. He was the inuenter of a strange and new custome in Baptisme, that after a man hath bin once baptized he may be baptized again the second time,  third time also. This he did to wash away  put in obliuio~ the foule fault of whordome committed by him. His father was a Preacher of Gods word in Pontus,  he himselfe had vowed chastity,  afterward polluted himselfe with whoredom,  was cast out of the church by his owne father,  when he came to Rome at the time when Hyginus (the ninth B. after the martyrdome of the two great Apostles) was lately departed this life, he was not admitted to the fellowship of the Church of Rome: there|fore he joyned himselfe to the fellowship of Cerdon and aug|me~ted his errour. To the two beginnings of Cerdon he added the third in this maner. First he said there was one supreme  vniuersall God,  him he called the good God, who crea|ted nothing that is in this world. Secondly there was a visi|ble God who was Creator and maker of all things, and third|ly there was the deuill as mid-thing betweene the visible  inuisible God.Epiph. contra haeres. No heresie sprang vp in this Centurie that was so vniuersally ouer-spred in many nations and countries as the heresie of Marcion was. So bent is the corrupt nature of man to follow a doctrine of lies, when it is coloured with a shew and pretence of reuerence toward God. For they fea|red to attribute the making of any thing that is euill to God, who is infinite in goodnesse. But this was needlesse feare, because creatures which now are euill, they haue not this wicked disposition by the creation of God, but by their

owne voluntarie defection from the first estate wherevnto God created them. Lucianus and Apolles were the disciples of Marcion whom many did follow, in so much that Marci|onists were called Lucianistae and Apelleiani. Neuerthelesse Apelles could not agree with his master Marcion in al things: for he graunted that Iesus Christ the son of the good God had a true body, yet not made of the substance of the Virgin Mary, but of the foure elements,  that he died  rose againe not putative as Marcion said, but truely and in very deede, yet he thought that this true body of Christ like as it was com|posed of the elements, so likewise after his resurrectio~ he dis|solued it into the foure elements, and afterward returned to heauen from whence he came. This errour Epiphanius abhor|reth for many great absurdities. First (saith he) did Christ build vp againe that Tabernacle which men destroyed, to the end that he himselfe incontinent after the building of it should destroy it againe by a dissolution of it into the ele|ments? Secondly if Christ dissolued his owne body, why would he not let his disciples see at least the relikes of his bo|dy resolued into elements, to the end they might haue hono|red the relikes of his dissolued body, as the woman came to the sepulchre with precious oyntments to haue honoured his dead body. Thirdly (saith he) Apelles speaketh of Christes body after his resurrection, that which neither Christ, nor his Apostles euer spake of that blessed body. This is the right way to vndoe heresies, to bring them to the right balance of the mouth of Christ,Note. and writings of his holy Apostles, and then heresies cannot consist and stand.
In the dayes of Antoninus and L. Verus the authors of the fourth persecution;Tatianus. Tatianus a Syrian came to Rome and was conuerted to the true faith by Iustinus Martyr, during whose lifetime hee maintained no errour openly: but af|ter the death of Iustinus hee became the authour of the sect Encratitae,Encratitae. who were so called, because they abstained from wine, eating of flesh and creatures quickned with a sen|sitiue life. They damned marriage and blasphemed the Epistle of PAVL.Euseb. l. 4 c. 28. This they did no doubt,

because Paul in his Epistles calleth the prohibition of marri|age, and the prohibition of meates appointed by God for the vse of men with thankesgiuing,1 Tim. 4. to be a doctrine of Deuils.
Montanus a man of Phrygia seduced two women,Montanus. Cataphryges. Iohn 14. Pris|cilla and Maximilla to leaue the companie of their hus|bands, and to be his prophetesses. He called himselfe the holy Spirit, whom Christ sent to instruct his disciples in all truth. He instituted lawes concerning fasting, and damned the second marriage, and affirmed that Paul gaue libertie to widowes to marrie,August. Index haeres. Euseb. lib 5. cap, 14 and 16. because hee knew the will of God, but onely in a part.
I purposely passe ouer the rable of obscure Heretikes, such as Ophitae, Caiani, Sothiani, and such like: of whom notwith|standing Epiphanius vouchsafeth to write at length, no doubt to manifest the corruption of mans nature, stouping some|times so basely, that not onely they hearken to the counsel of the old serpent the deuill, but also they worship the very in|strument of the Deuill, viz. the serpent, as these Ophitae did. Againe, some Heretikes magnified Cain and called him their father.Simil. And others gaue to Seth the honour due to Christ. So it commeth to pasle, that men destitute of the grace of God that commeth from aboue, are like vnto drunkards staggering on the right hand, and on the left hand, and fal|ling on their faces, and beating out their owne braines. Sometimes they extoll wicked men like vnto Cain, and fall at the left hand: at other times they praise good men like vn|to Seth with excessiue prayses, and with derogation of the glorie of Christ, and fall at the right hand. And at sometimes are so benummed, that they spare not to set the verie deuill  his instruments in the chaire of God, and fall like drun|ken fooles on their faces, and knocke out their owne braines.
Let no man maruell wherefore the name of Aquila a man of Pontus and Theodosion of Ephesus,Aquila and Theodosion ra|ther Apostats then Heretikes are not reckoned in the roll of Heretikes in this age. True it is that they once profes|sed the faith of Christ, and made defection againe, but this defection made not a diuision into the Church which is

the body of Christ, because they ioyned themselues to the vnbeleeuing Iewes, who vtterly denied the diuinity of Christ, and therefore of Christians became infidels rather then heretikes. Like as no man calleth the Emperour Iulian an heretike, but an apostate: so Aquila and Theodosian were notable apostates from the faith of Christ. How they labou|red to peruert by sinistrous translations of places of Scripture giuing cleare testimony of Christ who was borne of a virgin, Eusebius declareth.Euseb. l. . . . The translation of the Septuagints , that is, Behold a virgin shall conceiue, Isa. 7. was translated by them, , Behold a young woman shall conceiue. But this bad translation of Apostat christians and Proselites of the Iewes so well liked of the Iewish nation, could neuer take place in the Church of Christ: because the Propher Isaiah in that chapter is speaking of a miraculous signe which God will giue vnto his people to confirme their faith, such as is the birth of a virgin, which indeede is a miraculous worke, but the birth of a yong woman that hath an husband is no miracle.



CENTVRIE III.
_IVstly did Epiphanius compare an heretike to a Moul;Simile. a beast in quantitie litle, hr|king in subterraneall holes, and yet wor|king great harme to wel labored ground. neverthelesse when it hapeneth that this noysome and blind beast creepeth out of her hole, and runneth vpon the superfice of the earth, she is a ridiculous, wandering,  feeble, beast; she cannot see the hole out of which she hath crept forth, and she is easilie taken and slaine. Euen so heretikes so long as they luke in secret, they peruert the hearts of many simple and ignorant people: but when they set out their heads, and their doctrine is examined by the light of Gods euerlasting word,Note. they are found to be ridiculous  feeble beasts. In the for|mer Centuries by way of preterition I passed by many ob|scure heresies, the like order I intend God willing to keepe in this Centurie also.
The heretikes called Artotiritae who added vnto the admi|nistration of their Sacra~ent cheese vnto the bread.Artotiritae. Alogi. Alogi who reiected the writings of the holy Apostle Iohn, and said they were written by Cerinthus: although, the Euangelist Iohn of purpose, wrot the Historie of his Gospell against Ebion and Cerinthus.
Adamiani,Adamiani. who had their conventicles in subterraneal pla|ces called Hypocausta, because that vnder the place of their meetings, a fornace of fire was kindled to warme the place of their conventions: for they vnclothed themselues when they entered into it, and stood naked, both men and women, according to the similitude of Adam Eua before their fall.
Theodos who denied the diuinitie of Christ,Theodos. taking the

name of their sect, from a miserable man in Constantinople called Theodatus, who in time of persecutio~ for loue of tem|porall life, denyed the king of glory Iesus Christ, and when this filthie denyall was obiected to him as a reproach of a cowardly hart, he answered that he denied not God, but man; by this answere signifying that Christ was man only, and not God ma~ifested in our nature.Melchisedci|ani Bardesianistae Valesii. Melchisedeciani magnified Mel|chisedecke aboue Christ. Bardesianistae were but a branch of the heresie of the Valentinians  Gnostici, who denied the resurrectio~, as is already declared in the second Centurie. Va|lesii, who gelded themselues. Angelici, whose name was better knowne to Epiphanius then the original of their sect. Apstoli|ci, who would haue possessions,Apostolici. but reioyced in voluntarie pouertie,  detected marriage, giuing out a sentence against themselues, that they were vncleane, because they were pro|created by marriage. Origeniani,Origeniani.  Turpes. These were vile  filthy beastes, not abhorring from whordome, but from procreation of children, to the end they might seeme to bee chaste.Gen. 38.9.10 Epiphaen contra haeres. lib. 2. They were like to Onan the sonne of Iudah whom the Lord destroyed Al these heresies mentioned by Epiphan. I passe by almost with silence, because they were like vnto a|bortiue birthes,  continued not long to perturbe the peace of the Church.
Now concerning other Heretickes, by whose venemous doctrine the Church of Christ had great strife and pertur|bation. Artemon and Beryllus Bishops of Bostra in Arabia de|nied the diuinitie of Christ,Artemon. and affirmed that he was not exi|stent before hee tooke flesh of the Virgin. With Beryllus Ori|gen conferred, and reduced him backe againe to the true faith and therefore I set not his name in the Catalogue of Here|tikes, because he added not vnto the fault of his bad opinion an obstinate defending of the same.Eusebl. 6. c. 33. Helcesatae.
The heresie of Helcesaitae otherwise called Sampsei, be|cause of the short continuance of it, is scarce worthy to be re|ckoned. They mixed the religion of the Iewes, Gentiles, and Christians, together; but were more addicted to the sup|perstition

of the Iewes,Epiph contra eres lib. 2. then to any one of the other two. They reiected the writings of the Apostle Paul, and affir|med that a man who denyed the Lord with his mouth, in the time of persecution, if so be hee adhered to the faith in his heart, hee had committed no sinne. They carryed about with them a singular book, which they sayd was sent downe from heaven,Coment. Funt. in Chron. and they promised remission of sinnes to e|very man who would hearken to the words of that booke.
Novatus a Presbyter at Rome,The nature of contentious spirits. was a man of a contentious spirit, and men that are humorous, high-minded, and con|tentious, they are wise to doe evill, but they can do no good. Such a man was Novatus, who disquieted with schisme, and heresie, two of the most notable Churches in the world at that time, viz. Carthage and Rome, by giving out a rigo|rous sentence against those, who in the time of persecution had fallen, albeit they had repented after their fall, and all outward tokens of vnfained repentance had beene seene in them; yet his opinion was, that they should not be admit|ted againe to the fellowship of the Church. This opinion was not onely repugnant to the wordes of Isai, Ezech. 18. Mat. 11. and to innumerable moe places of sacred Scrip|ture, but also it was a foolish opinion, advancing the king|dome of the divell, and not the kingdome of God. For the two great wheels of the cart of the divell,Note. whereby he carry|eth men headlong to hell, are presumption and desperati|on: and merclesse Novatus teaching a doctrine that streng|thened not the knees of the weake, hee did what in him lay to moue sinners to despaire. There Cyprian Bishop of Car|thage, who excommunicated him, and Cornelius Bishop of Rome,Euseb. l. 6. c. 43. who did the like, with the advice of a graue and worthy Councell, gathered at Rome, are to bee counted wise men: because they endevoured timely to suppresse those errours that weakened the hearts of the children of God.
I reade of no heresie preceding the heresie of Arrius and Eutiches,Reasons why the Novatian heresie conti|nued long in the Church. that continued longer time in the Church of God, then the heresie of Novatus; partly, because it crept

in vnder pretence of zeale, to the glory of God, and vnder pretence of a detestation of sinne: partly also, because the Novatian Heretiques, in the question concerning the divi|nity of Christ,oto. ib.  p. . were conformable to the opinion of the true Church. Thirdly, because in the time of the Arrian perse|cion, the Novatians were banished, and troubled with no lesse hatfull malice and despite, then the members of the Church were: yea and the true Catholiques and Novatians, being companions of one and the selfe-same suffering, were content also to giue their liues one for another. And the foresayd author saith, Parmque abfuit quin coadunarentur, that is, They were neere-by vnited, and agreed together, to wit, the true Catholiques and Novatians. But what was the impediment that hindred their vnion? Reade the Hi|storie, and it shall not be found in the true Catholiques, but in the obstinacy and wilfulnesse of the Novatians. And so it falleth out at all times, that men who are the authors of heresies and schismes, are also the principall hinderers of the redintegration of the vnion of the Church.
The razing and demolishing of the Temple of the Nova|tians, in Cyzicum, a famous towne of Bithynia, together with the calamity of the people of Mantinium, a towne of Paphlagonia, cleerely prooveth, that the Novatian heresie continued vntill the dayes of Constantius the sonne of Con|stantine, an Arrian Emperour, and a persecuter of the true faith. The favour that they obtained in the dayes of Iulian, I passe over with silence. But in the dayes of the raigne of Theodosius, the Novatians by the Emperours edict, were per|mitted to haue publique conventions in Constantinople, to enioy such priviledges as other Christians had, and to pos|sesse the Oratories and Temples, wherein they were accusto|med to sere God. All this toleration and liberty was gran|ted to them by the good Emperour Theodosius, because in the head of Doctrine concerning the divinity of Christ, they damned the Arrians,Soc. l.. c. 10. Hi. Magd. Cnt. 3. . .  agreed with the Homousians. The Magdeburg historie saith, that this heresie continued in Constantinople to the time that it was conquered by the

Turkes, I haue written of this heresie at great length, to admonish all true Christians, that it is not enough to adhere to some points of the true faith,Note. and to suffer persecuion for righteousnes at sometimes, and to loue brotherly fellowship at some times, so that we are content to sacrifice our life for our brethren: all these things did the Novatians, and were favoured by the Emperour Theodosius, as is sayd, yet they were both Schismaticks  Heretiques, because they would be wiser then God, and debarre them, from the bosome of Christs compassions, whom Christ inviteth to come vnto him,Mat. 11.8 saying; Come vnto me all yee that are weary and laden, and I will ease you.
Let the example of the Novatians admonish men who stu|die to singularity, and to bring in new customes or opini|ons in the Church of God, to take heed that their opinions bee not repugnant vnto the written Word:Notes left, after they haue continved a long time, in the end they bee reiected as opinions, foolish, vaine, hereticall, and not agreeing with the Scriptures of God. His followers were called , or Puritans.Enseb, . c. 43 Hist. . cen. 3. cap.  Let this name rest in the bosome of Hereticks. And men who are not guilty of the faults, that were in the Novatians, if they be vndeservedly charged with this name given of old to Heretiques, let them say with humble hearts, that in one sense they are , because they are purged from sinne in the fountaine of the blood of Christ.1 Ioh. 3.. But in no other sense and meaning, can true Christians bee called , except onely in this, because their sinnes are freely forgiven in Christ, and God hath begun the worke of san|ctification in them, to bee a testimony that they are planted in the stocke of Christ, In this sense speaketh the Evange|list Iohn,Ioh. 15.3 , that is, Now are yee cleane, through the word that I haue spoken vnto you.
The heresie of Sabellius began to shew it selfe vnto the world,Sabellians about the yeere of our Lord 257. vnder the raigne of Gallus. It was set forth by Nortus in Ptolemaida, after|ward by Hermogenes, and Prazeas, and last it was propagated

by Sabellius the disciple of Noetus. Alwaies the heresie ra|ther taketh the name from the disciple, then from the ma|ster. They confessed that there was but one God onely, but they denyed that there were three distinct persons in this one Godhead, viz. the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost. By this their opinion, they confounded the two Greeke words,  and , as if there were no difference betwene them. No man dare presume to say, that in God there are three distinct substances, therefore Sabellius and his adherents sayd, that there were not three distinct substances or persons in the Godhead, but the three names of the Fa|ther, Sonne, and holy Ghost, were given to one person on|ly, but pointed not out distinction of persons or substances in the Godhead.Ruffin. l. 1. c. 29. By this opinion they were compelled to grant, that it was the Father who cloathed himselfe with our nature, and dyed for our sinnes, and they were called Patrispassani, because their opinion imported that the Fa|ther suffered.
In the raigne of Gallienus, and about the yeere of our Lord,Nepotiani. 264. a certaine Bishop in Egypt, called Nepos, began to affirme, that at the later day the godly should rise before the wicked, and should liue with Christ heere in the earth, a thousand yeeres, in abundance of all kinde of delicate earthly pleasures. The ground of this errour, was the mis|vnderstanding of the words of the Revelation of Iohn, chap. 20. vers. 5.6. In refuting of this heresie, Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, bestowed his travels with good successe: for hee disputed against Coracion, a man professing this errour in Arsenoitis, a place of Egypt, whom hee refuted in pre|sence of many brethren, who were auditors of that disputa|tion, for the space of three dayes, from morning till evening. So that in the end Coracion yeelded,Euseb l. 7 c. 24. and promised that hee should not maintaine any such opinion in time to come.
About that same time, that is, in the time of the raigne of Gallienus,Samosatenus. Claudius, and Aurelianus: Paulus Samosatenus Bishop of Antiochia, a pestilent fellow, denyed the divinity of the Sonne of God, and affirmed that Christ obtained the

name of the Sonne of God, through his vertuous behaviour and patient suffering; but he was not naturally and truely the Sonne of God, begotten of the substance of the Father. His life correspondent to his doctrine, was wicked and pro|phane. He was so covetous of vaine-glory, that he built vn|to himselfe in the Church a glorious seat, according to the similitude of a princely throne, and from this seat hee spake vnto the people, whom he was accustomed to reproue with sharpe words, if they had not received his words with cheer|full acclamations and shoutings, such as were wont to bee vsed in Stage-playes. The Psalmes also that were sung in Church,Euseb. l. 7c. 30. to the praise of God, hee abrogated, and was not ashamed to hire women, to sing his owne praises in the Con|gregation of the Lords people. For this his damnable doc|trine and lewd life, he was most iustly deposed by the Coun|cell convened at Antiochia, and excommunicated by all Christian Churches in the whole world, and was so detested by all good men, that Frmilius Bishop of Caesarea in Cap|padocia, and Dionysius Alexandrinus, who for his olde age might not travell, and be present at the Councell of Antio|chia, yet they both damned the Heretique Samosatenus, by their letters sent to the Congregation of Antiochia, but not to the Bishop thereof, because hee was not worthy that any man should salute him, either by word or writ.
Manes a Persian,Manes, and Manichei. otherwise called Manicheus, a man fu|rious and mad, answering well vnto his name, set forth the venome of his heresie, in the time of the raigne of Diclesian, a man both in speech and manners, rude and barbarous, in inclination divelish:Euseb. l. 7. c. 31. yet hee durst to call himselfe the holy spirit, as Montanus had done before, and to represent Christs actions in chusig vnto him twelue disciples, whom hee sent forth to propagate his errors, into diverse parts of the world. His heresie contained a masse, or venomous composition of old extinguished errors, which hee renued and massed to|gether; such as the error of Cerdon and Marcion, concerning two beginnings. The error of Encratitae, in prohibition of meates, which God hath appointed for the vse of man with

thanksgiving, specially flesh and wine. Hee vtterly reiected the old Testament, as many other Heretiques had done be|fore him. Hee ascribed not sinne to the free will of man, and his voluntary defection from the estate of his first crea|tion, but to necessity, because mans bodie was made of the substance of the Prince of darknes. This was that heresie wherewith Augustine was infected before his conversion, but the Lord who brought forth light out of darknesse, and made Paul, sometime a Persecuter, to be a Preacher of his Gospell, and Cyprian a Sorcerer, to be a worthy Preacher and Martyr: this same gracious Lord, I say, in the multi|tude of his vnspeakeable compassions, drew Augustine out of this filthy myre of abhominable heresie, and made him liste vnto a bright starre, sending forth the beames of light to comfort Gods house. The opinion of Manes concerning the creation of the world, and the creation of man, the ma|nifestation of Christ in our nature, rather in shew and ap|pearance, then in verity; and the horrible abhomination of their vile Eucharist, no man can be ignorant of these things, who hath read but a little of the bookes of Augustine, writ|ten against the Maniheans. In the end, like as Manes ex|ceeded all the rest of the Heretiques in madnesse of foo|lish opinions: even so the Lord pointed him out among all the rest, to be a spectacle of his wrath and vengeance. For the King of Persia hearing of the fame of Manes,Gods iustice against Manes. sent for him to cure his sonne, who was deadly diseased: but when hee saw that his sonne died in his hands, hee cast him into prison, and was purposed to put him to death: but he esca|ped out of prison, and fled to Mesopotamia. Neverthelesse the King of Persia vnderstanding in what place Manes did lurke, sent men who pursued him, tooke him and excoria|ted his body,Soc. l. 1. c. 22. and stopped his skin full of chaffe, and set it vp before the entry of a certaine Citie of Mesopotamia. If a|ny man bee desirous to haue greater knowledge of this re|markeable Heretique, both in respect of his life and death, hee may reade the fore-mentioned chapter of the Ecclesiasti|call history of Socrates, and he shall finde, that the first man

called Manicheus, who renued the error of two beginnings, was a man of Scythia. He had a disciple, first called Buddas, afterward Terebynthus, who dwelt in Babylon. This man Terebynthus, was the composer of these bookes which Ma|nes gaue out vnder his owne name. Manes was but a slavish boy, bought with money by a woman of Babylon, in whose house Terebynthus had lodged, and shee brought vp the boy at schoole: his name was Curbicus when he was bought, but when this woman died, shee left in legacie to Curbicus, the money and bookes of Terebynthus, and he went from Baby|lon to Persia, changed his name, and called himselfe Ma|nes, and set forth the bookes of Terebynthus,Note. as if they had beene composed by himselfe, so that he added vnto the rest of his villanies, this fault also, that he was from his very youth a dissembling and deceitfull fellow.
After Manes,Hieracitae. sprang vp Hierax, who spake of the Father, and the Sonne, as of two lights different in substance. Hee damned mariage, denyed the resurrection of the bodie, and excluded infants from the kingdome of God. Marke in this Catalogue of heresies of the first three hundred yeeres,Epiph. contra heres. Hist. Magd. how many of the divels trumpeters sounded the doctrine of the prohibition of marriage. The Nicolaitans, Gnostici, En|cratitae, Montanistae, Apostolici, Origeniani, called Turpes,Note. Manichei, and Hieracitae. Satan ha|teth mariage, to the end that his king|dome might be advanced by for|nication, and all kind of vncleannesse.



CENTVRIE IV.
_OLd heresies before mentioned, such as the heresies of the Novatians, Sabellians, and Manicheans, did more hurt in this Centu|rie, then in the time wherein they were first propagated; as appeareth by the books and Sermons of learned Fathers, seriously insisting to quench the flame of hereticall doctrine, which was kindled before their time.
Meletiani.In this Centurie the plurality of Heretiques did most mightily abound.Soc. l. 1. c. 6. Theod. l. 1. c. 8. Aug de heres. Theod. l. 1. c 9. Meletius a Bishop in Thebaida, was deposed by Peter Bishop of Alexandria (who suffered mar|tyrdome vnder Dioclesian) because hee was found to haue sacrificed to Idols. After his deposition he was factious and seditious, raysing vp tumults in Thebaida, and practizing tyranny against the chaire of Alexandria: and his disciples were found to haue communicated with the Arrians. The Councell of Nice suffered Miletius to enioy the name of a Bishop without power of ordination.
Arriani.In the yeere of our Lord 324. sprang vp Arrius a Presby|ter in Alexandria, who denyed that the Sonne of God was begotten of the substance of the Father, but that hee was a creature, and made of things not existent, and that there was a time wherein the Sonne was not.Theod. l. 1. c. 4. Alexander Bishop of A|lexandria, dealt with him to reclaime him from his hereti|call opinions: but his travels were spent in vaine. There|fore Alexander was compelled to vse the last remedie, to de|pose and excommunicate Arrius, with his complices, to wit, Achilles, Euzoius, Aethalus, Lucius, Sarmata, Iulius, Mnas, Arrtus alter, and Helladius. This excommunica|tion had allowance by the Bishops of Thebaida, Pentapolis,

Lybia, Syria, Lycia, Pamphylia, Asia, Cappadocia, and ma|ny other places. But Arrius an head strong heretike was in|corrigible: neither the letters of the good Emperour Con|stantine, nor the trauelts of Osius Bishop of Cordubae, could worke any amendment in him. He laboured to fortifie him|selfe in his hereticall opinion, especially by the assistance of Eusebius B. of Nicomedia, a perilous  deceitful man. Arrius was condemned by the Councel of Nice,  was banished by the Emp. Constantine. Albeit he was reduced againe from ba|nishment by the meanes of Constantia, the Emp. sister,  of an Arria~ presbiter, whom she co~mended to the Em. her brother when she was concluding her life:Socrat. l. 1. c. 38 Yet the Lord punished the insolent pride of this heretike, with a shamefull  vnquoth death, as hath bin already declared. This heresie was propa|gated by Constantius, by Iustina, and her sonne Valentinian the second, by the Emp. Valens, and by the kings of Gothes and Vandalles. The principall defenders of the heresie were Eu|sebius B. of Nicomedia,Socrat. l. 2. c. 18 Menophantes, B. of Ephesus, Theogonius B. of Nice, Vrsatius B. of Sygdonia, and Valens B. of Mursa, in vpper Panonia, Theonas B. in Marmarica, Secundus B. of Pto|lemaida in Aegypt, Maris B. of Chalcedon, Narcissus B. in Cilicia, Theodorus B. of Hearaclea in Thracia, and Marcus B. of Irenopolis in Syria. In the number of most impudent Ar|rian Bishops, was Ishyras, the chiefe accuser of Athanasius, to whom the Arrians gaue the wages of iniquity, and ordai|ned him B. of Mareotis:Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 25. The ouer-throwing of the holy Table, the breaking of the holy Cup, the burning of the holy bookes, the slaughter of Arsenius,  many other accusations were all forged against Athanasius by Ishyras, for hope of re|ward. Eulalius, Euphronius, Placitus, Stephanus, Leo~tius, Spado, and Eudoxius, Bishops of Antiochiaall these were defenders of the Arrian heresie, with many others of whom I will haue occasion to spake hereafter.
Albeit Anomaei were a branch of the stocke of the Arrians,Anomaie. yet they differed from other Arrians in this, that they abhor|red from the word , which other Arria~s embraced. The principall authors of this heresie were Acatius

Ennomius, and Aetius, whereof it came to passe, that some called them Acatiani, others Eunomiani, and some Aetiani. Acatius in the Councell of Seleucia manifested the Hipocri|sie of his deceitfull speeches,Sozom. lib 4. cap. 22. because in his books he had cal|led the Son of God , that is of like Substance with the Father: he was demaunded in what sence he had so writ|ten? he answered, that the Sonne of God was like vnto the Fa|ther in will, but not in substance. Eunomius bishop of Cyzi|cus in Bythynia, was the inuenter of this miserable Heresie of Anomaei, a man who delighted in multitude of wordes as many Heretikes doe.Sozom lib. 6. cap. 26. Sozomen blames him for altering the custome of thriee dipping the water in Baptisme. The peo|ple of Cyzicus complained to the Emp. Constantius,Theod. l. 2. c. 29. of the bad and reprobate opinion of Eunomius. The Emperour was offended against Eudoxius bishop of Constantinople who had placed him in Cyzicus.Basil contra. Eunomium. Numb. 25. ver. 14.15. Hereof it came to passe, that Eu|doxius (who was of that opinion himself, but durst not auow it) sent secret aduertisement to Eunomius to flie out of Cy|zicus. Basilius Magnus in his fiue bookes written against Eu|nomius, as it were filled with the spirit of Phineas, who with one speare killed Ombri and Cosbi: euen so Basilius with one penne, confounded both Eunomius, and his master Atius. This Aetius was a Syrian, admitted to the office of a Deacon by Leontius Spado: he spake vnquoth things of the Trinitie, and was justly called an Atheist. The Emp. Constantius, albeit he loued other Arrians,Theod. l. 2. c. 28. yet he disliked Anomei, and procured his deposition and excommunication, by the Bishops who came to Constantinople from Ariminum and Seleucia. Eu|doxius first Bishop of Germanitia, in the confines of Cilicia, after Bishop of Antiochia,  last Bishop of Constantinople, a hunter for preheminence of place: he was a fauourer of the sect of Arrians,Theod. l. 2. c. 25. called Anomei, or : yet he had the heart of a beast, for neither would he embrace the true faith, neither durst he defend the lye whereunto his heart was in|clined. But in the Councell of Constantinople, holden af|ter the Councels of Ariminum and Seleucia, he transferred all the blame vpon Atius, whom the Emperour banished: so

that it is a strange thing,Theod. l. 2. c. 27. that this errour should haue had the name also from such a feeble patron as Eudoxius was, to be called the errour of Eudoxiani.
Macedonius,Macedoniani, or . rather by the authoritie of the Emp. Constan|tius, then by the consent of the people, was made Bishop of Constantinople. Paulus lawfull Bishop of Constantinople, was banished to Cucusus, a towne of Armenia, and there hee was strangled by the Arrians, also. 3150. of the people were slaine and troden vnder feete, at his violent entrie. This bloo|dy Tyrant denyed the diuinitie of the holy Ghost. He was de|posed by the Emperours procurement,Soc. l. 2. c because hee durst presume at his owne hand to transport the bones of the Emp. Constantine from one Church to another. His followers were abhorred more then any other branch of the Arrian heresie,Soc. l. 4. c. 12. for their inconstancie. They sent Messengers to Liberius Bishop of Rome, and consented in all points to the Nicene Faith: but afterward, like vnto dogges, they retur|ned to their vomit a gaine. Hee was damned, as a notable heretike, by the second Generall Councell gathered at Con|stantinople, by the Emperour Theodosius, Anno. 386. He died in a little Village neere to Constantinople, and Eudoxius obtained his place.
Photinus Bishop of Sirmium in Illyria,Photiniani. was the Disciple of Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra in Galatia: These two renewed both the heresie of Sabellius and Samosatenus, and augmen|ted the blasphemous opinion of Samosatenus, with this addition.Secrat. l. 2. c. 19 That the kingdome of Christ was not euerlasting, but it had a beginning, when he was borne of the Virgin,  should haue an end at the latter day. This heresie hath the name from the disciple, and not the master, in regard that Marcellus continued not so obstinately in his errour, as did Photinus his disciple, but renounced his errour,  was recei|ued into the fellowship of the Church,Hist. Magd. cent. 4. cap. 11. in the Councell of Sardica: but Photinus was deposed at the Councell of Sirmium, and banished by the Emperour Constantine Neuer|thelesse, after his deposition  banishment, he continued ob|stinately in his errour,  wrote bookes both in Latine and

Greeke, in defence of his heresie: whereby his name became infamous, and he was counted the author of this heresie.
Audaei, or Anthopomor|phitae.Audaeus was a man of Syria, vnder the raigne of Valentinian, and his brother Valens: He published an errour, That God was like the similitude of a mans bodie. This errour hee conceiued through wrong vnderstanding of the words of Scripture, wherein it is said, Let vs make man in our owne Image,Gen. 1. verse 21. according to our likenesse. With this errour many vn|lerned Aegyptian Monkes were intangled. They pretended great innocencie and chastitie in their liues, and separated themselues from the societie of the Church,Theod. compend. beresium. couering their impietie with this pretext, that they saw vsurers and vncleane persons tolerated in the Church.
Messaliani.About this time, saith Theodoretus, that is, in the dayes of Valentinianus and Valens, sprang vp the heresie of Messaliani. Albeit this name be vnquoth, yet the Greeke names giuen vnto this heresie are more significatiue: they were called , because they counted prayer the onely exercise necessary to the children of God, euen as if a man could talke with God by prayer,Note. before he hath first heard God tal|king with him by the preaching of the Word.
Likewise they were called , that is, men rauished in the spirit,Theod lib. 4. cap. 11. after long continuance in prayer. When they were transported, and out of their wits, then they supposed, that the holy spirit was sensibly infused into them, whereby their bodies were made free of all perturbation, and their soules were auerted from all inclination to euill, in such sort, that they had no neede of fasting to subdue their bodies, nor of Doctrine to restraine the disordered affections of their soules.Theod. ibid. This Pestilent heresie was ouerspred in many places: but it was mightily suppressed by Letoius B. of Meleti|na, Amphilachius B. of Iconium in Lycaonia,  Flania~us B. of Antiochia, who with great dexterity drew out a co~fession out of the mouth of Adelphius, an aged man,  a propagator of this heresie in Edessa. This Heresie, albeit it had many pa|trons, such as Dadoes, Sabas, Adelphius, Hermas, Simeo|nes, yet from none of them it receiued the name, but

rather from the actions and passions wherevnto they in|clined.
Apollinaris Bishop of Laodicea in Syria,Appollinaris. gloried in the quickenesse of his wit, and delighted to make contradiction to euery thing that any man could speake: and so it came to passe (as Ruffinus writeth) Heresim ex contentione generauit,Ruffin. l. 2. c. 20. that is to say, Through contention he procreated an heresie: affir|ming that in the dispensation of Christes Incarnation, hee assumed the body of a man onely, but not the soule of a man because his diuinitie supplied the place of his soule. And when hee was argued by euident places of Scripture, that Christ in his humane nature was a perfect man, hauing not onely a body, but also the soule of a man: as when he sayd, His soul was heauy vnto the death:Marke, 14. verse, 34. left he should haue seemed to bee vtterly conuinced and ouercome: hee confessed that Christes bodie was quickned with a naturall life: but the diuinitie o
f Christ was in place of a reasonable soule. This heresie was damned in Councels conueened at Rome, Alex|andria, and Constantinople. Hee augmented the schisme at Antiochia, where there had beene alreadie three facti|ons, to wit, Eustatiani, Meletiani, and Pauliniani. Now Apollinaris dwelling in Laodicea a towne of Syria,Theod lib. 5. cap. 3. neere approaching to Antiochia: hee was the author of the fourth faction. In the dayes of Iulian hee compiled histories of Scripture, in Greeke Poesie. In the dayes of Valentinian and Gratian,Itrom in Catal. Theod l. 5 c. 4. Sozm. lib. 6. cap. 25. he defended his Heresie. In the dayes of the Empe|rour Theodosius he concluded his life. His sonne, in name, learning, and bad vse of excellent gifts, was like vnto his fa|ther. Vitalius presbiter in Antiochia was a serious defender of the heresie of Apollinaris, in so much,
 that the followers of Apollinaris were called Vitaliani.
Donatus was a Bishop in Numidia,Donatista. who contended with vnsupportable hatred against Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage, challenging him,August Epist. 152. that he had receiued ordination from Foelix Altungensis, who was proditor: that is, who in time of persecu|tion had deliuered the booke of holy Scripture to be burnt: or, as others say, because hee admitted to an Eccle|siasticall

office, a Deacon, who had committed the like fault. The cause of Cecilianus was oft agitat before the Councell of Carthage, before Miltiades B. of Rome, before the Coun|cell of Arles, and by the Emp. Constantine: but the Dona|tistes at all times succumbed in probation. Therefore they were enraged, because they could not accomplish their wic|ked designes against Cecilianus:  they fell from the vnity of the Church. Inueterate schismes oft times turne to Heresies. So the Donatists in the end were defenders of Hereticall opi|nions: namely, that the Catholicke church was no where els to be found, but only in that corner of Africke, wherein they themselues dwelt: and that Baptisme was not effectual, except it had bin ministred by one of their societie. Of all the bran|ches of this heresie,August de heres. ad quod vult Deum. Circu~celliones was the most reprobate branch: a people cruel  sauage, not only against others, but also against themselues, throwing themselues headlong fro~ high places, or casting themselues in fire and water: and this sort of death they counted Martyrdome. The diuersitie of names wherewith this Heresie was pointed out, clearely de|clares, that the Donatistes wanted not a great number of fa|uorers: for they were called Parmeniani, Rogatistae, Cirtenses, and Maximianistae. Against this Heresie, and the Heresie of the Pelagians, August. Bishop of Hippo, contended with mightie grace, as likewise against the Heresie, of the Mani|cheans, wherein he had bin nursed himselfe.
Collyridiani.Collyridiani were a sort of superstitious people, who wor|shipped the Virgin Marie, the mother of our Lord, with di|uine adoration, and with baking little pasties (which in the Greeke language are called ) which they offered to the Virgin Marie,Epiph. contra beres. as to the Queene of Heauen. Epiphanius counts them Heretikes, because the Virgin Marie, albeit shee be a blessed woman, yet is shee not God.
Many late heresies are nothing els, but a renewing of old  decayed heresies.Priscillianistae. Such was the heresie of Priscillianus, a man of Noble birth in Spaine, very eloqvent, rich temperate, with great show of humilitie, who easilie insinuated himselfe in the fauour of the people. In his youth hee was in|clined

to Magical Arts,Hist. Magd. Cent. 4. cap. 11. and renewed the heresie of Gnostici, who disallowed Marriage, and commended fornication. Some Bishops of Spaine were entangled with this heresie: such as Iustantius, Salvianus, and Helpidius, whom Adygimus Bishop of Corduba damned in a Cou~cell gathered at Caesar|augusta. This was done in the dayes of the Emp. Gratianus Valentinian. The great Citie of refuge to heretikes, was to ad|dresse themselues to the Bishop of Rome, and to leane vnder his shadow: But Damasus, who was bishop of Rome at this time, would not admit these Heretikes to his presence: Nei|ther would Ambrose Bishop of Millane, to whom they ad|dressed next, in any wise accept of them: when al other means failed them, last of al with buddes and bribes they sollicited the Emp. cubiculers,  were sent backe againe to enjoy their owne places. Neuerthelesse, God suffered not Priscillianus to escape punishment, for hee was conuict of sorcery, and was punished to the death, after the death of Valentinian the se|cond, whether by Maximus an vsurper of the Emperiall So|ueraintie, or by Theodosius, I am not certaine.
Lucifer was Bishop of Calaris in Sardinia.Luciferiani. He was present at the Councell of Millan, and was banished by Constantius, because hee would not consent to the deposition of Atha|nasius. Hee was reduced from banishment by the Empe|rour Iulian.Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 13. Hee visited Antiochia a towne miserably di|stracted with Schismes, and by ordaining Paulinus Bi|shop of Antiochia, hee rather augmented then lessened the schisme: he perceiued that this his fact was disproued by Euseb. Bishop of Vercellis, and many others, therefore he and his followers, did not communicate with such as disproued the ordination of Paulinus. This seemeth rather to be recko|ned in the catalogue of schismes,Theod. compend. heresium. then of heresies: and Theod. disprouing Lucifer, saith, that hee made faith to be , but he saith not , that is, a weapon of contentions, but not a weapon of heresie.
These who supposed,Antidicomari|anitae. that after the Natiuitie of the Lord, the Virgin Marie companied with her husband Ioseph, and did beare children to him, were called Antidi|comarianitae.

In this opinion was Helvidius,August de haeres. a man more cu|rious then wise. The opinion of the Fathers of the Church, not repugnant to Scripture, was this, That like as no man did lie in the sepulchre wherein Christ was buried before him, Euen so in the wombe wherein hee was conceiued, no man was conceiued after him: so the Fathers tooke the words of the Apostolicke symbole, , as if it had beene said, , that is, borne of Mary a perpetuall Virgin. In holy scriptures by the brethren of our Lord is meant the kinsmen of the Lord according to the flesh, to which exposition the consent of Ancient and Neotericke writers for the most part agreeth.
MetaugismouisaAugustine cites out of Philaster a sort of heretikes, cal|led Metangismonitae, whose heresie sounded to this. That the sonne is in the Father, according to the similitude of a little vessel comprehended within the compasse of a greater vessel:  in the Greeke Language signifieth a vessell,Note. and  signifieth the entering of one vessel within ano|ther, which in our language cannot be expressed by one word, as it is in the Greeke.
Seleuciani or Hermiani.From Seleucus Hermias this heresie had the name: where they dwelt, or in what Emperours daies this heresie was pro|pagated, August. maketh no mention: their opinions were most abominable: namely, that the Masse, whereof God crea|ted the elements, was coeternall with him: and that the An|gels, and not God, created the soules of men: that Christ in his ascension vncloathed himselfe of the flesh of man, and left it in the Globe of the Sunne. They receiued not baptis|me by water. They denyed the resurrection of the dead, supposing that by new generations, one succeeding to ano|ther, that is performed which in Scripture is written concer|ning the resurrection.
The rest of heresies of this age, were all obscure, and had few followers,Proclianitae. such as Proclianitae, who denied that Christ was come in the flesh:Patriciani. Patriciani, who affirmed, that the body of man was formed by the deuil,Ascitae.  not by God: Ascitae, who carried about with them the new vessels, to represent

that they were vessels filled with the new wine of the Gos|pell: Patalorynchitae,Patalorynchitae, or . Aquar. foolish men, who counted it religion to stop their breath with their fingers, and to vtter no intel|ligible speech: Aquarij, who in stead of wine receiued wa|ter in the holy Sacrament. The beginning of this errour seemes to haue beene in the dayes of Cyprian. Coluthiani denyed,Coluthiani. that any evill, either of sinne or punishment, came of God.Floriani. Floriani, who by the contrary affirmed, that God created creatures in an evill estate. The eight heresies which Philaster co~memorates with|out any name, either taken from the Author, or from the heresie it self, Augustine scarcely will rec|kon them into the roll of heresies.



CENTVRIE V.
Pelagiani._PElagius, Brito, and his followers, Iulianus, and Coelestius, mantained damnable here|sies, in the dayes of Arcadius and Honori|us. Their pernitious heresies may be ea|sily knowne by the learned writings of Augustine, who directly impugneth the Pelagians, and by the Councels of Arau|sio in France, and Milivetanum in Numidia, which damned the error of the Pelagians. They affirmed that men by na|ture were able to fulfill the whole lawe of God, howbeit more easily and better, if they were supported by the grace of God. They denyed moreover, that there was originall sinne, and sayd, the posterity of Adam were sinners by imi|tation of Adams sinne, but had not received sinne by carnall propagation. They said moreover, that children had not need to be baptized for remission of sinnes, and that godly fathers in Scripture, when they confessed their sinnes, they did it rather for example of humility, then for necessity and guiltinesse of sin. This pestilent heresie was spread abroad in many places, but chiefly in the Isle of Brittaine, because Pe|lagius being driven from Rome, came to the Isle aforesaid, and infected it with his error, but by the diligent travels of Germanus Altisidorensis, and Palladius, sent from Coelestinus Bishop of Rome, both England and Scotland were freed from that error.
Nestorius.Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, lived in the dayes of Theodosius the second. Hee was an eloquent man, but his head wanted braines, when hee spake against the perso|nall vnion,Evag. l. 1. c. 7. of the divine and humane nature of Christ. He denyed that the Virgin Marie could bee called ,

or Deipara, that is, the mother of God, but only , that is the mother of Christ. Hee was condemned as an Heretique in the Councell of Ephesus, and banished by the Emperour Theodosius, to the wildernesse of Thebaida, and was plagued by God with extraordinary iudgements, as other Heretiques had beene before:Note. for his blasphemous tongue was consumed with wormes, and rotted in his mouth, and so hee ended his wretched life most mise|rablie.
Eutyches was an Abbot in Constantinople:Eutychiani. hee fell into an errour farre different from the heresie of Nestorius: for Nestorius would not grant the personall vnion of two na|tures in Christ,Euag. l. 1. c. 9. but Eutyches confounded the natures, and would haue the humane nature so swallowed vp by the immensitie of the divine nature in Christ, that there was nor two natures in Christ, but one onely, to wit, the di|vine nature. He was condemned in the Councell of Chal|cedon, as will bee declared hereafter (God willing). This heresie much perturbed and troubled the Church, in re|spect of the fautors, and favourers thereof, both in Policie and Church. Chrysaphius, a principall ruler in the Court of Theodosius the second: Basiliscus and Anastatius Empe|rours, were favourers of this heresie, and of Bishops not a few; such as Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria: Timotheus Ae|lurus, who entred into the chaire of Alexandria like vnto a Wolfe, with sheading the blood of Proterius the true shep|heard, and Petrus Moggus Bishoppe of Alexandria, and Petrus Gnapheus Bishoppe of Antiochia: all these maintai|ned the heresie of Eutiches a long time. And now appea|reth the fruit of humane wisedome, who chose Patriarches to suppresse heresies, and yet they are the principall main|tainers of it. Likewise a multitude of wicked men, special|ly Monkes cryed out against the decrees of the Councell of Chalcedon (which were assembled by the authority of the Emperor Martianus) these were called ,Note. because they had no principall head, vpon whom they depended:

all these countenanced the heresie of Eutiches, whereby it became the more pernicious to the Church.
It is to be vnderstood that old heresies, such as the here|sie of the Manicheans, and the heresie of the Donatists sprung vp of later time, were in vigour and strength as yet, whereby it came to passe, that Augustine is compelled to write in his time against many Manicheans, such as Fau|stus, Fortunatus, Felix, Secundinus; and against Do|natists, such as Gandentius, Parmenianus, Emeri|tus, Ticonius: so that it is evident, that the Church in this Centurie, and in the former, was chiefly perturbed with the multitude and diversitie of heresies.



CENTVRIE VI.
_IN this and the next Centurie, I finde, that the error of Eutyches is like vnto a roote of bitternesse,Simile.. which budding out with new branches not seene before, but foste|red with the venomous sappe of the old roote, that seemed to bee abolished, did mightily perturbe the Church. The er|ror of the Monothelites was but a branch of the error of Eu|tyches, of which hereafter.
In this Centurie a great number of people, especially of Monkes, favouring the heresie of Eutyches, spake against the Councell of Chalcedon: These were called , be|cause they had no principall head,Acephali. vpon whom they depen|ded, and they were anterior to Anthimus, or Anthimius Bi|shop of Constantinople, and to Theodosius Bishop of Alex|andria, and Severus Bishop of Antiochia: therefore they were not called Anthimians, Theodosians, or Severites, but indeed, they might haue beene called Eutychians, but the vulgar name given vnto them, was .
Another branch which sprang vp from the root of Euty|ches heresie,. was the errour of those who supposed that the flesh of Christ was voyd of all kinde of humane infirmitie, expresly contradicting holy Scriptures, which attributeth vnto the body of Christ,Mat. 4. Iohn 4. hunger, and wearinesse, and other infirmities, which hee voluntarily accepted for our sakes. And where it is sayd, that the Lord Iesus did eat and drink: to this they answered, that hee seemed to eat and drinke, as hee did after his resurrection; but hee had no necessity of eating and drinking. But the verity of his death, stoppeth the mouth of all these Heretiques: for Christ was content

to taste of all our infirmities (death it selfe not excepted) that we might know hee will be a mercifull high Priest,Heb. 5.2. because hee hath tasted of our infirmities, and can haue compassion on those who are in trouble. In this opinion was the Emperour Iustinian in his old dayes, whose vices did almost equall his vertues, especially, in comporting so much with Theodora the Empresse, to the great advancement of the er|ror of Eutyches, and hinderance of the Gospell.
Originesta.In this Centurie, the defenders of the bookes of Origen, were Theodorus Ascidas, Bishop of Caesarea Cappadocia, and the Monkes of Noa Laura, whom Eustochius Bishop of Ierusalem, eiected out of their Monasteries, as shall bee declared hereafter.
Agnoita.Finally, there were some Heretiques, who durst dero|gate perfection of knowledge to the sonne of God in his divine nature:Note. These were cal|led Agnoitae, whom I leaue as buried in the dust,  according to their name, never worthy to haue beene knowne in the world.



CENTVRIE VII.
_IN this age, partly through the malice of Satan, and partly through the power of the wrath of God, punishing the con|tempt of his truth, heresies did mightily abound:Platin. in vit. Ioan. 4. for the heresie of Arrius began to reviue againe, and many of the Kings of Lombardis were addicted vnto it: in speciall, Rhotaris, the sonne of Arioaldus, who appointed, that in every towne of Lombardie there should be two Bi|shops, having equall authority, the one a Catholick Bishop, the other an Arrian. In England and Scotland, the here|sie of Pelagius was renewed, as Beda testifieth. The Monkes of Syria propagated the heresie of Nestorius, as Platina recor|deth in the life of Donus the first. The heresies of Severitae, Apartodotitae, Momphysitae, Acephali, Theopafcitae, Iaco|bitae, Armenij; all were Eutichian Heretiques, differing one from another in some ceremonies, in absurditie of speeches, in authors whom they principally admitted and followed, in places where the heresie chiefly increased, and in their carriage. Likewise Staurolatrae were Eutychian He|retiques: but the worshipping of the Crosse, was a note distinguishing them from other Heretiques, of their owne opinion. Priscillianistae were Heretiques, who borrowed absurd opinions from Samosatenus, and Photinus, from Cer|don, and Marcion, and from the Manicheans: but all these ancient errours, were sufficiently refuted in ancient times.
The heresie of the Monothelites,Monothelitae. was a branch of the he|resie of Eutyches, by a secret and crafty conuoy, insinuating it selfe into credite againe, after it was condemned in the

Councell of Chalcedon. The authors of this heresie, were Sergius, Pyrrhus, and Paulus, Patriarches of Constantinople; and Macarius Patriarch of Antiochia; Cyrus Patriarch of Alexandria; Petrus Bishop of Nicomedia, with many others. They denyed not directly the two natures of Christ perso|nally vnited: but onely affirmed, that after the vnion of the natures, there was onely one will, and one operation in Christ: whereas the holy Scriptures attribute vnto Christ, as hee is man, the action of sleeping: and to Christ in re|spect of his divine nature, the action of compescing and calming the rage and stormy tempest of blowing windes, and swelling Seas. This heresie was damned in the sixt gene|rall Councell, as wee shall heare (God willing) in its owne place.



CENTVRIE VIII.
_MAny were accounted heretikes in this age, because they worshipped God sincere|ly according to the rule of his owne bles|sed word, and would not giue consent to the fond errours of the Roman Church. But some were counted heretikes iustly, and without all controuersie, as namelie they who call Christ in his human nature the adoptiue son of God.Falician. This wicked heresie repungeth vnto the celestiall Oracle, which the three Apostles heard in the holy moun|taine, This is my wellbeloued sonne in whom I am well pleased, we are adopted in Christ to be the sons of God. But Christ, euen in his manly nature is the son of God by the excellent prerogatiue of personall vnion with the diuine nature. It is not certainlie knowne, whether Elipandus Bishop of Hispalis, or another named Foelix, with whom some affirme that Elipandus consulted about this damnable opi|nion, was the author of this damnable heresie.



CENTVRY IX.
Iconolatra._THey who of old were accustomed to condemne Heresies, now they are be|come the chiefe patrons and maintai|ners of adoration of Images, a notable heresie: whose Pusillanimitre argueth, the weakenesse of their cause: For vn|der the raigne of Lodouicus Pius Claudius Taurinensis wrote bookes against the adoration of Images: and the Emperour by a publike edict com|maunded them who were disposed to answere to his bookes, to answere whilst Claudius was aliue. But Ionas Bishop of Orleans concealed and obscured his bookes, during Claudius lifetime, but after his death with im|potencie of railing words, rather then with power of solide arguments hee indeuored to refute Claudius Taurinensis.
Let the iudicious reader without partialitie, peruse the bookes of Ionas Bishop of Orleans, and the verie stin|king breath of the aduersarie of the truth, shall giue great allowance to the truth of God.
Godescalcus.Godescalcus, a man of the low Countries, is reckoned in the number of Heretikes of this age, about the yeere of our Lord, 849. Because hee spake of Predesti|nation perilouslie, to witt that these who were Predesti|nated to life by the decree of Gods Predestination, were forced to doe well: and those who were Predesti|nated to condemnation, were forced by the decree of God to doe euill. Concerning old extinguished here|sies,

as the Manicheans, Arrians, Donatists, and such like, who preased to build vp the walls of Iericho, which God had destroyed, there is no necessitie to speake; be|cause these were vaine at|tempts wiihout any successe.



CENTVRIE X.
_IN this age darkenes had gotten such vpper hand that the eye it selfe was darkened as our Lord speaketh. The Spirit of errour so possessed the verie teachers,Most part of  this age Idola|ters. that the most part of them worshipped Images, yea the verie elements in the holy Sacra|ments of the Supper. Churches were replenished with the bones of dead men, whereunto the people kneeled, wor|shipping dead bones in place of the liuing God. And the small sparke of knowledge which remained not extinguished seemeth to be in the people, rather then in the Pastours: for the people saw that the Preachers entered not at the right doore,Ioh. 10. but rather like vnto thiefes  robbers they entered by bribes and gifts into spirituall offices, and therefore the Historie recordeth that Henricus Auceps when hee did fight against the Hungarians made his vowe to God,Note. that if the Lord would giue him victorie against his enemies, hee would purge his countrie from Simonie, which was an euident token,The heresie of Simon Ma|gus renued. that the vilde heresie of Simon Magus in buying and selling spirituall things did at this time mightily abound.



CENTVRIE XI.
_IN this Centurie the Pope had such vpper-hand both ouer Princes and Pastors: that they accounted euery thing that dis|pleased them to be heresie. The inuest|ment of Bishops by secular men,Note. was called Simonie; and marriage of Priests was called the Heresie of the Nicolaitans: Likewise betweene the Latine and Greeke Church fell out such contention for a matter of small importance, that they accounted one another to be heretikes.
The Greeke Church called the Latines Azymitae,Azymitae. be|cause they celebrated the Lords supper with vnleauened bread, and the Latine Church on the other part called the Greeke Church Fermentarij,Fermentarij. because they vsed leaue|ned breade, yea and the Roman Church in this age so obstinately maintained the errour of Transubstantiation, that they accounted all them heretikes who dissented from their opinion.



CENTVRIE XII.
Petrus Abelar|dus._IN this Centurie is found a French man, Petrus Abelardus an accurat Philosopher, who vttered vncouth things concerning the blessed Trinitie. That the holie spirit was the soule of the world, and that hee was not of the substa~ce of the father, whose opinions were da~ned by the Theolgues of Paris,  by Ber|nard of Clarauall, in the Councells of Seison and Senon; as also by Pope Innocentius the second: after he had receiued this foyle, hee entered into the Monasterie of Cluniacke, where he concluded his life.



CENTVRYE XIII.
_AMongst Heretikes in this age were re|ckoned Albigenses,Albigenses. so called from the name of the part in France where they dwelt. They were fauoured and assisted in many parts of France, but namelie in Tolosa, not only by the inferiour sort, but also by the Count himself. It is to be lame~|ted that the heads of their doctrine are not acuratly set downe by the writers of this age. For it is verie likely that they haue taught otherwise then their aduersaries doe report of them, who attribute vnto them the errours of the Manichea~s, who supposed that there were two Gods, the one authour and creator of good things, and the other of euill things. Alwaies it is certaine that they counted the Clergie of the Romane Church a corrupt rable.The Pope pur|sueth the Albi|genses. And for this cause Innocentius the third sent vnto France twelue Abbots of the Christian order with Didatus Bishop of Oxfurd, and Dominicus who was af|terward the author of a new sect of Dominike Friers. All those came to France for co~futation of Albigenses. But when the Pope perceiued that they yeelded not to his foresaid Ambassadours, he pursued them with cruel warres, and sent out an armie against them vnder the conduct of Leopold Duke of Austria, and Simon Count of Montfort; who vsed great crueltie against the townes of Bitera, Carcassus, Vaurus, Careum, Apistaginum, Galliacum, Causacum, Funum Mar|celli, Fanim Antonij, Modacum, and diuers others, wherein Albigenses had their residence.Note. In the towne called Castra Mineruae an hundreth and twentie were burnt quicke.
In Paris about the same time 14. Priests were accused as guiltie of this sect, and ten of them were burnt with fire, one at London. At Penuense, Agenois Castrum which was long

besieged, 74. Souldiers were hanged, the rest who would not recant their opinions were burnt with fire. Yet after this the French armie being troubled with other warres, the Albi|genses increased of new againe, and were supported by Ray|mond Count of Tulosse, and Peter king of Arragon, against whom Simon of Montfort leading out his armie slew of their host twentie thousand men.
In Avinion Lewis the eight, for suppressing of their sect dimolished the walls of the towne,  razed from the grou~d 300 houses in Avinion, and was minded to haue vsed grea|ter rigour, if hee had not bin preuented by death.
Almaricanus.Almaricus a man of Carnotum a towne in France, vttered strange opinions co~cerning God, whom hee affirmed to be the essence of all creatures,  the soule of heauen,  that all creatures should be counerted into the substance of God againe, with many other foolish things, who was refuted by the Schoole of Paris, and after that he had appealed to the B. of Rome, was sent backe againe to recant his errour, which thing also he did, rather with his mouth then with his heart. Likewise about Tullouse sprang vp certaine heretikes called Patereni and Gazari from the authors of this sect,Patereni. Gazari. who affir|med that married men were not in the state of grace,  could not be saued. This opinion was damned in the Councell of Lateran.
Fratricelli.In this age also sprang vp Begardi, Beginae, and Bizochi, who are all reckoned to be of the sect of Fratricelli, who imagined that a man might attaine in this world to the estate of such perfection that he might be altogether voide of sin. And that he who had attained thereto, was neither vnder subiection to ciuill nor spirituall gouernours, but was freed from all subiection to mortall men, and that they had no neede of prayer and fasting, and such other exercises where|by increase of grace is obtained.



CENTVRIE XIV.
_POpe Iohn the 23. of that name,An heresie of Pope Iohn the 23. taught that soules so soone as they were dispoyled of the bodie, should not see God before the last iudgement. Against whom Thomas Wallafe a Iacobin, an English-man, oppo|sed himselfe, but was thrust in prison. Afterward Pope Benet who succeeded Pope Iohn, made a decretall, wherein hee confuted, and con|demned as hereticall, the doctrine which his predecessor Iohn had publiquely preached, touching the happy soules; and it was determined and declared, that the soules which had nothing to purge, incontinent as they are departed from the bodie doe see the face of God.



CENTVRIE XV.
An heresie of the Councell of Basill._THE Councell of Basill confirmed that the Virgin Marie was conceived without ori|ginall sinne.


CENTVRIE XVI.
The heresie of the Anabap|tists._WHen the Gospel began to spring vp in Ger|many, thorow the malice of Satan sprang vp also a Sect of pestilent Heretiques, cal|led Anabaptists: so called by reason they thinke that Infants should not bee bapti|zed vntill they come to perfect age, and can giue a confession of their owne faith. They maintaine wicked opinions concerning Christ him|selfe,The Anabap|tists opinion. his Word, his Church, his Magistrates. Concerning Christ, that hee tooke not flesh and blood of the Virgin, but brought it from heaven: concerning the Word, that God not onely revealeth his will, by the written Word, but also by visions and dreames, wherevnto the Anabaptists do leane more then to the Word: concerning the Church, that it is not a true Church wherein there is any spot or wrinckle: concerning Magistrates, that their office vnder the New Testament, is not a calling approved of God. Some other wicked opinions they maintaine, but these are the chiefe. And it was no wonder, that men who had layd such

grounds of seditious doctrine, were also found in their liues to be authors of very seditious commotions, and insurrecti|ons against Princes.Tho. Muntzerus an Anabaptist maketh insur|rection, is over|come and be|headed. Like as Thomas Muntzerus, one of the first Fathers of this sect, gathered a great number of com|mon people, who made insurrection against their superi|ours; and albeit this first attempt of the Anabaptists succe|ded very vnprosperously (for the Princes of Germany over|came in battell those seditious people, and tocke Thomas Muntzerus himselfe, and beheaded him, whose me|morie was so perturbed with beastly feare, that hee could not recite the beliefe (but the Duke of Brunswicke was constrained to recite it before him, and hee followed after him for lacke of memorie) yet others would not take war|ning by him to abstaine from the like seditious attempts. For in the yeere of our Lord,Ioh. Leidensis an Anabaptist, v|surpeth a king|ly authority, banisheth the Citizens of Munster. Cniperdolingus a false Prophet 1533. Iohannes Leidensis a Taylor of Holland, came to a towne of Westphalia, called Munster, and hee had seduced many, and increased the number of his faction, hee expelled and banished the Citi|zens of Munster, and vsurped to himselfe a kingly autho|rity, being assisted with the support of Cniperdolingus, a vaine man, and a false Prophet, who affirmed that it was revealed to him by God, that Iohannes Leidensis should haue the dominion of the whole world, and that he should raise vp a mightie army, and destroy the Princes of the world, and should onely spare the simple multitude, so many of them as would forsake impiety, and imbrace righteousnes. Likewise hee affirmed that it was the will of God, that Iohannes Leidensis should send throughout the whole world eight and twentie Apostles,Leidensis sen|deth 28. sediti|ous Apostles, who were all destroyed one excepted. to exhort the world to repen|tance, and to receiue the doctrine of the Anabaptists, which thing Leidensis was willing and readie to per|forme.
But the Princes of Germany, and the Princes of other Countries, tooke those seditious Apostles, and gaue vnto them the reward which seditious Preachers iustly deserved; so that of all the number of his Apostles onely one (who by fleeing conveyed himself away) escaped the punishment

of Death. Thus Iohannes Leidensis, was called King of new Ierusalem, and tooke vnto himselfe many wiues, of whom also hee beheaded one in the open market-place, because she had compassion of the poore besieged people of Munster, of whom many died through famine. For the Bishop of Mun|ster assisted with the Princes of Germany, besieged the town very strictly, and in the end prevailed, and tooke this new made King,Ioh. Leidensis and his false Prophet taken and condem|ned to death. Cniperdolingus, his false Prophet aliue, and ad|iudged them not onely to be hanged in chaines of iron, but before their hanging, to haue their flesh seared with hot iron pincers. Thus came the authors of this most vnhappy sect, vnto a most miserable and shamefull destruction.
Of this Sect of Anabaptists, sprang vp in Holland an im|pudent fellow David Georgius,David Georgi|us an Ana|baptist, affir|med himselfe to be Christ, flieth to Basill, and there sedu|ceth many, whose bodie was raised out of the graue and burnt. who affirmed that hee was Christ, the Messias and Saviour of the world, yet for feare of punishment hee fled out of the Low Countries, and came to Basile, where he remained vntill the day of his death; all which time, hee not only obscured his blasphemous errors, but also behaved himselfe in outward show so humbly, and modestly, that hee was in good account, and became weal|thy also. Yet after his death, it was knowne that he had sedu|ced many, with his blasphemous errours. Therefore the Councell of Basile commanded, that his body should bee raised out of the graue, and burnt with fire, in token of their detestation of his abhominable errors.
Servetus a Spaniard, re|nueth the doc|trine of ArriusAbout the same time also, sprang vp Michael Servetus, a Spaniard, who renewed the blasphemous doctrine of Arri|us; affirming that God the Father, is onely the true God, and that neither the Sonne nor the holy Spirit is eternall God: but that the Sonne is a creature, and had the begin|ning of existence when God created the world. He was ta|ken in the towne of Geneva  cast in prison; but he would not be reclaimed from his blasphemous errors. Therefore the Councell of the towne thought meet with flames of fire to stoppe the breath of this blasphemous man,The Councell of Geneva co~|demned him to be burnt. who durst set his mouth against the heauen to blaspheme the Sonne of God. After his death, many were found who maintained

his errors, as namely, Valentinus Gentilis, Gregorius Blandrata a Physitian in Italy, Matheus Gribaldus a Lawyer, and Pau|lus Alciatus, with many others. Amongst whom Valenti|nus Gentilis was bold to put in print his blasphemies, and he called the summe of faith set forth by Athanasius, Symbolum Satanasi, calling Athanasius himselfe Satanasius; but after hee had blasphemed the Sonne of God a while,Vallent. Gentilis a maintainer of the doctrine of Servetus, condemned to death at Berne both by word and writ, in the end hee was taken in the towne of Berne, where hee suffered the iust deserved punishment of death.
Many other sprang vp in this age, who were teachers of false and hereticall doctrine; but because they had few fol|lowers, so that the errour died with the author thereof, wee haue no great need to enroll their names and errors in this booke at large, but shortly to poynt them out.
Gasper Suenkefeldius,Gasper Suenk|feldius. a man borne in Silesia, maintained this errour, that the outward ministerie of the Word and Sacraments was not necessarie to eternall life, because that by the illumination of Gods holy spirit, without the mini|sterie of the Word, men might be saved.
Andreas Osiander thought that Christ was our Mediatour onely in respect of his divine nature:Andreas Osian|der. and on the other part Stantcarus (refuting Osiander) fell into the contrarie extremi|tie, that Christ was Mediatour onely in respect of his hu|mane nature.Stancarus.
Flaccius Illiricus,Flaccius Illyri|cus. supposed originall sin was a substance.
Huberus beleeved that all men were elected vnto eter|nall life:Huberus. Fancis. Puccius. and Franciscus Puccius, defended this opinion, that all men of whatsoever religion they were, should bee saved, if they led not a very impious life, and evill conversation.
Finally, in this age was cleerly discovered that hee who sate in the chaire of Christ,Antichrist and his adherents Heretiques. as Christs Vicar, was the very Antichrist; and they who depend vpon the Pope, as gene|rall Bishop of all Christs sheepe, were notable Heretiques, giving the glorie of Christ to Antichrist: denying the suf|ficiencie of the written Word, bowing and kneeling to I|mages, praying to creatures, and accounting them mediators

of their intercession, sacrilegiously imitating the holy Sa|crament of the Supper, and taking from the people the vse of the Cup, offering dayly a new propitiatorie sacrifice for sinne, as though Christs sacrifice once offered vp vp|on the Altar of the Crosse, were imperfect; damning marriage in some persons, and forbidding meates, which God hath allowed to bee eaten with thanks|giving: with many other errors which the Lord hath cleerly detected to haue beene a long time by-past in the Romane Church.
Here endeth the third Booke.




THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY of the Church, containing a short Compend of all the Councels, together with their severall Canons, since Christs dayes to this present.

CENTVRIE IV.
_COuncels may bee divided in Ge|nerall, Nationall or Provinciall,Of the Apo|stles  Elders convention, reade Acts 15.6. and Particular Councels. Gene|rall, were called Oecomenicke Councels ( in the greek language signifieth the world) because from all quarters of the world wherein Christ was prea|ched, Commissioners were sent to these Councels, and they were gathered by the authoritie of the Emperour. Nationall or Provinciall Councels were such as were gathered by the

authoritie of the Emperor in one Nation, with the assistance of other neere approaching Nations, for suppressing of here|sies, deciding of questions, pacifying of chismes, and ap|pointing Canons and Constitutions, for decent order to be kept in the Church. The third sort of Councels were par|ticular Councls, by Bullenger called  or . Such as the Councels of Gangra, Neocaesaria, and ma|ny others, gathered vsually by Patriarchs, and Bishops, in a corner of a Countrie, but for the like causes that natio|nall Councels were assembled. Let no man expect a recitall of particular Councels, except at such times as some matter of great moment enforceth me to speake of them.
The Councell of Ancyra Tom. 1. Concil.ANcyra is a towne of Galatia: in this towne were assem|bled Bishops of diverse Provinces, about the yeere of of our Lord, 308. as is supposed. The principall cause of their meeting, was to constitute a forme of Ecclesiasticall discipline, according to which, they who either willingly or vnwillingly, had sacrificed to Idols in time of persecuti|on, should bee received into the bosome of the Church a|gaine, when they were found penitent. There were many rancks of persons, who had defiled themselues with Heathe|nicke Idolatrie: such as Libellatici, Thurificati, Sacrificati, and Proditores. The Councell of Ancyra took order chief|ly with those, who were called Thurificati, and Sacrificati, that is, with them, who either had cast vp incense vpon ido|latrous Altars, or else had eaten of meates sacrificed to Idols: to whom it was inioyned to testifie their repentance, a long time before they were received to the communion of Gods people, some one yeere, some two yeeres, others three or foure yeeres, some fiue or six yeeres, and aboue, according to the heauinesse of their transgression. In this Councell it was ordained, that Deacons, who in time of their ordinati|on did protest, that they had not the gift of continency, but were disposed to marrie, if they married, they should re|maine in their Ministerie: but they who in time of impo|sition of hands by their silence had professed continencie,

if afterward they married, they should bee remoued from their Ministrie. Also it was ordained, that Chorepiscopi (these were Countrie Bishops, in the Latine language called Vicarii-Episcoporum) These,Canon. 13. I say, were commanded to ab|staine from ordination of Elders and Deacons, and from vsurping of do~inion ouer the preaching Elders, who were in Cities.Canon. 14. Likewise it was ordained, that whosoeuer did abstaine from eating of flesh, as from a creature in it selfe vncleane, he should be depriued of his dignity.Tom. 1. Concil. This Councell was sub|scribed by 8. Bishops.
IN the yeere of our Lord 330.The generall Councell of Nice. and in the 20. yeere of the raigne of Constantine, as Eusebius reckoneth (others referre it to the 333. yeere of our Lord, for there is great diuersitie in this counting) The Councell of Nice in Bithynia was gathered not by Silvester, nor by Iulius, but by the authority of the Emperour.Euseb. de. vita Constane. lib. 3. The name of the towne answered to the successe of the Councell, for  in the Greeke language sig|nifieth victorie: and when the veritie encountered with the lie in this Councell, the veritie preuailed and got the victo|rie. The matter entreated in the Councell,Note. was concerning the opinion of Arrius a presbyter in Alexandria, who denied that the Sonne of God was consubstantiall with the Father, but affirmed there was a time wherein the sonne was not, and that he was created of things not existent. This opini|on was so vnquoth and abominable to the Fathers con|ueened in the Councell of Nice, that they vtterly damned and anathematized the opinion of Arrius.Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 5. Onely 17 Bishops adhered to his blasphemous opinion. The Empe|rour liked well the determination of the Conncell, and threatned to punish them with banishment, who did refuse to subscribe the determination of the Councell: for they had concluded, that the sonne of God was , that is con|substantiall with the Faith. Of the number of feuenteene, who were fauourers of Arrius,Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 16. only two, to wit, Secundus a B. of Ptolemaida in Aegypt, and Thomas Bishop of Marmarica, adhered to Arrius vntil the end of the Councell, with a

a few moe,Theod. l. 1. c. 7. whom the Fathers conueened at Nice, deliuered vnto Sathan, and the Emperour banished them: the rest for feare of punishment subscribed to the deposition of Arrius with their handes,Socrat. l. 1. c. 14. but not with their hearts: such as Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, Theogonius of Nice, Menophantus of Ephesus, Patrophilus of Scythopois, Narcissus of Nero|nias, otherwise called Irenopolis of Cilicia: these (I say) and some others, subscribed the summe of Faith set downe by the Nicene Councell, and the deposition of Arrius.
Exod. 12. verse, 2. Russin. l. 1. c. 6.About the controuersie of keeping the festiuitie of Easter day, a conclusion was taken, that it should be kept vpon the Lords day, and not vpon the fourteene day of the first month of the Iewes called Nisan. And this was done for keeping of vnitie and peace in the Church: for it was expedient, that that thing which was vniuersally done, should also bee vniformely done, for auoiding of schismes in the Church. Neuerthelesse Socrates granteth, that it is but an ancient custome, not authorized by any Apostolike com|mandement.
Socrat. l. 5. c. 22About Marriage many were in the opinion, that Bishops, Elders, and Deacons, who were married before their ordi|nation, should in time to come abstaine from the companie of their wiues. But Paphnutius a Bishop in a towne of The|baida, a chaste man who neuer companied with a woman,Socrat. l. 1. c. 11 entreated the Councell, that they should abstaine from ma|king such an ordinance, because Marriage is honorable, and the cohabitation of a man with his married wife, is chasti|ty. Likewise it was a diffiicult matter to be performed, and it opened a doore to vnchast liuing. Yet Paphnutius inclined too much to this opinion, That Bishops, Elders, and Dea|cons, who were vnmarried,Sozom. l. 1. c. 12. should abstaine from marriage. The Councel would make no constitution about such mat|ters, but remitted marriage as a thing indifferent to euery mans free arbitriment.
The Canons of the Nicene Councell pertaining to matters of discipline, in number 22. (reade them in the history of Russin.) The appointing of three Partiarches,Russin. l. 1. c. 6. one in Rome,

another in Alexandria, the third in Antiochia, with power to conuocate within their owne boundes particular Coun|cels, for timous suppressing of heretikes: It was like vnto a faire morning presenting vnto the world the countenance of a faire day, but at Euen, the face of the Heauen is co|uered with blacke cloudes, troubling the earth with the tempest of changed weather. Euen so, these Patriarches, for the most part, became in the end chiefe propagators of no|table heresies, as the historie following God willing shall de|clare.
THe Nationall Councell of Tyrus was gathered by the commandement of the Emperour Constantine,The Councel of Tyrus. in the thirtieth yeere of his raigne.Euseb. lib. 4. de vita Constan. Socrat lib. 1. cap. 23. Eusebius by ouer-passing with silence a due commemoration of the malice and falsehood of the Arrians against Athanasius, giueth occasion to Socrates to suspect, that Eusebius Pamphili was not a sound follower of the Nicene Councell. To this Nationall Councel conuee|ned threescore Bishops, from Aegypt, Lybia, Asia,  Europe. The most part of them were Arrians,Socrat. l. 1. c. 27 who had solde themselues to iniquity, of purpose, with false accusations to oppresse the innocent seruant of Christ,Theodor. lib. 1: cap. 29. Athanasius. The crimes laide vnto his charge, were fornication, the slaughter of Arsenius, and cutting off of his hand, the ouerthrowing of the holy Table, the breaking of the holy Cup and bur|ning of the holy volumes. No assembly was so full of par|tialitie, confusion, clamour, and vnrighteous dealing, as this assembly at Tyrus: in so much, that Paphnutius a Bishop in Thebaida, arose, and left the Councell of vngodly men, and drew with him Maximus Bishop of Ierusalem, fearing lest his simplicitie should haue beene circumueened by the sub|tiltie of deceitfull Arrians.
How Athanasius fled to the Emp. and declared the vnrigh|teous proceedings of the Councell of Tyrus, it hath bin de|clared already. In this assembly Pota~ion Bishop of Heraclea, a man full of spirituall libertie,Hist. Magd. Centur. 4. cap. 19 finding Eusebius Pamphili sit|ting as a Iudge,  Athanasius standing, outbraided Eusebius

as a man who in the persecution of Dioclesian was enclosed in that same prison with himselfe: but Eusebius escaped out of prison without the markes of the rebuke of Christ, which Potamion and other faithfull Confessors could not get done.Theod. lib. 1. cap. 27. In like manner, Athanasius refused to compeare in Caesarea Palestinae, where Eusebius was Bishop, as a place suspect for fauour carried to Arrians. All these things brought the name of Euseb. Pamphili in some disliking. The issue of the Coun|cell of Tyrus was this: the Arrians in his absence deposed him, and amongst the rest Arsenius was one of them, who subscribed the deposition of Athanasius with that same hand that the Arrians had alleadged was cut off by Athanasius:Socrat. l. 1 c. 32. so effronted are Heretikes, defenders of false and lying doctrine. The Emperour Constantine commanded the bi|shops assembled at Tyrus, to addresse to Constantinople: but when they came thither, they durst make no mention of the fornication of Athanasius, of the hand of Arsenius, of the Table,Theod lib. 1. cap. 30. Theod. lib. 1. cap. 35. Euseb. lib. 4. de vita Con|stant. Cuppe and bookes aboue mentioned: but they forged new accusations against him, whereunto the Emp. gaue too hastie credit, and banished Athanasius to Triere. Immediatly after the Councell of Tyrus many Bishops were assembled at Ierusalem, for the dedication of the Temple, which the Emperour Constantine had builded at the place of the Lords sepulchre.
Concerning the Councell of Antiochia, wherein the Ar|rians deposed Eustatius, and the Councell of Arles, wherein Cecilianus was absolued from the accusation of the Dona|tists, no further discourse is needful then is contained in the history of the liues of these two Bishops.
The Councel of Gangra.GAngra is a towne of Paphlagonia. In this towne were assembled certaine Fathers, to the number of 16. about the yeere of our Lord 324. The occasio~ of their meeting was the heretike Eustatius, who admiring the Monasticke life, or (as others affirme) fauouring the heresie of Encratitae, and the Manichea~s, he spake against Marriage, against eating of flesh; and hee damned the publicke Congregations of Gods

people in Temples:Tom. 1. Concil. and said, a man could not be saued, ex|cept he forsooke all his possessions, and renounced the world after the forme of monkish doing. These opinions were da~|ned in the Councell of Gangra. The subscriptions of the fa|thers of this Councell after their Canons, are worthie to be remarked. These things (say they) haue wee subscribed, not vituperating them, who according to Scripture chooseth vn|to themselues an holy purpose of a continent life: but them onely, who abuseth the purpose of their minds to pride, ex|tolling themselues against the simpler sort: Yea, and damne and cut off all those, who contrary to Scripture  Ecclesiasti|call rules, bring in new commandements. But wee admire humble Virginity, and we approue continencie that is vnder taken with chastity and Religion: And we embrace the re|nounciation of secular businesse, with humilitie: And wee honour the chast bo~d of Marriage: And we despise not riches joined with righteousnesse,  good workes: And we co~mend a simple  course apparrel, vsed for couering the body with|out Hypocrisie. Likewise we reject loose and dissolute gar|ments: And we honour the houses of God,  assemblies, that are in them, as holy and profitable, not debarring men from exercises of pietie in their owne priuate houses. But places builded in the name of the Lord, we honour, and Congre|gations assembled in the places for the common vtilitie wee approue: And good workes, which are done to poore brethren, euen aboue mens abilitie, according to the Ecclesiasticall traditions, we blesse them: And we wish all things to be celebrated in the Church, accor|ding to holy Scriptures, and the ordinances of the A|postles.
IN the time of the raigne of Constantine in Eliberis,The Councell of Eliberis. a towne of Spaine, were assembled nineteene Bishops,  of Presby|ters, thirty six. The end of their meeting was to reforme hor|rible abuses, both in Religion  manners, which in time of the ten Persecutions had preuailed in Spaine: And now in

time of peace such enormities and festered manners could hardly be amended. Many Ecclesiasticall Canons were made in this Synode to the number of 81. Whereof wee shall re|hearse but a few, and such as clearely pointeth out the prin|cipall end of their meeting.
Canon 4.They ordained, the Heahnicke sacrificing Priests (called of old, Flamines) if they were content to abstaine from sacri|ficing to Idols, and to learne the groundes of Christian Religion, after three yeeres repentance, they should be admit|ted to baptisme.
Canon 15.Likewise they ordained, that Christian Virgins should not be giuen in marriage to Pagans, lest in the floure of their youth they should be entangled with spiritual whoore|dome.
Canon 28.In like maner, that Bishops should receiue no reward from men that did not communicate with the Church.
Canon 36.They ordained, that nothing that is worshipped, should be pictured on the wall.
Canon 41.And that in priuate houses no Idols should be found: And in case the masters of houses were afraid of the violence of their seruants, at least, they should keepe themselues pure and cleane: which if they did not, they should be counted stran|gers from the fellowship of the Church.
Canon 60.And that if any man happen to be slayne, in the action of breaking downe images, his name shall bee enrolled in the catalogue of Martyrs, because it is not written in the history of the Gospell, that the Apostles vsed any such forme of re|formation: whereby they signifie, that by wholsome doctrine images should be cast out of the hearts of men, rather than broken with popular violence, and with the tumultuary at|tempts of priuate men. Any iudicious man may perceiue by these Canons both the time when, and the cause where|fore this Councell was assembled.
The first Councell of Carthage.THey who count the first Councell of Carthage, to be that Councell whereinto Cyprian, with aduise of many other bishops of Numidia, Lybia, and other partes of Africa,

ordained men who were baptized by Heretikes,Tom. 1. Councell. to be rebap|tised againe: they commit a great ouer sight, to reckon the first Councell of Carthage to be holden vnder the raigne of Constantine, whereas it is certainely knowne, that Cyprian was martyred, in the dayes of Valerian the eight persecuting Emperour.Hist. Magd. Cent. 4. cap. 9. But the first Councell of Carthage, that was kept in Constantines dayes, was that Councell whereinto the Donatistes co~demned Caecilianus, Bishop of Carthage, whose innocencie afterward was tryed by many Iudges. In it there was no matter of great importance concluded, and therefore I ouer-passe it with few wordes, as an assemblie of little account. All these Councells aboue mentioned were assembled in the dayes of Constantine the Great: Now followeth Councells gathered in the dayes of his sonnes.
The cause pretended for the gathering of the Councell of Antiochia,The first Councell of Antiochia hol|den by Arrians vnder the raigne of Con|stantius. Socrat. l. 2. c. 8. Szom. l. 3. c. 5. Hist. Magd. Centur. 4. cap. 9. in the dayes of Constantius the sonne of Constantine, was the dedication of the Church of Antiochia: which albeit Constantine had builded, yet fiue yeeres after his death, and in the seuenteenth yeere after the foundati|on of the Temple was laide, Constantius his sonne finished, and perfected the worke. And vnder pretence of dedicati|on of this Temple (as said is) this Assemblie of Antiochia was gathered. Anno, 344. but indeed of purpose to sup|plant the true Faith. To this Assemblie resorted many Bi|shops, to the number of 90. But Maximus Bishop of Ie|rusalem, and Iulius Bishop of Rome, neither came they to the Councell; neither sent they any messenger in their name, fearing as the truth was, that they were gathered for euill, and not for good. At this time Placitus, the suc|cess out of Euphronius, gouerned Antiochia. Now when they were me together, many accusations were heaped vp a|gainst Athanasius: First, that hee had accepted his place againe, without aduise of other Bishops: Secondlie, be|cause at the time of his returning backe againe to Alex|andria, there fell out great commotion amongst the peo|ple,

and some were slaine, others were contumeliouslie beaten, and violently drawne befor justice seates. Mention also was made of the decrete of the Councell of Tyrus, a|gainst Athanasius. It was an casie matter for the Arrians to im|print into the vlcerate mind of Constantius,Sozom. l. 3. c. 5. an hatred against Athanasius. In this Councell they set downe diuers summes of Faith: first secretly couering the venome of their heresie, but afterward, as it were repenting, they manifested them|slues more clearly in their owne colours. After this Coun|cell followed terrible earth-quakes in the East, wherewith many townes were shake~, especially the towne of Antiochia, with continuall earth-quakes was shaken for the space of a whole yeere.Hist. Mag. Cent. 4. cap. 9. The principall designe of the Councell was to eject Athanasius, out of his chaire,  to alter the sum of Faith set downe in the Nicene Councell: as euidently appeared, by sending of Syrianus to destroy Athanasius, and to place Gregorius in his roome: but Athanasius escaped the danger by the great prouidence of God, and fled to Iulius Bishop of Rome: and the Arrians displaced againe Gregorius, and ap|pointed Georgius a man of Cappadocia, and more fit for their purpose, to be bishop of Alexandria.
Other two Councels hol|den in Antio|chia by the Arrians.THe fauour that Iulius Bishop of Rome shewed to Atha|nasius Bishop of Alexandria, Paulus Bishop of Constan|tinople, Asclepas Bishop of Gaza, and Lacius Bishop of A|drionopolis, was the cause mouing the Arrians to haue so frequent meetings in Antiochia: Very sharpe letters passed betwixt Iulius and the Orientall Bishops:Socrat l. 2. c. 15 Iulius blamed them, because they had both rashly and vnrighteously de|posed the fore-named bishops. They on the other part expo|stulated with Iulius, because he had receiued to his fellow|ship men deposed by the~, whereas none of the East Church had admitted Novatus to their communion, whom the Bi|shop of Rome had excommunicated.
Socrat. l. 2 c. 19 Hist, Magd.After the issue of three yeere, another Councell was con|ueened in Antiochia, about the yeere of our Lord 348. wherein the Arrians set foorth a newe summe of their

Faith in very ample and prolix manner, and different from all other formes set downe before: the copie whereof they sent to the Bishops of Italy, by Endoxius Bishop of Germa|nicia, and Martyrius, and Macedonius: but the Bishops of Italy would not receiue it, contenting themselues with the summe of Faith set downe in the Nicene Councell.
IN the yeere of our Lord,The Councell of Sardica. 351. by the commandement of Constantius, and his brother Constans, a great nationall Councell was gathered in Sardica, a towne of Illyricum, of Dacia.Soc. l. 2 c. 20. Many Bishops of the West, to the number of three hundred, resorted to this assembly, but from the East only seventy six. They who came from the Easterne parts, would not vouchsafe to be present in the Councell, except Proto|genes Bishop of Sardica, and Osius Bishop of Corduba, had separated from their fellowship Paulus Bishop of Constan|tinople, and Athanasius Bishoppe of Alexandria. But the cause of their absenting themselues from the Councell, in|deed, was this (as Theodoretus prudently recordeth) because the forgers of salse accusations against the men of God,Theod. l. 2. c. 8. whose cause was appointed to be iudged in this Councell, durst not abide the tryall of honest Iudges, and men of vnsuspected credit. The Councell finding that the Arri|ans couvicted in conscience, durst not compeare to accuse Paulus, and Athanasius (whom notwithstanding they had deposed in the Councels of Tyrus and Antiochia) procee|ded to the tryall of their cause: and findeth all the accusati|ons of the Arrians against Panlus, Athanasius, Asclepas, and the rest, to bee but a masse of forged calumnies and lyes: Arsenius was found to be aliue, whom, the Arrians had al|ledged, Athanasius had slaine: As concerning the over|throwing of the holy Table, and breaking of the holy Cup, by Macarius (whom Athanasius had imployed, and there|fore the blame was layd vpon him) it was found to be a no|table lye: because when Macarius entred into the Church of Mareota (where this fact was alledged to bee done)  were present in the Church. And such kinde of

persons were not permitted to be present at the celebration of divine mysteries. Ishyras also, who was the principall forger of all the afore-mentioned calumnies, was found to haue beene tyed to the bed by infirmity, at that time, when Macarius was alledged to haue done all these things. And finally, it was found, that Ishyras had received a Bishop|ricke, as the wages o iniquity from the Arrians, before hee had beene admitted Presbyter in any Church. Also the sup|plicant bils of Paulus, Asclpas, Marcellus, c. were read, tryed, and examined, and they were all found honest and vpright men, and they were all recommended by the letters of the Councell of Sardica, to their owne flocks.
On the other part, the Bishops, whom the Arrians had intruded in the places of the fore-mentioned brethren, they deposed them, and abhorred their memorie: such as Gre|gorius in Alexandria, Basilius in Ancyra, and Quintianus in Gaza: of whom they discerned, that they were not worthy the name of common Christians,Theod. ibid. much lesse to bee called Bishops: commanding all people to forsake their fellow|shippe, and neither to send letters to them, nor to receiue letters from them. The like sentence they pronounced a|gainst Theodorus of Heraclea, Narcissus of Neronias, Acacius of Caesarea Palestinae, Stephanus of Antiochia, Vrsatius of Sigidun in Mysia, Valens of Myrsa in Panonia, Menophan|tus of Ephesus, and Georgius of Laodicea, principall patrons of the Arrian heresie.
The Arrians on the other part assembled themselues in Philippopolis, a towne of Thracia, and there they damned of new againe, Paulus and Athanasius. Likewise they dam|ned Iulius Bishop of Rome,Sozom. l. 3. c. 11  12. Osius Bishop of Corduba, Pro|togenes Bishop of Sardica, Maximinus Bishop of Triere, and many others, whom they cursed also, because they had ad|mitted to their fellowship those Bishops, whom they had de|posed.
Sozomenus is in that opinion, that the Councell of Phi|lippolis succeeded the Councell of Sardica. From 35. Pro|vinces did Bishoppes resort vnto the Councell of Sardica.

From this time forward, there was added diversitie of affe|ction, vnto diversity of opinion:Ahanas. epist. ad solitar. vit. argente. Theod. l. 2. c. 8. and those who dwelt in the East, did not communicate with them who dwelt in the West. Some Arrian Bishoppes dwelt in the West, such as Auxentius Bishop of Millan, and Vrsatius, and Valens: But by the vigilant travels of the Bishoppe of Rome, and other godly Bishops of the West, it came to passe, that these Semi|naries of errors did not prevaile much in the Westerne parts. This is that Councell,Canon 4. wherein Iulius Bishop of Rome, for his good carriage, and good deservings, was appointed to be Iudge of Appellations, when the like case fell out, that righteous men were oppressed with the vnrighteous dea|ling of Heretiques. But remember, that this is a constitution of the Councell of Sardica, and not of the Nicene Councel: And this was a priviledge both personall and temporall, for extraordinary causes, conferred to Iulius: but not to bee extended to all his successours, nor yet to continue at all times.
IN the yeere of our Lord,The Councell of Sirmium. 356. and fiue yeeres after the Councell of Sardica, by the commandement of the Em|perour Constantius, a Councell was gathered in Sirmium, a towne of Illyria (Bullenger calleth it a towne of Pannonia) Photinus Bishop of Sirmium,Bullen. de Con|ciliis. Soc. l. 2 c. 29. had renued the heresies of Sa|bellius, and Samosatenus. A disputation was instituted be|twixt Basilius Bishop of Ancyra, an Arrian Heretique, and Photinus a Sabellian Heretique: in which disputation Pho|tinus was thought to be overcome, and was damned by the Councell as an Heretique, and banished by the Emperour. In this Councell they set downe summes of Faith, one in Greeke, and two in Latine; wherein, albeit they abstained from the word : neverthelesse they gave great glo|rie to the Sonne of God.Sec. l. 2. c. 30. But in the end they repented, and by the Emperours authority, would haue recalled backe a|gaine the copies of the summes of Faith, set forth at Sirmi|um: but the mandates of the Emperour commanding, in most rigorous forme, to deliver backe againe the copies that

were past abroad, could not bring to passe, that, that thing which was once divulgated, should be againe suppressed. The weaknesse of Osius Bishop of Corduba kythed in this Councell, hath been touched in the history of his life.
The Councell of Millan.AFter that the Emperour Constans, was slaine by Mag|nentius, the whole Soveraignty both of the East and West, was in the hands of Constantius alone. The Arrians moved him to assemble a Councell at Millan, partly for ra|tification of the sentence pronounced against Athanasius in Tyrus,Theod. l. 2. c. 15. amd partly for the subversion of the Nicene Faith. The Occidentall Bishops to the number of three hundreth, at the Emperors commandement assembled at Millan.Soc. l. 2. c. 36. But neither would they ratifie the deposition of Athanaesius, nor yet alter the summe of faith. And some of them with liber|tie and freedome,Sozom. l. 4. c. 9. accused the Emperour of vnrighteous dealing. For this cause many worthie Bishops were bani|shed, such as Liberius,Ruff. l. 1, c. 20. Bishop of Rome, Paulinus B. of Triere, Dionysius B. of Alba, Lucifer B. of Calaris in Sardinia, Eusebi|us B. of Vercellis in Liguria. If in this Councell Osius B. of Corduba, was banished, as Thedoretus recordeth, it would appeare that the Councell of Millan preceded the Councell of Sirmium:Sozom. l. 4.6. because that Osius immediatly after he was re|duced from banishment, was compelled to addresse to the Councell of Sirmium. But I haue followed the order of Ecclesiasticall writers.
The Councell of Ariminum. Soc. l. 2. c. 39. Theod. l. 2 c. 26IN the yeere of our Lord, 363. and in the two and twen|tith yeere of the raigne of Constantius, the Arrians having a great vantage of the flexible minde of Constantius mooved him to appoint a place wherein a generall Councell should be gathered, for confirmation of their Faith. Whether this place was the towne of Nicomedia, or Nice, alwaies it was shaken with earth-quake, and the God of heaven hindered the purposes of their mindes.
The next course was, that two nationall Councels should be convened,Soc. l. 3. c. 37. one at Ariminum in Italy, as a meet place for

for the Bishops of the West to convene at, and another in Slcia, of Isauria, as a meet place for assembling of the O|rientall Bishops. To the Councell of Ariminum, more then foure hundred Bishops did resort.Sozom l 4.17. In this nationall Coun|cell compeared Vrsatius and Valens, with Germanus, Auxen|tius, and Caius, and Demophilus, desiring that the wordes , and , as words not found in Scripture, and grounds of vnsupportable contention in the Church, should bee cancelled, and razed out of the summe of Faith: and that the Sonne of God should be called , that is, of like substance with his Father. The Fathers convened at Arininum,Theod. l. 2. c. 19. altogether disliked this proposition of Vrsatius, and Valens, and adhered for the most part of them closely to the Nicene Faith, and excluded from the fellowship of the Church,Sozom. l. 4. c. 18. Vrsatius, and Valens, with their complices aboue menioned, as the letter of the Councell written to the Emperour, cleerely beares. With the letter the Councell sent twenty Ambassadors, chosen and selected men, who should giue further instruction to the Emperor, concerning the matter of Faith. But Vrsatius, and Valens prevened the Ambassadours of the Councell, and by sini|strous informations, hindered them from accesse to the Em|perour: onely their letter was read, whereunto the Empe|rour turned a differing answer, bearing, that for the present hee was busied with weighty affaires of the kingdome, but when hee should finde any breathing time, hee would hear|ken vnto them. The Councell sent the second time to the Emperour,Soz. l 4. c. 19. desiring they might haue libertie, before the winter season, to returne to their owne flocks: and here|withall they assured the Emperour, that in the matter of Faith, they would adhere to that which was comprehended in the former letter. To this second message no answer was returned: Therefore the Bishops wearied with long atten|dance, returned every man to his owne flock: the Emperor counted this dissolution of the Councell, without warrant of his anthority, to bee a contempt of his Soveraignty: Therefore he gaue charge to Valens, to publish the summe

of the Arrian Faith read in Ariminum, albeit it was both disapproued and reiected: with power also to Vrsatius and Valens, to eiect those bishops out of their places, who would not subscribe to the Arrian Faith, and to ordaine others in their roome. Vrsatius and Valens, being strengthned with the Emperours commandement, not onely troubled the Churches of the West;Soc. l. 2 c. 37. but also went to Nica, a towne in Thracia, where they gathered a number of Bishops of their owne faction, and approved the summe of Faith read by Ar|rians (in Ariminum, being first translated into the Greeke language) and this they called the Nicene Faith, deceiving themselues with vaine hopes, as if men had beene so sense|lesse, as to be altogether deceived by the similitude of words, Nica in Thracia, and Nice in Bithinia. Moreouer, Athanasius was as yet aliue, who could haue discovered both the blas|phemie of the Arrians at Sirmium, and the falshood of the Arrians at Nica: for at Sirmium, in the first Session of the Councell, it was written by the Clerke of the Councell, Presente Constantio sempiterno,  Magna Augusto, Consuli|bus Eusebio  Hypatio.Sozom. l. 4. c. 17 Loe, saith Athanasius, writing to his friends, the Arrians will not call the Sonne of God everla|sting, but they say, there was a time, wherein hee was not: but they call the Emperor Constantius, being a mortall man, everlasting Emperour.
The Councell of Seleucia. Acts 13, 4 Soz. l. 4 c. 22.SElucia is a towne of Isauria, or Cilicia, from whence Paul and Barnabas sayled to Cyprus. Isauria lyeth be|twixt Lycaonia and Cilicia, and in an ample signification it comprehendeth Cilica. In this towne convened 160. Bi|shops of the East, in the moneth of December, of that same yeere of our Lord, wherein the Councell of Ariminum, was assembled. Leonas one of the Princes of the Emperours court, and Lucius, otherwise called Lauritius, Captaine of the bands of souldiers in Isauria, were appointed to attend the peace of the assembly, and that all things should bee done decently, and in order. The Emperour gaue comman|dement, that the matter of faith should bee first intreated:

but afterward hee gaue commandement, that the liues of them who were to bee accused,Soc. l. 2. c. 29. should first bee examined: Whereupon arose contention in the assemblie: some vr|ging the matter of Faith to be first entreated: others craving that the liues of such as were accused or deposed, should be first examined: and both parties grounded themselues vpon the warrant of the Emperours letters. The princi|pall ring leaders of the one faction, were Acacius Bishop of Caesarea Palestinae, Georgius Bishop of Alexandria, Vranius of Tyrus, Eudoxius of Antiochia, and their followers ex|ceeded not the number of two and thirtie. On the other side were Georgius Bishoppe of Laodicea in Syria, Sophronius of Pompeiopolis in Paphlagonia, Eleusius of Cyzicus: and the greatest number of the Councell followed the opinion of these Bishops. So it came to passe, that the most part thought it expedient, that the matter of Faith should bee first en|treated.
After this, the Councell was of new againe divided into three factions. Acacius, and his complices thought meete, that the forme of Faith should bee altered. The most part were in a contrary opinion, that the summe of the Nicene Faith should be kept, onely the word , should bee left out. Sylvanus Bishoppe of Tarsus, was in the third o|pinion, that the summe of Faith compiled in Antiochia, at the dedication of the Temple, should be kept. Pluralitie of voyces prevayled, that the Sonne of God should neither be called , nor yet , but rather , that is, like vnto his Father, because in Scripture hee is called the image of the invisible God. And they consented to ex|communicate all those, who called the Sonne of God , that is, vnlike vnto the Father. Now Acacius, and his complices, who were indeede Anomaei, would haue seemed to accord with the rest of the Councell: but when it was demanded of them, in what sense they counted the Sonne alike vnto the Father? They answered, that hee was like in will, but not in substance. After that much disputation and little agreement had beene, Leonas a secret

favourer of Acacius, dissolved the assembly. Neverthe|lesse, the Fathers of the Councell convened,Soz. l. 4. c. 22. to iudge the cause of Cyrillus Bishoppe of Hierusalem (whom the A|cacians had deposed) and warned the Acacians to bee present, but they would not compeare. Therefore the Councell proceeded to the deposition of Georgius Bishop of Alexandria, Acacius Bishop of Caesarea, Vranius Bishoppe of Tyrus, Patrophylus Bishope of Schythopolis, and Eu|doxius Bishop of Antiochia, in whose place they substitu|ted Avianus, a Presbyter in Antiochia, others call him A|drianus. The Acacians layd hands on Avianus, and de|livered him into the hands of Leonas and Lauritius, and they banished him. The Councell protested against Leonas and Lauritius, and the Acacians, that they violated the Decree of the Councell: and without further delay, they addresse to Constantinople, to giue information to the Emperour. But the Acacians prevented the rest, and mis|informed the Emperour, and accused the Councell, and perswaded him to reiect the summe of Faith agreed vpon in Seleucia.
The Councell of the Acati|ans at Con|stantinople.THe wrath of the Emperour against the Fathers of the Councell of Seleucia, made the rest to bee dispersed: only the Acacians remained stil in Constantinople, and they gathered together fifty Bishops, out of Bithynia, and other neere adiacent places. In this Synode they confirmed the summe of Faith read by Vrsatius, and Valens, in Ariminum. It is iudiciously observed by Socrates, that after the Coun|cell of Nice,Soc. l. 2. c. 41. the Arrians in the multiplyed conceits of their wauering minds, set forth nine divers summes of faith, to wit, in the dedication of the Church of Antiochia, two formes. The third by those who adhered to Narcissus, was exhibited to Constance in France. The fourth was sent by Eudoxius to Italy. In Sirmium three formes were indited: whereof one was read in Ariminum, with noting the names of the Consuls, in whose time it was written. The eight was the summe of Faith set forth in the Councell

of Seleucia. The ninth was the sum of faith, set downe in Co~|stantinople, with this addition, that the words   should be silenced when Preachers spake of God. Thus we see, that there is no end of wandering, when men haue once forsaken the narrow path of the truth of God.
THe Emp. Constantius,The fourth Councel of Antiochia, ga|thered by Constantinu.  the rest of the Arrians, were like vnto a troubled sea, that ca~not take rest: yet another cou~|cel must be gathered in Antiochia, for abjuring both the word   the word , so that in time to come no man shall call the Son of God consubstantiall with the Father, nor yet of a different substance fro~ the Father. The bi|shops conueened thought expedient, before they intreated concerning the Faith,Theod. lib. 2. cap. 31. that the chaire of Antiochia, vacant at that time without a B. should first be prouided: choise was made of Meletius, some-time B. of Sebastia, in Armenia. Hee receiued ordination by Arrians, who subscribed also to his admission,  their hand-writs were deliuered into the custo|dy of Eusebius Samosatenus. But when Meletius disappointed the expectatio~ of the Arrians, they procured his banishment,  that Euzoius should be placed in his stead.Theod lib. 2. cap. 32. Likewise Euse|bius Samosate~us for no minassings  threatnings of the Emp. would deliuer backe againe the subscriptions of the Arrians: so that the Emp. both commended  admired the magnani|mous courage of Eusebius. This Cou~cel was holden in the 25 yeere of the raigne of Constantius. In it the Arrians could not perfect their intended purpose to inuent a new sum of faith, which would haue made not the tenth forme of faith indited by the~, because Consta~tius got knowledge of the seditious at|tempts of Iulian,  he left the Councel to preueene the enter|prises of Iulian, but he fell sicke by the way, and died at Cili|cia.
Vnder the raigne of Iulian Iouinian some particular coun|cels were assembled:Hist. Magis. such as a Councel in Alexandria, gathe|red by Athanasius Eusebius Vercellensis, for da~ning old here|sies, and confirming the Faith.Sozom. lib. 5, cap. 3. Another in Palestina, for or|daining a B. in Maiuma. Another in Antiochia by the Aca|cians,

vnder the raigne of Iouinian. These wandering stars, accustomed to accommodate themselues to times,Socrat lib. 3. cap. 25. places, and persons, to gaine fauour at the Emperours hands, they sub|scribe the Nicene Faith. But I set forward to the rest.
The Councel of Laodicea. Apocal. 3.LAodicea is the Metrapolitane towne of Phrygia, and one of the seuen Churches of Asia, to whom the Apostle Iohn, when hee was banished in Pathmos for the word of God, did write his Epistles. This description I haue pre|mitted, to distinguish Laodicea of Syria, a citie neere approa|ching to Antiochia, and whereof frequent mention is made in the Ecclesiasticall Historie, from Laodicea of Asia. In this towne, Laodicea of Asia, a Synode was gathered, after the death of Iovinian,Hist. Magd. about the yeere of our Lord 368. Nothing was determined in this Councell concerning mat|ters of Faith:Gratian. distinct. 16. but onely constitutions concerning Ecclesia|sticall policie were made in number 59. In this assembly the worshipping of Angels is damned, as horrible idola|try, and a forsaking of Christ.Canon 35. And the bookes of holy Canonicke Scripture which are to be read in time of holy Conuocations of people, are particularly reckoned out, both of olde  new Testament. And in this Catalogue of cano|nicke bookes,Canon 59. no mention is made of the bookes of the Ma|chabees, of Ecclesiasticus, and other Apocreeph bookes.
A Councell in Illyricum.VNder the raigne of the Emperours, Valentinian and Valens, and about the yeere of our Lord 370. With ad|uice of both the Emperours a Councell was gathered in Illyricum, wherein the Nicene Faith had confirmation and allowance.Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 8.9. The Emperour Valens was not as yet infected with the poison of the Arrian heresie.
The Councell of LampsacumLAmpsacum is a towne situated about the narrow passages of Hellespontus. The Macedonia~ heretikes sought liberty from the Emp. Valens, to meete in this towne, who granted their petition the more willingly, because he supposed that they had accorded in opinion with Acacius Eudoxius: but

they ratified the Cou~cel set foorth at Seleucia  damned the Councel holden at Constantinople by the Acacians.Socrat. l. 4. c. 6. Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 7. The Emp. Valens being deceiued of his expectation, commanded them to be banished, and their Churches to be giuen to the fauourers of the opinion of Eudoxius.Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 11.  12. This dash constrained the Macedonians to take a new course, and to aggree with Laberius Bishop of Rome. But these Camelions when they had changed many colours, they could neuer be white, that is, sincere and vpright in Religion.
VNder the Emperour Valentinian in the West,The Councel of Rome. Damasus bi|shop of Rome gathered a Councel in Rome,Theod. lib. 2. cap. 22. Sozom. lib. 6: cap. 23. wherein he confirmed the Nicene Faith, and damned Auxentius Bishop of Millan, with Vrsatius, Valens, and Caius. Likewise hee dam|ned Apollinaris, and his disciple Timotheus.
IN the yeere of our Lord 38.3. or as Bullinger reckoneth,The second Generall Councel. 385 in the third yeere of the raigne of Theodosius, a Generall Councell was gathered at Constantinople, consisting of 150. Bishops, of whom 36. were entangled with the heresie of Ma|cedonius, who called the Holy Spirit a creature,Theod. lib. 5. cap. 8. a minister,  seruant, but not consubstantiall with the Father and the Son. In this Councel the Macedonia~ heretikes were louingly ad|monished to forsake their errour,  to embrace the true faith and that so much the more, because they had once already sent messengers to Liberius, and professed the true Faith. But they continued obstinately in their errour,  departed from the Councell. The heresie of Macedonius was da~ned, the Ni|cen faith confirmed, with amplification of that part of the Symbole which concerned the holy Spirit, in this manner: I beleeue in the holy Spirit our Lord, giuer of life, who proceedeth from the Father,  with the Father, and the Son, is to be worship|ped,  glorified. They ordained Nectarius B. of Co~stantinople;  that Consta~tinople shuld haue the prerogatiue of honour next to Rome.Theod. ibid. Great care was had of Prouinces, that they should not of new againe be infected with Heresies. For this cause the name of Patriarches in the Councell of Nice appropriated to a few, in this Generall Councell is com|municated

to manie.Theod. ibid. To Nectarius Megapolis and Thracia was allotted: Pontus to Hellodius, Cappadocia to Gregorius Nys|senus, Meletina and Armenia to Otreius. Amphilochius atten|ded vpon Iconium and Lycaonia, Optimus vpon Antiochia and Pisidia,Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 7.8.9. Timotheus vpon the Churches of Aegypt. Laodicea was recommended to Pelagius, Tarsus to Diodorus, and Antiochia to Meletius, who was present at the Coun|cell, and ended his life in Constantinople. To other Bishops a care and sollicitude of their owne boundes was commit|ted, with this caueat, that no man should inuade the bounds belonging to another, but if necessitie so required, Synods should be assembled, and euery one being desired, should mutuallie assist his neighbour.
Another Councell at Constantino|ple.THe great affaires of the Church,  the care of their bre|thren in the West, compelled them to meete againe in Constantinople, where they wrote a Synodicke letter to Da|masus B. of Rome, to Ambrose, Britto, Valeria~us, Acholius, Ane|mius, Basilius,Theod. lib. 5. cap. 9.  to the rest of the Bishops co~ueened at Rome, Wherin they declare the ma~ifold troubles they had sustained by heretikes:  now albeit in the mercie of God they were ejected out of the sheepe-folds, yet like vnto rauening wolues they were lurking in woods, seeking oportu~ity to deuour the sheepe of Christ. They excuse their absence, because the infir|mitie of their Churches newly recouered from the hands of heretikes, could not permit many of their number to journey to Rome. Alwayes they sent their beloued brethren Cyriacus, Eusebius, Priscianus, to countenance the assembly at Rome. In matters of Discipline they recommended vnto them the Canons of the Councell of Nice:Theod. ibid. namely, that Ecclesiasticall honours should be conferred to persons worthy,  that with the speciall aduice and consent of the Bishops of that same Prouince, with assistance of their confining neighbours, if neede required. After this manner was Nectarius B. of Con|stantinople, Flauianus B. of Antiochia,  Cyrillus B. of Ierusa|lem, ordained. Heere marke, that the consent of the Bishop of Rome was not necessarie to the ordination of the Bishops

of the East. And the vsurped authoritie of the Bishop of Rome smelleth of Noueltie, and not of Antiquitie. This Synodicke letter sent from Constantinople, would seeme to import, that the Councell which Damasus gathered at Rome, was assembled in the dayes of Theodosius, or els that hee had gathered two assemblies in Rome at diuers times, and yet for owne purpose.
GOdly Emperours and Kings,The third Councell hol|den at Con|stantinople, vnder the raigne of Theodosius. 2 Sam. 5. Psalm. 122. such as Constantine, The|odosius, and Dauid, were very carefull of the vnitie of the Church, that it might be like vnto a compact Citie, as Ierusalem was when the tower of Iebus was conquised, then the people worshipped one God, were obedient to one Law, and subject onely to one Soueraigne. Theodosius in the fifth yeere of his raigne, caring for the peace of the Church, conueened a great Nationll Councell at Con|stantinople, not onely of Homousians, but also of Arrians, Eunomians, and Macedonians, hoping that by mutuall con|ference possibly they might in end accord. The good Em|perour consulted with Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople,Socrat. l. 5. c. 10. Nectarius with Agelius a Bishop of the Novatians, Agelius with Sisinius, an eloquent man, and a mightie Teacher, and a Reader in his Church.Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 12. This man considering, that by contentious disputations, Schismes were increased, but not quenched, gaue this aduice to Nectarius, that hee should counsell the Emperour to demande of Heretikes, in what account they had the holy Fathers, who preceeded their time. The Heretikes at the first spake reuerently of the Fathers: but when they were demaunded, if in mat|ters of Faith they would giue credit to the testimonie of the Fathers, the Heretikes were diuided amongst themselues: Therefore the Emperour rent in pieces the summes of the Arrian, Eunomian, and Macedonian, faith: and ordained the Homousian Faith onely to haue place.
THe second Councell of Carthage was asse~bled vnder the raigne of Theodosius,The second Councell of Carthage. neere vnto the time of the Generall

Councell holden in Constantinople. In it, first the summe of the Nicene Faith is confirmed. The continencie of Bishops,Tom. 1. Concil. Elders, and Deacons, is recommended, with ab|stinence euen from matrimoniall societie: so earlie began men to bee wiser then God: But in the twelfth Canon of the third Councell of Carthage, it may bee perceiued, that this constitution (as disagreeable from Gods word) was not regarded, because Bishops in Africa married, and had sonnes and daughters: and these are inhibite to marrie with Infidels and Heretikes in the Canons a fore-saide. The making of Chrisme, and consecrating of holie Vir|gins, is ordained onely to belong to Bishops. The Ca|nons of this Councell, for the most part, tend to this, to aduance the authoritie of their Bishops, fore-smelling (as appeares) the vsurpation of preheminence in the Bishops beyond sea.
The third Councell of Carthage.THe third Councell of Carthage was assembled in the yeere of the Lord 399. Aurelius Bishop of Carthage seemeth to haue bin Moderatour of the Councell: Augustine Bishop of Hippo was present. Many good constitutions were accorded vpon in this Councell:Canon 6. as namely, that the Sacra|mentes should not bee ministred to the dead.
Canon 12.That the sonnes and daughters of Bishops, and others in spirituall offices, should not be giuen in marriage to Pagans, Heretikes, or Schismatikes.
Canon 15.The men in spirituall offices should not be intangled with secular businesse, according to the precept of the Apostle, 2. Tim. 2. verse, 4.
Canon 16.That men of the Cleargy should practise no kind of vsury.
Canon 18.That no man shall be ordained Bishop, Elder, or Deacon, before hee haue brought all persons of his owne familie to the profession of Christian Religion.
Canon 19.That Readers, who are come to perfect yeeres shall either marrie, or els professe continencie.
Canon 24.That in the ministration of the Sacrament, or Sacrifice, (to wit, Eucharistike) nothing should bee offered, except bread

and wine mixed with water, of the fruites of the Cornes and Grapes.
That the Bishop of Rome should bee called the Bishop of the first seate,Canon 40. but not the high Priest, nor the Prince of Priestes.
That nothing,Canon 47. except holy Canonicke Scripture, should be read in the Churches, vnder the name of holy bookes.
ABout the yeere of our Lord 401.The fourth Councell of Carthage. vnder the raigne of Honorius, was assembled againe a great nationall Coun|cell in Carthage, of 214. Bishops. Augustine Bishop of Hippo was also present at this Councell. Manie Canons were set downe in this Councell, almost equall with the number of conueened Bishops.
That persons married,Canon 13. for reuerence of the blessing pro|nounced to the marriage, should not companie together the first night after their marriage.
That the Bishop should haue his dwelling place neere vn|to the Church,Canon 14 and 15. his house-holde-stuffe should be vncostly, his fare should be course, and vndelicate, and that hee should conquiese authoritie vnto himselfe by fidelitie and vpright|nesse of an holy conuersation.
That a Bishop should not spend time in reading the bookes of Pagans:Canon 16. the bookes of Heretikes, if necessitie required, he might reade.
That a Bishop entangle not himselfe deepely with hous|hold businesse,Canon 20. to the end hee may attend vpon reading, Prayer, and Preaching.
That a Bishop admit no man vnto a spirituall office,Canon 22. with|out aduice of the Clergie, and consent of the people.
That a Bishop without aduice of his Cleargie,Canon 23. pronounce no sentence, els it shall haue no force, except they confirme it.
That a Bishop sitting,Canon 34. shall not suffer a presbyter to stand.
That an assembly of Heretikes conueened together,Canon 71. shall not be called Concilium, but Conciliabulum.
That hee who communicateth with an Heretike,Canon 73. shall be excommunicate, whether he be of the number of the Laikes, or of the Cleargie.
Canon. 95.That such as refuse to giue vnto the Church, the ob|lations of defunct persons, shall bee excommunicate, as murtherers of the poore. Heere marke what is meaned by Oblationes Defunctorum, not soul|masses, said for the defunct, but the charitie which they haue in testa|mentall legacy to the poore,Canon. 100. That no woman shal presume to bap|tize.



CENTVRIE V.
_COncerning Councels gathered in the daies of Arcadius and Honorius,Councels at Constantino|ple against Iob. Chrysostome. by Epiphanius in Cyprus, and Theophilus in Alexandria, vnder pretence of damning the bookes of Origen; and in Constantinople, first and last, by the malice of Eudoxia, the Emperour Arcadius wife: to the depo|sition of Iohn Chrysostome Bishop of Constantinople: I hope I haue not need to make a new declaration of things, which are amply declared in the preceding history.
ABout the yeere of our Lord,The fift Cou~|cell of Car|thage. 419. a great number of Bishops were assembled in the Towne of Carthage, whose names are particularly expressed in their Synodicke letters, sent to Innocentius the first, Bishop of Rome. In this assemblie,Aug. Epist. 90.  91. they damned the opinions of Pelagius, and Coe|lestius (which hath been aboue rehearsed) as hereticall. The answer that Innocentius returned to the Councell, is inter|mixed with words of swelling pride, as if no Decree could be firme, vntill it had allowance of the Romane chaire: yet the fift Councell of Carthage had pronounced Anathema against the opinions of Pelagius, and Coelestius, before they sent their letter to Innocentius.
Amongst the canons of this Councell, the two last are to be remarked: namely, the fourteenth, and fifteenth ca|non. The one declareth,Canon 14. that no Church was consecra|ted without the reliques of the Martyrs:Canon 15. the other decla|reth, that adoration of reliques at this time, was the custome of Ethnickes: supplication is appointed to be made to the Emperors, that reliques which are found in Images, groues,

or trees, or such other places, should bee abolished.
The first Councell of Toledo.THe first Councell of Toledo in Spaine, was assembled vnder the raignes of Arcadius and Honorius. The yeere of our Lord wherein this Councell was gathered, is much contraverted: therefore I overpasse it, contenting my selfe with some notice of the time of the Emperour, in whose time the Councell was gathered. It seemeth to haue beene assembled for confirmation of the Nicene Councell, and re|futation of some errours. The canons concerning prohibi|bition of marriage to some persons,Canon 17. are foolish, and the ad|mitting of a man to the communion, who wanteth a wife, and contenteth himselfe with one concubine onely, is foo|lisher: so perilous a thing it is, in a iot to depart from the certaine rule of the written Word of God.
The Councell called Mileui|tanum.MIlevitum is a towne of Numidia: in it many Bishops were assembled vnder the raigne of Arcadius, whose names are particularly expressed in the letter sent from the Councell to Innocentius Bishop of Rome, which letter is inserted in the Epistles of Augustine, together with the answer of Innocentius the first.Epist. 92.  93 Two principall causes moo|ved them to assemble together. First, to finish the work they had begun, in the fift Councell of Carthage, in condem|ning the heresies of Pelagius, and Coelestius, by whom, as yet, many were deceiued, and perverted from the true faith. Augustine Bishop of Hippo, was not onely present, but also President. The opinions of Pelagius and Coelestius, concer|ning the power of mans nature, not supported by the grace of God, and free-will of man to doe good of it selfe, is so solidly refuted, and that by arguments taken out of holy Scripture onely; that it is to be wished, that other Councels had followed the example of this Councell, wherein Au|gustine was President.
The other cause of the meeting of this Councell, was to constitute canons concerning Ecclesiasticall discipline, spe|cially, that no man should make appellation from his owne

Bishop to Bishops beyond Sea, but in case his owne Bishop did him wrong,Canon 22. then hee should appeale vnto an assembly of African Bishops, but hee who would needes appeare to Bishoppes beyond Sea (meaning chiefly of the Bi|shop of Rome) let him be secluded from the communion of all African Bishops. The cause of Apiarius, and his Bi|shop Vrbanus Siccensis seemed already to bee wakened, and the Fathers of this Councell fore-smelled that he was to ap|peale to the Bishop of Rome; like as he did indeed, to Zo|symus the successor of Innocentius: and therefore, like wise men in due time, they made this constitution. Innocentius received the Councels letter from a brother named Iulius, and approoved the condemnatory sentence, pronunced a|gainst Pelagius and Coelestius: but marke the words of Inno|centius letter, Frater,  Coepiscopus noster Iulius dilectionis ve|straeliteras, quas ex Milevitano cura fide propensiore misists, mi|hinopinanter suggessi: that is to say, Our brother and fellow|ship Iulius, brought vnto mee vnawares your brotherly let|ters, which ye sent vnto me from the Councell Milevitanu~, with a care very bent for the Faith. The word inopinanter, declareth, that hee received their letter before hee knew that any such Councell was gathered, for the Bishops of Rome as yet tooke not vpon them that authority, to bee the onely appointers of generall and nationall Councels. Pelagius af|ter this Councell, compeared before a Councell in Palestina, and seemed to renounce his errors, but hee spake deceitful|ly, as Heretiques are accustomed to doe: but hee set forth nothing in writing to destroy the errour hee had builded, and to procure the safety of them whom hee had intangled with the snares of deceitfull errours,Aug. Epist. 95. as the Epistle of Aureli|us, Alipius, Augustinus, Evodius, and Possidius, written to Innocentius, doth declare. Obscure Covncels I haue not o|verpassed with silence, and do minde, God willing, to keep the like order in time to come.
IN the yeere of our Lord,The sixt Councell of Carthage. 402. and vnder the raignes of Honorius, and Theodosius, the second, a great nationall

Councell was assembled in Carthage: two hundred and seventeene bishops were present at this Councell,Hist. Magd. cent 5 cap. 9. and it con|tinued for the space of six yeeres. Aurelius Bishop of Car|thage, was Moderator. Three Bishops of Rome, to wit, Zo|symus, Bonifacius the first, and Coelestinus, endevoured with all their might to perswade the African Bishops, that they were vnder the soueraignty and iurisdiction of the Bishops of Rome: but all in vaine, as the issue of this Councell will proue. The ground of the great controversie betwixt the Bishops of Rome, and the sixt Councell of Carthage, was Apiarius Presbyter Siccencis, a wicked man, and iustly ex|communicate, not onely by his owne Bishoppe Vrbanus, but also by a Synode of other neere approaching Bishops. Hee appealed to Zosymus Bishop of Rome, a Citie of refuge to all villanous men, as appeared by the insolent forme of his cariage, toward his brethren in Africke: for before hee had heard the causes wherefore they had excommunicated this wicked man Apiarius, hee absolued him, and admitted him to his communion. Moreover, vnderstanding that a Councell was to be convened in Carthage, hee sent thither Ambassadours to plead the cause of Apiarius, to procure the excommunication of Vrbanus; and in case this succeeded not, to desire that this question might be remitted to the de|termination of the Romane Bishop, as vndoubted Iudge of appellations, according to an act of the Councell of Nice. The Fathers of the Councell of Carthage answered with great modesty that they knew no such act, to haue beene made in the Councell of Nice. Alwayes time is granted to the Bishop of Rome, to prooue that such right belongeth to him by an act, of the Councell of Nice. Zosymus the first alleadger of this false act,Soc. l. 7. c. 11. continued short time in office: for hee ended his course within the space of one yeere, and few moneths. Bonifacius the successor of Zosymus, seriously vr|ging the same prerogatiue, to be iudges in all causes of ap|pellation, according to the act of the Councell of Nice. When all the acts were read, both in the Latine and Greeke exemplars, and no such act was found, the Ambassadors

of Bonifacius returned to him with this answer, that the principall Registers ought to bee searched, which were to bee found in Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antiochia: and in the meane time no man should bee challenged for appealing to the Bishoppe of Rome, vntill this questi|on had an end, by viewing of the authentique Registers. Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria, and Atticus Bishop of Con|stantinople, sent to the Councell of Carthage, the iust co|pies of the acts of the Councell of Nice: but no such act was found,Soc. l. 7.11. as was alledged by Zosymus and Bonifacius: and by this time Bonifacius also ended his life: for hee sate not aboue three yeeres. The Epistle sent from the sixt Coun|cell of Carthage, declaring that they found the act afore|sayd, alledged by the ambassadours of the Bishop of Rome, to bee supposititious and false, this Epistle (I say) was di|rected to Bonifacius: but seeing hee had ended his life, it came into the hands of Coelestinus, the successor of Bonifaci|us, who insisted by the same ambassadours, who were em|ployed before, to wit, Faustinus a Bishop, and Philippus and Asellus, two Presbyters, to haue Aparius received into fa|uour, and the African Bishops to bee subiect to the Bishop of Rome: but their travels were bestowed in vaine. The last period of this controversie was this, that Aparius des|pairing of helpe from the Bishops of Rome, confessed his faults, and humbly submitted himselfe to the Councell of Carthage.Hist. Magd. cent. 5. cap. 9 And the Ambassadours of Coelestinus returned with this answer, that the Bishop of Rome had no authori|tie over the Bishops of Africa: but hee who thought him|selfe to bee wronged, let him complaine to a nationall Councell, and if the nationall Councel also did him wrong, then let him complaine to the generall Councell, but no appellation to be made in time to come from Africa to the Bishop of Rome.
VNder the raignes of Arcadius and Honorius,The Councell called Bagiense and about the yeere of our Lord, 433. The Donatists assembled themselues in a towne of Africa called Bagaia, in frequent

number: for they are counted 310. who were present at this Councell. The principall purpose of their meeting, was for deposition of Maximianus Bishop of Bagara, who fell from their societie, and drew many others from their here|sie: him they deposed and accursed. I haue made mention of this vnhappy Councell for two causes: First, to declare the vncessant diligence of Heretiques, in advancing a doc|trine of lies, for it was a strange thing, that for the depositi|on of one man, so many should assemble themselues in one towne: seldome were so many present at Occumenicke Councels, as were at this convention. Secondly, to declare the effromed peartnesse of Heretiques, when they are met together, all that they doe is ascribed to the holy Spirit: for in their definitiue sentence against Maximianus, they bor|row the words of the holy Apostles,Acts 15. Placuit Spiritui sancto qui in nobis est: that is, It hath pleased the holy Spirit, who is in vs.
 Yet were they guided by Satan, and not by the ho|ly Spirit, in all the actions of this Councell.
The first Councell of Ephesus gene|rall.IN the eight yeere of the raigne of Theodosius the second, was a general Councel assembled in Ephesus, against the Heretique Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, of whom Socrates writeth, that the first ground of his heresie was the speeches of a Presbyter in his Church called Anastatius, whom hee had in reverent account. This Anastatius vpon a time teaching in the Church,Soc. l. 7. c. 32. sayd, let no man call the Virgin Marie the mother of God, whereupon ensued great trouble in the Church, for they were assured of the divini|tie of Christ. And Nestorius not willing that the man should bee disesteemed, whom he so much regarded: he chopped oft in his Sermons, vpon the word , not willing to giue vnto the blessed Virgin so great an honour. When the Councell of Ephesus was assembled, consisting of the num|ber of two hundreth Bishops and aboue, and Cyrillus Bi|shop of Alexandria, was appointed Moderator, by the ordi|nance of the Emperours, who commanded the Councell to bee gathered; Cirillus began to embarke, and to agitate

the question, before Iohn Patriarch of Antiochia, and his companie could be present at the Councell. At the first meeting, Nestorius being present, in the towne of Ephesus, vtterly spoyled his cause, and added to his former opinion borrowed from Anastatius, that they thought it an indignity done to the onely begotten Sonne of God, to speake of  and , and the words ,Acta Synodi Ephesina. were all reproachfull words to be spoken of the Sonne of God, that is, that hee was nourished vpon milke, that he was borne of a maide, that hee was two moneths or three moneths old, all these words hee counted to bee re|proachfull words to be spoken of the Sonne of God. The Fathers of the Councell were all highly offended at these wordes, and warned him to bee personally present at the Councell, but hee refused to appeare, vntill the time that Iohn Patriarch of Antiochia, should be present at the Coun|cell. Cirillus Bishop of Alexandria, was a man prompt, and forward in all causes, both good and bad, and hee would not linger vntill the comming of Iohn Patriarch of Antio|chia, and his company, but forthwith hee caused his books and writings to be examined, wherein it was cleerly found, that hee sayd the Sonne of the Virgin Mary was not God, but onely that God was with him: so hee denyed the per|sonall vnion of the divine and humane Nature. The Fathers of the Councell vpon this ground damned Nestorius as an Heretique,Soc. l. 7.32. and Nestorius on the other part gathered the Bi|shops of his ownefaction, and damned Cirillus Bishoppe of Alexandria, and Memnon Bishop of Ephesus.
After this, Iohn Patriarch of Antiochia came to Ephesus, whose comming rather increased, then diminished the schisme: for hee was so angry against the precipitation and hastinesse of Cirillus, that hee would not adioyne himselfe to the Councell: hereupon followed mutuall excommu|nications: Iohn Patriarch of Antiochia, excommuicated Cyrillus and Memnon: and they on the other part excom|municated him, and his  who came not to the Coun|cell: yet in the mercy of God, this schisme that fell out last

amongst good men was cured, and they were reconciled, and the Heretique Nestorius was banished to Oasis.
The first Councell of Ephesus.BEfore Theodosius the second had ended his life, Flavia|nus Bishop of Constantinople, had gathered a parti|cular Councell, and damned Eutyches an Abbot of Con|stantinople, because hee affirmed, that in Christ, after the v|nion of the divine and humane natures, there was no lon|ger two natures. This absurd opinion Flavianus damned as hereticall. Notwithstanding, Chrysaphius, the chiefe Go|vernour of the Emperours Palace, was a friend to Eutyches, and a favourer of his heresie. And hee procured at the Em|perours hands,Eva. l. 1. c. 9.10 that Eutyches cause should bee iudged in a more frequent assembly, to bee gathered at Ephesus, and wherein Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria should be Modera|tor. In this assembly Dioscorus dealt imperiously, like vnto an head-strong Heretique. Hee called vpon Eutyches, and required a confession of his faith, which when hee had gi|ven, not expecting the votes of others, who were present, with clamour and out-crying, hee gaue allowance vnto it, as if no more were requisite in a Councell, except onely the suffrage and vote of the Moderator. Likewise hee suffered not the letters of Leo Bishop of Rome, sent to the Councell, to be read. Thirdly, he absolued Eutyches, and 300 Monks, all intangled with this heresie,Hist. Magd. cent. 5. c. 9. whom Flavianus had iustly excommunicated: and last of all, he excommunicated Fla|vianus, and caused him by the tumult of his factioners, to be so rudely and discourteously entreated, that he was trod vn|der foot, and was so wounded, that within three dayes after hee ended his life: for this cause, this Councell was called a Councell of brigandrie.
The Councell of Berytus.THe Councel of Berytus in Phoenicia, wherein the cause of Ibas Bishop of Edessa (whom Dioscorus had depo|sed) was wakened, and he was iustified and absolued, I pur|posely passe by, because the controversie against Ibas, will be discussed in a greater assembly.
And the Councell called Agathense in France,The Councell called. Agthense. wherein albeit there be a great number of Constitutions, yet nothing is more remarkable in it than this; that they grant they had libertie to meete together by co~mandement of Alaricus king of Gothes, who at that time had soueraigntie in that part of France called Gallia Narbonensis where the Councell was gathered: so that in al countries, Councels, both generall and nationall, were conueened by the authoritie of Princes.
IN the yeere of our Lord 454. and in the third yeere of the raigne of the Emperour Martianus:The generall Councell of Chalcedon. Funct. chron. a generall Councell was assembled at Chalcedon a towne of Bythinia, lying di|rectly ouer against Constantinople. Martianus the Empe|rour was in person present at the Councell, and of Bishops, and reuerend Fathers, from all partes of the world sixe hun|dreth and thirtie. The like whereof hapned not in any ge|nerall Councell preceeding this time. The Patriarches were all present at this Councell,Euagr. lib. 2. cap. 4. either in proper person, or by their Ambassadours. Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria, Maximus Bishop of Antio|chia, Iuvenalis Bishop of Ierusalem: and in stead of Leo Bishop of Rome, his Ambassadours Pascasianus a Bishop, Lu|centius, Bonifacius, and Basilius Presbyters, with a Christian brother Iulianus.
Martianus entreated all the Fathers of the Councell to thinke that he gaue his presence to the conuention, not for ostentation of his power or vertue, but onely for desire that the true faith should be confirmed and established, and that by his authority all tumults of men disobedient to the Councell, might be repressed. Aboue all crauing of them, or rather charging  commanding them, that they should de|cerne nothing repugna~tto the actes of the Councel of Nice.
The Ambassadours of Leo Bishop of Rome craued that Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria should not sit in the Coun|cell as a iudge,Euagr. lib. 2. cap. 4. but that he should stand, and answere to things that were to be obiected vnto him. Which petition being granted, Eusebius B. of Dorileum stood vp, and accused him

of three things. First, that he had beene an aduersarie to the true faith, in absoluing Eutyches a notable heretike in the se|cond Councell of Ephesus: Secondly that he was a murderer of Flavianus Bishop of Constantinople a constant defender of the true faith: and thirdly that hee had done himselfe wrong in deposing him without a cause, and therewith hee desired his letter to be read. The Councell not onely read his letter accusatorie, but also read all the acts of the second Councell of Ephesus, and heard the reports of Bishops, who were present at the Councell of Brigandrie, and consented against their hearts to the deposition of Flauianus, because Dioscorus had bands of souldiers sent by Chrysaphius in the name of the Emperour Theodosus 2. to compell simple men to obey all his desires. All this beeing considered, together with his vnmanerly rudenesse, who would not suffer the letter of Leo Bishop of Rome to be read in the Councell a|foresaid, and finally that hee had most vniustly and vnadui|sedly excommunicated Leo Bishop of Rome.
The Councell of Chalcedon cited Dioscorus, the ground of this controuersie, but he appeared not: therefore hee was condemned as an heretike,Evagrabid. together with Eutyches and Iu|venalis Bishops of Ierusalem, and it was ordained that men should beleeue that the natures of Christ, albeit they were vnited, yet were they not confounded, as Eutyches heretically had affirmed. Likewise all the actes of the second Councell of Ephesus were abrogated  rescinded, except the deposi|tion of Damus Bishop of Antiochia, and substitution of Maximus in his place. Moreouer Theodoretus Bishop of Cyns and Ibas Bishop of Edessa, who had beene vniustly deposed in the second Councell of Ephesus, were both restored to their places, after they had clearely damned the heresies of Nestorius, and Eutyches. In the cause of Bassianus and Stepha|nus, who contended both for the Bishopricke of Ephesus, it was ordained that both of them should be remooued from that dignitie, as men who by vnlawfull meanes had aspired to ecclesiasticke offices, and a third person should haue the office. Finally, it was appointed and ordained in this Coun|cell,

that Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, and his succes|sours should haue the chiefe dignitie next vnto the chaire of Rome. It is to be marked that Proterius Bishop of Alexandria, to whom the place of old belonged, albeit hee was present in the Councel, yet he made none obstacle vnto this ordinance; but the Ambassadours of Leo Bishop of Rome spake against it, fearing left the increasing magnificence of such an Empe|riall towne, should in ende bring Constantinople to the pre|heminence of the first seat. Supremacie was long agoe the apple of their eye, and they could not abide that afarre off a diminution of this should be once pointed at. Neuerthelesse this ordinance had allowance of the Councel, notwithstan|ding of the contradiction of the Romane Ambassadours. Incodice Romano,Mysterium iniquitanis. saith learned Morneus, all this action is left out.
In the sixt Session of this Councell the Emperour Marti|anus with Pulcheria the Empresse, were both present, and cra|ued of the Councell, that ordinances should be made for re|straining the filthie lucre,Canon 6. and ambition of Monks and Cler|gie, who intangled themselues with secular businesse for desire of gaine and riches: wherevpon followed this constitution, that men who addicted themselues either to the Monastickelife, or the Clergie men, they should not be promoted to other digni|ties, meaning, mere ciuill offices, be|cause that that is a distraction of them from their calling.



CENTVRIE VI.
The Councel of Rauenna._THE schisme that fell out in the election of Symmachus was the cause of the ga|thering of the Councell of Rauenna, Laurentius, was his competitour. In this Councell it was found that Symmachus was first ordained, and that the most part both of Clergie and people ad|hered to him: therefore hee was declared to bee Bi|shop of Rome, and Laurentius was ordained Bishop of Nuceria.
Sixe Coun|cels holden  Rome in Symmachus time.The multiplied number of Councels in Symmachus time, al conueened by the authoritie of Theodoricus king of Gothes, who raigned in Italie. Al this number of Councels (I say) was assembled for matter of litle importance, except the fourth  fifth Councell, wherein a libel of accusations was giuen in against Symmachus, but he compeared not before the Coun|cell to answere; yet was he absolued by the most part of the Councell (being his own fauourers) chiefly for this reason; be+cause they thought that the high Priest should be iudged by no man,Hist. Magd. cent. 6 cap. 9. but his doings should be examined only before the Tribu~al of God. Marke how this matter goeth: the B. of Rome are lying vnder the feete of the Gothes, neither haue they li|berty to assemble themselues together, except that licence be sought,  obtained fro~ Theodoricus king of Gothes. Notwith|sta~ding supremacie that great Idol, whereat they aimed con|tinually, runneth so high in their heads, that the flatterers of the B. of Rome would absolue him, as a man whose actions came not vnder the indicature of mortall men. His accusers protested in write, that if the successours of Peter should bee

protested in writing that if the successors of Peter should be iudged by no man, then with the rest of the priuiledges of their chaire, they had also a priuiledge to sinne, and to doe what they please.
THe Councels of Spaine called Ilerdense,The Councels in Spaine cal|led Ilerdense and Valenti|num. and Valenti|num assembled in Valentia, are very obscure Councels. In the one eight Bishops were present: in the other sixe Bishoppes. Many new and needelesse-Canons were made in these assemblies, and farther I see nothing. In the first called Ilerdense; a prohibition of marriage in time of Lent, and three weekes before the festiuitie of Iohn the Baptist, and betwixt the dayes of the Aduent of our Lord, and the dayes called Epiphania. In the other Councell it was appoin|ted, that in the ordinarie seruice the Gospell should be read after the Epistle, partly in respect that all the people of God haue entresse to heare the wholesome precepts of their Sa|uiour, and partly, in respect that by such hearing, some were found to be conuerted to the faith, whereof it may be percei|ued, that the Gospell was read vnto the people in a known and intelligible language, els it could not worke faith in the heartes of the hearers.
IN the 20. yeeere of the Emp. Anastatius a nationall Coun|cell was assembled at Sidon of eightie Bishops,The Councell of Sidon. by the pro|curement of Xenaeas B. of Hierapolis, for vndoing the Coun|cell of Chalcedon. The Emperour had alreadie banished Eu|phemius, and Macedonius Bishops of Constantinople, Yet hee found that Flavianus B. of Antiochia, and Helias B. of Ieru|salem altogether disliked  reprooued his proceedings, nei|ther could they admit the law of obliuion, called in the Greeke language , which the Emperour would haue brought in, to pacifie controuersies in the Church, as ciuil controuersies, at sometimes haue bin pacified: for this cause the Emperour Anastatius set himselfe directly against the truth of God, and gathered this Councell, to vndoe the au|thoritie of the Councel of Chalcedon. Flavianus, and

Helias would not bee present at this vngodly Councell, wherein they damned the Councell of Chalcedon, yet they abstained from damning Flaevianus and Helias, for a time. Ne|uerthelesse by continuall accusations of these two Bishops, as if they had beene mockers of all the Emperours doings, they procured their banishment, as hath beene declared in the preceding historie.
The first Councell of Aurelia.IN the 22. yeere of the raigne of Anastatius, and vnder the raigne of Clodoueus King of France, conueened 32. Bishops in the towne of Aurelia, of purpose to settle some order in Ecclesiasticall discipline, which through iniurie of time, and irruption of barbarous people into the countrie of France, had beene brought to great dissolution and misorder. The Canons of this Councel are coincide~t for the most part, with the Canons of all other Councels.
The Councell of Gerunda and Czsa|raugusta.THe two former Councels assembled in Spaine, name|ly Ilerdense, and Valentinum, were vnder the raigne of Theodoricus. Now these two Gerundense and Caesaraugusta|num are celebrated vnder the same King, to wit, Theodoricus of the nation of the Gothes raigning in Spaine. In Ge|runda seuen Bishops conueened, made Ecclesiasticall con|stitutions, chiefly about Baptisme, that Catechumeni should bee baptized on Easter day, and at Pentecost, when most solemne conuentions of people were gathered.Canon 4. They who were vnder infirmitie and sicknesse, might bee baptized at any time,Canon 5. and the infant, which was likely to die, might be baptized the same day wherein it was borne. In Caesaraugusta eleuen Bishops seemed to haue beene conueened.Canon 2. They for|bid fasting vpon the Lords day, for superstition, or for respect of times, or for perswasion. It would appeare that this Coun|cell had a desire to abolish the rites and customes of the Ma|nichean heretikes, who were accustomed to fast vpon the Lords day.
The Councell of Rome.IN the dayes of Hrmisda by the mandat of Theodoricus King of Gothes raigning in Italie, a Councell was assem|bled

at Rome vpon this occasion. It was thought meet by the Emperour Anastatius, Theodoricus King of Italie and many others, that a Councel shuld be assembled at Heraclea for deciding coutrouersies in religion. Many Bishops re|sorted to Heraclea about the number of 200. but Anastatius suffered no Councell to be holden, thereby incurring the great blame of inconstancie, and carelessenesse in seeking out the truth: for this cause Theodoricus willed Hormisda Bi|shop of Rome to gather a Councell at Rome, wherein the er|rour of Eutyches is damned of new againe,  Ambassadours are ordained to be sent to Anastatius the Emperour, and to the Bishop of Constantinople, to diuert the~, if it were possible from the errour of Eutyches, but how inhumanely the Am|bassadours were intreated, it hath beene declared in the de|scription of the life of Hormisda.
VNder the raigne of the Emperour Iustinus a Synode was gathered in Constantinople by Ioannes Cappadox.The Councel of Constanti|nople. Many grieuons accusations were giuen in against Severus Bishop of Antiochia,Hist. Magd. cent. 6. cap. 9. such as sacrilegious spoyling of Temples, vn|der pretence of eschewing causes of Idolatrie, hee tooke away the golden doues that hung aboue the fontes, and the altars, and hee vttered many blasphemous speeches a|gainst the Councell of Chalcedon. Ioannes Cappadox, al|beit hee was of a bad religion himselfe, yet the authoritie of the Emperour, and consent of the Councell procured that Severus should be damned of heresie, whom the Em|perour also banished, and (as some affirme) punished him also by commanding that his blasphemous tongue should bee cut out. In like manner the Monks of Apamea in a Councell conueened in Syriasecunda,The Synode Syria secunda. accused Severus of bloody cruelty, and oppression, in besieging of Mona|steries, slaying the Monks, and spoyling their goods. The like accusation was giuen in against Peter Bishop of Apa|mea, which accusations beeing sufficiently proued by vnsus|pect witnesses: this Councell damned Severus, and Petrus Bishop of Apamea.
The second Councell of Toledo.IN the fifth yeere of King Abnaricus was the second Councell of Toledo conueened, partly for renuing the ancient constitutions of the Church, and partly for making new constitutions belonging to Ecclesiasticall discipline. It was ordained that children whom their parents had de|dicated to the Church, they should not be admitted to the office of a Subdeacon, vntill they were eighteene yeeres of age, neither to the office of a Deacon, before they were twentie fiue yeeres old, and at the beginning of their admis|sion to the office of a Subdeacon, namely, when they were full eighteene yeeres old (and not before that time) they should bee presented before the Clergie, and people to make an open declaration, whether they were of pur|pose to leade a continent life, or to marrie, and these who protested they had not the gift of continency,Canon 1. are tolerated by the first Canon of the second Councell of Toledo to marrie.
The fift gene|rall Councell holden at Constantino|ple.IN the yeere of our Lord 551. and in the 94. yeere of the raigne of the Emperour Iustinian, was a generall Councell assembled at Constantinople. The principall causes of this meeting are expresly set downe by Euagrius lib. 4. cap. 38. First in respect of the controuersie betwixt Eustochius B. of Ierusalem, and Theodorus Ascidas B. of Caesarea Cappadocia: Eustochius cast out the Monkes of Nova Laura, who obsti|nately defended the errours of Origen. Theodorus Ascidas as|sisted them, and said, that Eustochius Bishop of Ierusalem had dealt cruelly, and inhumanely with his brethren; to pacifie this controuersie was this Councell conueened: Also great disputation was in the Church about the bookes of Origen, of Theodorus Bishop of Mopsuesta, and some writings of Theodoritus Bishop of Cyrus, and Ibas Bishop of Edessa: this was the second cause of this great conuention to put an ende vnto these contentious disputations. At this time Menas was Bishop of Constantinople, but he ended his life in the very time of the generall Councel. The first question mooued in the Councel was this: Whether or no, men who were dead, and had ended their course, might lawfully be cursed and

excommunicated. To this Eutychius (a man before this time of no great account) answered:2. Reg. 23. vers. 16. That like as Iosias not onely punished Idolatrous Priestes who were aliue, but also opened the graues of them who were dead, to dishonour them after their death, who had dishonoured God in their life-time: euen so the memorialls of men might be accursed after their death, who had harmed Christes Church in their life-time.Euag. lib. 4 cap. 38. This was thought by the Fathers of the Councell to be pertinently spoken, and when his answer came to the eares of the Emperour Iustinian, hee appointed that hee should be ordained Bishop of Constan|tinople, for Menas died suddenly in time of the Councell. Vigilius Bishop of Rome was in Constantinople in time of this Councell, but would not be present at the Councel, left the dignitie of the Romane chaire should bee impaired, if the Patriarch of Constantinople had beene equalled with him in honour, for Eutychius, after Menas, was moderator of the Councell. The generall conuention tooke this effect, That the writings of Theodorus Bishop of Mopsuesta were vtterly condemned, and the replyes of Theodoretus to the 12. heades of Cyrillus, with the letter of Ibas written to Maris a Persia~ were damned. Finally the errours of Origen were dam|ned,  Theodorus Ascidas, together with the Monks of Nova Laura, who defended the errours of Origen, all were excom|municated, and the 4. preceeding generall Councels were confirmed with full allowance. The Councell of Mopsuesta immediatly following, tended onely to this, to know when the name of Theodorus sometime B. of Mopsuesta a towne of Cilicia, was razed out of the roll called sacra diptycha. And the ancients both of Clergie and people, assured the Emperour Iustinian that the name of Theodorus was razed out of the rol of holy Bishops before their time.
VNder the raigne of Childebertus king of France,The second, third, fourth and fifth Councels of Aurelia. were fre|quent meetings of Bishops in Aurelia a town of France commonly called Orleans. Many superstitious constitutions were hatched amongst them, especially about prohibition of

marriage, for this doctrine of deuils had now gotten the vp|per hand in the West. The verse of Homer may be written in the frontispice of these Councels : that is, It is a shame to tarie long, and to re|turne emptie. If they meet so oft, somefruites worthy of their meeting should haue beene brought out to the world, but it is a wearisome thing to trauell a long time in the wil|dernesse of Arabia, albeit in it there bee large fieldes, yet it is a barren ground, and the paine of wearisome trauelling is not recompensed with the delight of any refreshment that can be had there. This I write, not to hinder any man from the reading of these Councels also: for some good things are to bee found in them, but to wish that the short time wee haue to liue in this world should not be vnfruit|fully spent.
Canon 4.In the second Councel Simonie is damned, and the recei|uing of money for admitting a man to a spirituall office is vtterly derested.
Canon 8.In the third Councell Periurie is abhorred in a man ha|uing a spirituall calling, but softly punished by 2. yeeres ex|cluding of him from the communion.
Canon 4.In the fourth Councell, it is ordained that in the offering of the holy Calice, nothing shall be presented, except wine onely, vnmixed with water, because it is a sacrilegious thing to transgresse the holy mandate and institution of our Sa|uiour Christ.
Canon 10.In the fifth Councell it is condescended, that no man shall be ordained Bishop, without consent of King, Clergie and people, according to the ancient constitutions of the Church, and that no sprituall office shall be bought by money.
The heape of constitutions about the keeping of Pasche day and Lent, about the prohibition of marriage betwixt Christians and vnconuerted Iewes, about seruants not to bee admitted to Ecclesiasticall orders, about assemblies to be at the least yeerely conuocated by Bishops, about Ecclesiasticall rents not to be dilapidated. The nature of

a short Compend cannot permit mee to insist in such things.
VNder the raigne of Theodobertus king of France,The Councel of Overnie. Canon 2. the Fathers who were present at the Councels of Aurelia, conueened also in the Councell of Overnie, and ordained that no man should presume to the office of a Bishop, by the fauour of men in credit, but by the merites of an honest and vnreprouable life.
That the dead body of a Bishop in time of his funerall should be couered with the pall,Canon 4. otherwise called Opertori|um Dominici corporis which couered the Altar, left the ho|nour done to the body, should be a polluting of the Altar, with many other constitutions, which of purpose I ouerpasse with silence.
VNder the raigne of Aribertus king of France,The Councell of Tours. Canon 5. a Coun|cell was assembled at Tours. In this Councell it was ordained, that the Clergie and people in euery Congrega|tion should prouide support for their owne poore, and not permit them to wander to vncouth places: for indeed this custome of wandering hath brought in Atheisme amongst the poore, when they leaue their owne Congregation, they leaue also their owne Pastor, who attended vpon their con|uersation, and they fall into the snare of the deuil.
It was also statute and ordained that a Bishop should count his wife as his sister,Canon 13. and that he should no manner of way companie with her: and for this cause hee should haue Pres|byters, and Deacons so familiarly conuersant with him, that they might beare testimonie of his honest behauiour, to wit, that he neuer companied with his wife. The Romanists who count the prohibition of marriage to be the soule of their religion, could not ouerpasse this Canon without a censure. Now let vs heare what Censura saith. Intellige hunc Canonem iuxia vsum Orientalis Ecclesiae, in qua coniugatus promouebatur ad sacerdotium: that is, Vnderstand this Canon according to the custome of the Orientall Church, wherein a married

man was promoted to the Priesthood: well excused. The B. of Rowen, Burges, Tours, c. are conueened in the towne of Tours, to prescribe rules to the Orientall Church, or at least rules vnto their own bishops to liue after the forme of the Orientall Church, which neuer came in their minde to doe, as may evidently be knowne by the sixt generall Councell.
Canon 15.Moreouer, it was ordained, that no Priest, or Monke should receiue in bed with him another Priest or Monke, to the end they might be, so vnreproouable, that they would ab|staine from all appearance of euill.
Canon 25.In this Councell was set downe very strict prohibitions, that no man should oppresse the Church, and conuert vnto his owne vse any thing duely belonging to them, left hee incurre the malediction of Iudas who was a thiefe, and kept the bag, and conuerted to his owne vse a part of that mony which belonged to the poore.
The Councell of Paris.IN the Councell holden at Paris, order was taken con|cerning admitting of Bishops to their offices, that no man should be admitted Bishop, without the full consent of Cler|gie and people, and that no man should presume by fauour of Princes onely, without the consents aforesaid, to become Bishop in any place.
The third Councell of Toledo.REcaredus king of Spaine,  of the discent of the Gothes, who were miserably infected with the Arrian heresie, assembled a Councell of 62. Bishops at Toledo, where he re|nounced the Arrian heresie, and embraced the true faith,  the whole nation of the West Gothes in Spaine did the like, about the yeere of our Lord 585.
Hist. Magd. cent. 6. cap. 9. A Councell at Constanti|nople.VNder the raigne of Mauritius a Councel was assembled at Constantinople, for trying of the cause of Gregorius Bishop of Antiochia, whom Asterius Deputie in the East had accused of incest: but Gregorius was declared to be inno|cent,  his accuser was scourged with roddes, and was bani|shed. In this Councell the name of Oecumenick Bishop, was attributed to Iohn Patriarch of Constantinople.
TThe first Councel of Matiscon was assembled about the time of Pelagius 2,Three Coun|cels at Matis|con. Canon 8. as the second Tome of Cou~cels recor|deth. In it commandement was giuen, that no man of the Clergie should cite another man hauing a spirituall office, before a secular iudge.
And that a Bishop or Presbyter should not intangle him|selfe with carnall lust,Canon 11. after hee is promoted to so high dig|nitie, but the woman who before was his wife, now let her be his sister, and let the husband be changed into a brother. Marke how subtilly Sathan vnder pretence of lothing matri|moniall chastitie, is bringing in, all kinde of vncleannesse into the Church.
THe second Councell of Matiscon was conueened in the twentie foure yeere of the raigne of Gunthranus king of France.Canon 3. In it complaint was made, that Baptisme was mini|stred vsually vpon euery holy day, insomuch, that vpon Easter day, scarce were two or three found to be presented to Baptisme. This they ordained to be amended, and that no man (except vpon occasion of infirmitie) presume to pre|sent his child to Baptisme, but to attend vpon the festiuall dayes prescribed of olde, that is, Easter and Whitsonday.
Also it was appointed and ordained,Ca 6. that the Sacrament of the altar should be ministred before any communicant person had tasted of meat or drinke.
That no person who fleeth to the Church as to a citie of refuge,Canon . be drawne backe againe by violence, from the bosom of the Church, or be harmed in that holy place.
That a bishop must not be attached before a secular iudge.Ca.
That the houses of Bishops shall be kept holy with exer|cises of prayers and singing of Psalmes;Ca and shall not be de|filed with the barking of dogges, and muting of haukes.
That secular men shall doe reuerence to those who are of the Clergie,Cano 1. euen vnto the lowest degree of the~; in such sort that if the secular man doe meere any of the Clergie walking on foot, he shall honour him by vncouering his head: but if the secular man be riding on horsebacke, and the Clergie

man on foote, then the secular man shall light downe from his horse, and shall doe reuerence to the Church-man: this age smelleth of Antichristian pride.
In the third Councell at Matiscon there is nothing to be read but a contentious disputation betwixt two Bishops, Palladius and Bertramus,  foolish questions scarse worthy to be disputed in Grammer schooles. Whether or no a wo|man may be called Hom.
A Councell at Rome.IN the yeere of our Lord 595. and in the thirteene yeere of the raigne of the Emperour Mauritius: Gregorius first Bi|shop of Rome assembled a Councell at Rome of twentie foure bishops, thirty foure Presbyters, wherein first of all he confirmed the first foure generall Councels.
He ordained that at the celebration of the Sacrament there should be lesse singing and more reading of Psalmes and Gospel: because weake people transported with the de|light of a sweet and delicate voyce, marked not how men of a lewd life drew neere vnto the Altar of God.
He ordained also that laicke boyes should not be cubicu|lars to the bishops or Rome: but that Presbyters, Deacons, or Monkes should be witnesses of the honestie of their con|uersation.
And that the Beare wherein the body of the Bishop of Rome is brought forth to be buried; shall not be ouerspred with any couering aboue the Beare.
That for ordination of men in spirituall offices, no reward shall be craued. For like as the Bishop should not sell the imposition of his hands, euen so the minister or notare should not sell his voyce and pen. If hee who is ordained, voluntari|ly giueth any thing as a testimonie of his thankfulnesse, this is not forbidden to be receiued.
Gregorius standing before the place where the body of Saint Peter is buried, pronounced many Anathems, where|vnto the rest of the assemblie with vniforme consent, said Amen. Amongst the rest, the Presbyter or Deacon, who marrieth a wife is deliuered to the deuill, and a man who

marrieth his owne spirituall sister (whom in our language, we call his gossope) hee is likewise deliuered to an euill Heard to be kept. Albeit Gregorius be not counted the worst amongst the bishops of Rome, yet when hee followeth not the certaine rule of the written word of God, hee is wande|ring in the mist as boldly as others did before him.
THe Councels which I haue ouerpassed with silence, such as Gradense, Braccarense, Lateranense, Lugdunense, Pictaviense, Merense: lest I should ouercharge a litle booke with an vnnecessarie burthen, or trouble the reader of superstitious rites, damning of old , and of euery contentious disputation, more  belonging to ciuill iudges than to spirituall conuentions, I referre mine excuse in this to the wisdome of the iudici|ous Reader.



CENTVRIE VII.
A Councell at Rome by Bonifacius the third. Plin. in vit. Bonif. 3._IN the yeere of our Lord 607. and vnder the raigne of the Emperour Phocas, a Councell was assembled at Rome of 72. Bishops, 30. Presbiters, and 3. Deacons. In this councell the priuiledge of supre|macie giuen by Phocas to the Roman Church, was published. Likewise it was ordained vnder paine of cursing, that during the life-time of a Bishop, no man should talke of the election of another: That no man by largition of money should purchase vnto himselfe a spirituall office, and that no man should consult concerning the election of another Bishop or Pope before three dayes were expired, after the death of the defunct: and that the Bishop should be elected by the Clergie  people, and their electio~ should be ratified by the Magistrate of the Citie and the Pope: by these words, Volumus et iubemus, that is we will and we command, otherwise the election shall be voyde, and of none effect.
Another as|semblie hol|den at Rome by Bonifacius the fourth. Note.Bonifacius the fourth gathered another assemblie in the eight (that is in the last) yeere of the raigne of Phocas: where|in he gaue power to Monkes to preach, to minister the Sa|craments, to heare Confessions, to bind and loose, and associ|ated them in equall authoritie with the Clergie.
The first Councell of Bracara coun|ted the second by Caranza.BRacara or Braecara, vulgarly called Braga, is a towne in Portugall. In the yeere of our Lord 610. and vnder the raigne of Gundemarus, king of Gothes, raigning at that time in the countrey of Spaine, assembled some Bishops of Galli|cia, Lusitania, and of the Prouince called Lucensis of olde. It was ordained, That eurie Bishop should visit the Churches

of his diosie, and see that baptisme was duly ministred, and that Catechumeni twenty dayes before their baptisme should resort to the purifications of Exorcismes,Canon 1. and should bee in|structed in the knowledge of the Apostolick Symbol, and that the people should bee exhorted to beware of Idolatry, adultery, murther, periury, and all other deadly sins.
That Bishops should not lift vp the third part of the ob|lations of the people,Canon 2. but that it should remaine in the parish Church, for furnishing light, and for repairing the fabrick of the Church: and that the Bishop should compell noue of the Clergy to attend vpon him in servile workes.
That Bishops,Canon 3. for ordination of the Clergy, should re|ceiue no rewards.
That neither a little balme,Canon 4. nor yet the price thereof should be exacted from the people for their baptisme, in any time to come: lest they should seeme (with Simon Magus) to sell the gift of God for money.
That Bishops,Canon 5. before the dedication of Churches, shall see a charter, containing a sufficient maintenance for them, who shall serue in the Church, and for a substantiall furniture of lights thereunto.
A Church builded for gaine,Canon 6. and contribution of the people, redounding to the vantage of the builder, shall not be consecrated.
Parents,Canon 7. who are poore, and present their children to bap|tisme, if they offer any thing voluntarily, it shal be accepted: but they shall not be compelled to pay any thing, neither shall a pledge be required from them, left poore people fea|ring this, with-hold their children from baptisme.
If any of the Clergie bee accused of fornication,Canon 8. let the accuser proue his accusation, by two or three witnesses, ac|cording to the precept of the Apostle, else let the accuser be excommunicate.
That Metrapolitane Bishops,Canon 9. shall signifie to others of the Clergie, the time of the observation of Easter, or Pasch day: and the Clergie, after the reading of the Gospell, in like manner intimate the day vnto the people.
Canon 10.That whosoever tasteth meat or drink, before he consecrate the oblation of the Altar, shall be deposed from his office.
The Councell of Altissidoru~.IN the yeere of our Lord, 613. assembled in a towne of France, called Altissidorum, otherwise Antissidorum, vulgarly Auxerre, a number of Abbots and Presbyters, with one Bishop, and three Deacons. In this Councell they dam|ned Sorcerie, and the seeking of consultation at Sorcerers, in the first, third, fourth, and fift Canons: wherby it appeareth, that Sorcery hath been in frequent vse in France. Many su|perstitious constitutions were set down in this Synod, con|cerning the number of Masses, prohibition of tasting meate before Masse, concerning buriall, prohibition of Baptisme before the festivity of Easter-day, except vpon necessity, and feare of approaching death, prohibition of Matrimoniall copulation with their owne wiues, to Presbyters and Dea|cons, after their blessing and consecration; with prohibition of marriage also, to the widowes of the defunct Presbyters, Deacons, or Sub-deacons: this was a yoke of Antichristian subiection indeed.Canon 31. Brothers and sisters children are forbid|den to marrie.
Canon 34.It is not lawfull for a Presbyter to sit in iudgement, when any man is condemned to death.
Canon 35.It is not lawfull for a Clergie-man to cite another of the Clergie before a secular Iudge.
Canon 36.It is not lawfull for a woman with a naked hand, to touch the holy Eucharist.
Canon 38.It is not lawfull to take refreshment of meate, with an ex|communicate person.
Canon 39.If any of the Clergie receiue an exco~mmunicate man, with|out the knowledge of him who did excommunicate him, he shall receiue the like sentence, that is, he shall likewise be ex|communicated.
Canon 40.It is not lawfull for a Presbyter in banqueting time, to sing or dance.
Many Canons, to the number of 45. were concluded in this Councell: but I haue determined not to over-lade a

little booke, with commemoration of an heape of vnprofita|ble, vnnecessary, and superstitious Canons.
IN the yeere of our Lord,The Councell of Hispalis, vnder Sisebu|tus. 364. and in the 24. yeere of the raigne of the Emp. Heraclius, a Councel was gathered in Hispalis a towne of Spaine, vulgarly called Civill la grand. It was gathered by Isidorus Bishop of Hispalis, at the com|mand of King Sisebutus, who was both present  President, in this Councell. For two principall causes was this Synod convened: namely, for suppressing the heresie of , which was a branch of the heresie of Eutyches: secondly, for decision of questions, which arose amongst Bishops, con|cerning the marches  bounds of their dioceses, with some other Ecclesiasticall causes. They had 13. Sessions, or mee|tings, as is declared, 2. Tom. Council.
In the first action Theodulphus Bishop of Malaca, complai|ned, that by iniury of warres an ancient parish Church was separated from his towne, and possessed by others. It was concluded, that he should be repossessed againe into his an|cient priviledges, and that prescription of time should haue no place, if it were knowne, that hostility and war-fare had hurt a man in his rights.
In the 2. Session, the controversie betwixt Fulgentius B. of  Astigita, and Honorius B. of Corduba, concerning the mar|ches of their dioceses, was debated: and men were chosen to visite the bounds, and to decide the controuersie.
In the 3. Session compeared Cambra B. of Italica, a towne  of the province of Spain, of old called Baetica: he co~plained against one of his Clergie, named Passandus, that hee being brought vp fro~ his infancy in the Church of Italica, yet had fled without any iust cause to Corduba. It was ordained, that whosoever fled from his owne Church vnto another, should be sent back againe, and be put into a Monastery,  should be devested of his honor for a time, to the end, that the sharp|nesse of discipline might correct the licentious liberty of vagring and wandering.
In the 4. Session, it was complained, that some were con|secrated  to bee Levites in the Church of Astigita, who had

maried widowes: This ordination was annulled; and it was ordained, that none of these Leuites should be promo|ted to the honor of a Deacon.
 In the 5. Session, a Deacon of the Church of Agabra com|plained of the ordination of three persons in that Church: one was ordained to bee Presbyter, and two to bee Levites. The Bishop being blind, laid his hands vpon them, but one of the Presbyters pronounced the blessing: Now the Pres|byter who had pronounced the blessing, was dead before the Councell of Hispalis, therefore they remitted him to his owne Iudge: but the three persons afore-said admitted to Church-offices, they deposed them from their offices, as persons vnlawfully admitted.
 In the 6. Session, it was found, that Fragitanus, a Presby|ter of the Church of Corduba, was most vniustly both de|posed and banished, by his Bishop. For remedy, that the like mis-order should haue no place in time to come, it was statu|ted  ordained, that a Bishop, without advice of his Synode, should not presume to depose a Presbyter.
 In the 7. Session, Chore-episcopi,  Presbyters are debar|red fro~ the high priviledges of the Episcopal office: namely, from the consecration of Presbyters, of holy Virgins, Chur|ches,  Altars, from laying hand vpon men converted from heresie,  conferring vnto them the holy Spirit, fro~ making of Chrisme,  signating with it the fore-heads of them who are baptized, from absolving publickly in time of Masse, any penitent person, and sending testimonials to forraine parts, called Formatae epistola: and finally, from baptizing, consecra|ting the Sacrament, blessing the people, and teaching them, receiving penitents, when the Bishop was present.
 The 8. Session intreated concerning Heliseus, a servant, whom the Bishop of Agabra had set at liberty, and hee on the other part abused his liberty, so farre, that he presumed by Magicall Art to cut off the Bshoppe who had beene so beneficiall vnto him: he was ordained to be redacted againe to his former servile estate, that hee might learne obedience to his superiours, by the heavie yoke of servile subiection.
In the ninth Session, it is forbidden, that Bishops should  haue Leke-men to be masters of their house, but onely some of their owne Clergie, should be dispensators of their hous|hold affaires,Deut. 12.10. because it is written, Thou shalt not plow with an Oxe and an Asse together. By the way marke, that nothing was so miserably abused at this time, as testimonies of holy Scripture.
In the tenth Session, the Monasteries lately builded in  the Baetike Province, were allowed, and confirmed.
In the eleventh Session, the Monasteries of Virgins are re|commended  to the over-sight of the Abbot governing the Monastery of Monkes, with caveats, that all appearance of evill should be providently eschewed.
In the twelfth Session, one professing the heresie of Ace|phali compeared, who denyed the distinction of two natures in Christ, and affirmed, that the divinity of Christ did suf|fer vpon the Crosse: but he was seriously dealt withall, and convicted by testimonies of holy Scripture, and Fathers: so that hee renounced his hereticall opinion, and embraced the true faith; and the whole Councell gaue thankes and praise vnto God, for conuersion.
In the thirteenth Session, there is a prolix refutation of  the opinion of those who supposed, that the two natures of Christ were confounded, and that the divinity suffered. Isi|dorus seemeth to be the compiler of this Treatise, against A|cephali, given into the Councell of Hispalis: and many do thinke,Hist. Magd. cent. 7. cap. 10. that hee collected into one volume the Councels that preceded his time: for he was a man more learned than his fellowes, in his dayes.
IN the yeere of our Lord,The 4. Coun|cel of Toledo. 639. and vnder the raigne of Si|senandus, King of Spaine, by the Kings commandement, moe then 70. Bishops and Presbyters were convened in the towne of Toledo, vpon occasion of diversity of ceremonies and discipline, in the countrey of Spaine.
First,Canon 1. they set downe a short confession of the true Faith, which they ordayned to be embraced and kept.
Canon 2.Secondly, that there should be an vniforme order of pray|ing, singing of Psalmes, solemnities of Masses, Euen-song, seruice, throughout al Spaine  Gallicia, like as they all pro|fessed one faith,  dwelt in one kingdome, lest diuersitie of ceremonies  rites should offend ignorant people,  make them to thinke that there was a schisme in the Church.
Canon 3.It was statuted and ordained, That at least once in the yeere prouinciall Councels should be assembled: and in case any controuersie should fall out in matters of Faith, a generall Councell of al the prouinces of Spaine should be assembled. Here let the judicious Reader marke, that in processe of time almost all thinges are subject to alteration; and Councels, of old called Nationall, now abusiuely begin to be called Ge|nerall. The order of incomming of Bishops to the Councell, sitting in the first place, and of the Presbyters after them, and sitting in a place behinde the Bishops: and of Deacons, who should stand in presence of Bishops and Presbyters, is descri|bed at length in the third Canon.
Canon 4.That the Festiuitie of Easter, or Pashe day, should be kept vpon the day of Christes resurrection.
Canon 5.Concerning the diuersitie of rites vsed in Baptisme, some vsing the ceremonie of thrise dipping in water, others one dipping only. It was thought most expedient to be content with one dipping, because the Trinitie is so viuely represen|ted in the name of the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, that there is no necessitie by three dippinges in water to represent the Trinitie: and for eschewing all appearance of schisme, and lest Christians should seeme to assent vnto heretikes who diuide the Trinitie: For all these causes it was expedient to keepe vniformitie in the ceremonies of Baptisme.
Canon 6.It was statuted and ordained, That vpon Fryday immedi|ately preceeding Easter day, the doctrine of the suffering of Christ, of repentance, and remission of sinnes, should be clearely taught vnto the people, to the end, that they being purged by the remission of sins, might the more worthily ce|lebrate the feast of the Lords resurrection, and receiue the ho|lie Sacrament of the Lords bodie and blood.
The custome of putting an ende vnto the fasting of Lent,Canon 7. vpon fryday at nine a clocke, as damned, because in the day of the Lords suffering, the Sunne was couered with darknesse and the elementes were troubled: and for honour of the Lords suffering that day should be spent in fasting, mour|ning, and abstinence: and he who spendeth any part of that day in banqueting, let him be debarred from the Sacrament of Christs bodie and blood on Pashe day.
That the Tapers and Torches,Canon 8. which shined in the church in the night preceeding the day of the resurrection should be solemnly blessed, to the end, that the mystery of the holy re|surrection might be expected with consecrated lights. Such voluntary seruice inuented by the braine of man, had great sway at this time.
That in the day lie Church-seruice the Lords prayer (vul|garly called Pater noster) should be rehearsed,Canon 9. because it is vsually called Oratio quotidiana, that is, a daylie prayer.
That Alleluiah be not sung in time of Lent,Canon 10. because it is a time of mourning, and humiliation, vntill the dayes of re|surrection be celebrated, which is a time of ioy and glad|nesse.
That after the Epistle a part of the Gospell should bee read.Canon 11.
That Hymnes and spirituall songes,Canon 12. not contained in holy Scripture, may be sung in the Church.
The song of the three Children shall be sung in all Chur|ches of Spaine and Gallicia.Canon 13.
In the end of Spirituall songes it shall not be simply saide,Canon 14. Glorie to the Father, and to the Son, c. but, Glorie and ho|nour to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, to the end, that hymmes sung in earth, may be correspondent to the song of the Elders in Heauen, , : Apocal. 4.11.
In Responsories,Canon 15. if it be a matter of gladnesse, the ende shall be, Gloria, c. and if it bee a matter of sadnesse, the end shall be, Principium, c.
The booke of the Apocalyps of Saint Iohn,Canon 16. is declared

to be a booke of Canonicke Scripture, and to be preached in open audience of the Church, betwixt Easter and Whit|sonday.
Canon 17.It is forbidden, that the holy Communion should be cele|brated immediatly after the saying of the Lords Prayer: but let the blessing bee first giuen, and then let the Priestes, and Leuites communicate before the Altar, the Clergie within the Quire, and the people without the Quire.
Canon 18.No man shall be promoted to the honour of Priesthood, who is infamous, who hath beene baptized in heresie, who hath gelded himselfe, who hath married the second wife, or a widow, who hath had concubines, who is in a servile con|dition, who is vnknowne, Neophycus, who is given to war-fare, or an attender in Court, who is vnlearned, or hath not attained to the age of thirtie yeares, who hath not pro|ceeded to honour by ascending degrees, who by ambition, or bribes, hath presumed to honour, who hath been elected by his predecessor, who hath not beene elected by the Cler|gie and people of his owne citie: He who is approved, shall be consecrated on the Lords day, by all the comprovinciall Bishops, at least by three of them.
Canon 19.Let Levites be of the age of 25. yeeres before their admis|sion, and Presbyters of 30.
Canon 20.Let Bishops be vnreproveable, according to the precept of the Apostle, 1 Tim. 3.
Canon 21.Let Bishops not onely haue the testimony of a Good con|science in the sight of God, but also the testimony of an vn|ruproueable conversation amongst men.
Canon 22.Presbyters  Levites, whom infirmity of old age permits not to abide in their secret chambers: yet let them haue wit|nesses of their honest conversation and remaining places.
Canon 23.Youth-hood is prone and bent to evill: therefore let them that are young, be all brought vp in one conclaue, vnder the instruction and government of some well approved Senior. But they who shall be found lascivious and incorrigible, let them bee thrust into a Monastery, to the end, that stricter discipline may correct the proud minds of insolent youths.
Seeing that ignorance is the mother of all errours,Canon 24. it be|commeth Presbyters, who haue vndertaken the office of teaching, continually to meditate vpon holy Scripture, ac|cording to the words of the Apostle, Take heed to reading, exhortation, and doctrine, 1 Tim. 4. for by meditation of holy Scripture, and the Canons of the Church, men are made able to instruct others in knowledge, and in precepts of good manners.
Presbyters shal receiue from their owne Bishops an officiall booke,Canon 25. to the end, that through ignorance they doe nothing amisse, neither in celebration of the Sacraments, nor in their Letanies, nor in their forme of comming to Councels.
When Presbyters and Deacons are admitted to their offi|ces, they must vow chastitie,Canon 26. and binde themselues to their Bishops, to lead a continent life: and after such profession, let them retaine the discipline of an holy life.
A Bishop,Canon 27. Presbyter, or Deacon, who shall happen to be vniustly deposed, if they bee found innocent by the tryall of the Synode, let them be restored to their former dignities before the Altar, by the hands of Bishops, in this manner. If hee bee a Bishop, let him be restored to his Orarium, with Staffe and Ring: If hee be a Presbyter, to his Orarium and Planeta: If he be a Deacon, to his orarium and Alba: If he be a Sub-deacon, to his Plate and Chalice: and other or|ders, let them receiue in their restitution, that which was gi|ven vnto them in their ordination.
If any of the Clergy be found to haue co~sulted with divi|ners  sorcerers,Canon 28. let him be deposed from his dignity,  put into a Monastery, to make co~tinual penance for his sacrilege.
Church-men who dwell in borders, confining to a Nati|on that is vnder hostility with their owne countrey, let them neither receiue from the enemies of the countrey, nor direct any secret message vnto the enemies.
If any Church-man sit in iudgement,Canon 29. or be iudge in a sen|tence of blood, let him bee depriued of his dignity in the Church.
Let Bishoppes haue a care of such as are oppressed,Canon 30. to re|proove

the mightie men who oppresse them:Canon 31. and if the word of wholesome reproofe profite nothing, let them com|plaine to the king, to the ende, that by regall authoritie im|pietie may be subdued.
Canon 32.Seeing auarice is the roote of all euill, let Bishops so go|uerne their dioceses, that they spoyle the~ not of their rightes: but according to the determination of anteriour Councels, let them haue the third part of Oblations, Tithes, Tributes,  Cornes: the rest let it remaine vnto the Paroches free, and vntouched.
Canon 33.That thing which one Bishop possesseth, without in|terpellation, for the space of thirtie yeeres, let no man in that same Prouince be heard in an action of repetition: But as concerning them who dwell in diuerse Prouinces, the case standeth otherwise, lest while Dioceses are defended, the boundes of Prouinces be confounded.
Canon 34.A Church newly builded, shall appertaine vnto that Bi|shop, in whose diosie it is knowne that spiritual conuentions haue beene kept.
Canon 35.A Bishop shall visit yeerelie all the paroches of his diosie: and in case he be hindered by infirmitie, or by weightie bu|sinesse, he shall appoint faithfull Presbyters and Deacons, to take inspection of the fabricke of the Churches, and of their rentes.
Canon 36.Whatsoeuer reward a Prelate promiseth to a man who vn|dertaketh any worke tending to the vtilitie of the Church, let him faithfully performe his promise.
Canon 37.Seeing that a part of Church-rentes is bestowed vpon sus|tentation of strangers, and of poore and indigent people, if it shall happen at any time, those persons, or their children, to be indigent, who haue rendered any rent to the Church, let them render a just deserued retribution to their bene-fac|tors, in sustaining them, to whose beneuolence they are ad|doted.
Canon 38.The Deacons are decerned to be inferiour to Presbyters.
Let the Leuites be content to be cloathed with their Ora|rium onely vpon the left shoulder,Canon 39. and not vpon their right

shoulders: and let it neither be beautified with colours, nor with gold: Platina in the life of Zosinus, calleth it Linostima.
Let Clergie-men haue the vpper-most part of their heads bare and shauen,Canon 40. and the lower-part rounded, not following the example of the Readers of Gallicia, who did shaue one|lie a little of the vpper-most part of the haire of their head:Note. conforming themselues, in so doing, to the custome of some Heretikes; which dishonour is to bee remoued from the Churches of Spaine.
No strange women shall cohabite with Church-men,Canon 41. on|ly their mother, or sister, or her daughter, or fathers sister, may dwell with them, amongst which persons the bandes of nature permitteth not to suspect any sinne, according to the constitutions of auncient Fathers.
Some of the Clergie,Canon 42. who are not married, are intangled with the forbidden lust of strange women, let the Bishop se|parate them, sell the women, and redact the men infected with their lust, for a space, vnto penance.
If a man of the Clergy marrie a wife,Canon 43. or a widow, or a de|uorced woman, or an harlot, without aduise of his Bishop, let the Bishop separate them againe.
Clergie-men,Canon 44. who haue cloathed themselues with armour voluntarilie, and haue gone to warre fare, let them be depo|sed from their office, and bee thrust into a Monasterie, there to remaine all the dayes of their life.
Church-men,Canon 45. who are found spoyling the sepulchers of persons departed, let them be deposed, and be subject vnto three yeeres penance.
By the commandement of king Sisenandus,Canon 46. Churchmen are exempted from all publike indictions and labours, to the end with great libertie they may attend vpon spirituall seruice.
Let Bishops have some of their owne Clergie to be rulers of their house-holde-affaires,Canon 47. according as the Councell of Chalcedon hath ordained.
A man is made a monke either by his parents deuotion,Canon 48. Note. or by his own profession: but whether he be embarked into

the Monasticke life, the one way or the other, there is no re|dresse againe vnto a secular estate.
Canon 49.Persons of the Clergie, who are desirous to enter into a Monasterie, and to leade a contemplatiue life, let not their Bishops hinder the purpose of their minde,Note. because they haue intention to enter into a better trade of living.
Canon 50.Bishops haue power to constitute Abbots, to governe Monasteries, and to correct enormities, that shall happen to fall out amongst them: but not to redact them to servile of|fices, nor to convert the rents of the Abbie to their owne vse, as a possession duly belonging to themselues.
Canon 51.The Monks who leauing their Monastery, returne againe to a secular life, and marrie wiues; let them be brought back againe to their owne Monasterie, there to doe penance, and to lament for their by past sins.
Canon 52.Religious men, who wander vp and downe in a Nation, and are neither members of the Clergie, nor Monkes of any Monasterie; let the Bishops restraine their licentious liber|tie, and appoint them either to serue in the Clergie, or in a Monasterie, except such as through infirmity, or age, haue gotten an exemption.
Canon 53.They who haue confessed the committing of any deadly sinne, cannot be promoted to Ecclesiasticall honors.
Canon 54.Secular men, who in receiving their penance, haue been content to be shaven, and to put on a religious habit, if they revolt againe, and will needs become Laickes, and be incor|rigible, then let them be counted apostates, and excommu|nicate from the fellowship of the Church.
Canon 55.Widowes who haue put on a religious habit, and vowed chastitie, if they marrie, they haue damnation, according to the wordes of the Apostle, 1 Tim. 5.12.
Canon 56.Iewes are not to bee compelled to receiue the Christian faith: but these who already by constraint, haue received it in the dayes of the noble King Sisebutus, seeing they haue been already partakers of our Sacraments, let them be com|pelled to persevere, left the Name of the Lord Iesus bee blasphemed, and the Faith, which they haue embraced,

bee counted vile and contemptible.
They who receiue the bribes and rewards from the Iewes,Canon 57. to cloake their vngodlinesse, and to foster them in their infi|delity, let them be accursed, and counted strangers from the Church of Christ.
Iewes,Canon 58. and 59. after their conversion to the Christian faith, if they be found to haue circumcised their sonnes or servants: by the commandement of the most religious King Sisenandus, it is ordained, that the circumcised children of the Iewes, shall be separated from the fellowship of their parents, and the servants shall bee set at liberty, for the iniury done vnto their body, by circumcision.
Iewes,Canon 60. who are punished to death for any contempt done by them against Christ, after their baptisme, this punishment shall not preiudge their children from right to enioy their goods, if they be faithfull, because it is written, The sonne shal not beare the iniquity of the father, Ezech. 18.20.
Let not Iewes,Canon 61. after their conversion, haunt the company of other superstitious Iewes, as yet addicted to the abolished law of ceremonies, left they be perverted: if they transgresse this ordinance, such of them as haue professed Christianity, shall be given in service to Christians, others shal be appoin|ted to be publickly scourged.
Iewes,Canon 62. who haue married Christian women, if they will not embrace Christian religion, let them be separated from their wiues company, and let the children be brought vp in the faith of their Christian mothers.
Iewes,Canon 63. who haue once professed Christian Faith, and haue sliden backe againe from it, shall not bee admitted witnesses before a Iudge, albeit they professe themselues to be Chri|stians, because like as their faith is suspected, so in like man|ner, their humane testimony is to be doubted of.
Let no Iew be preferred to any publique office,Canon 64.
Let no Iew presume to buy a Christian servant,Canon 65. which if hee doe, the servant shall be taken from him, and shall be set at liberty.
Bishops,Canon 66. who haue not benefited the Church, by any pro|per

donation of their owne goods, they should not impove|rish their Church, by setting at liberty Church-servants, which thing if hee presume to doe, his successour shall re|duce those servants againe to the possession of the Church, whom iniquity without any iust right hath absolved.
Canon 67.A Bishop, who setteth a servant at liberty, having first by permutation set another of the like worth, and merit, in his place, shall deny liberty to the fore-said servant, either to ac|cuse or to beare witnesse against the Church, wherein hee was a seruant; else he shall forfeit his liberty, and bee redu|ced to his former servile condition, in that same Church, which he would haue harmed; and in the meane time, the permutation afore sayd, shall stand firme and stable.
Canon 68.Hee who hath augmented Church-rents, either by con|ferring, or accquiring some augmentation vnto it, hath some liberty to set Church-servants at liberty, prouiding al|wayes, they abide vnder the patrociny of the Church.
Canon 69. and 70. and 71.Because the patronage of the Church never dieth, let those servants, whom the Church hath set at liberty, and their posterity, be obedient to the Church,  depend vpon their patrociny. If they be vnthankfull, let their liberty bee forfeit, and let the Church defend them, from all insolency and wrong.
Canon 72. and 73.Servants, who are set at so full liberty, that their patrons haue kept no band of subiection over their heads, if they be vnspotted, and vnreproueable, they may bee promoted to Ecclesiasticall offices. But it is vnseemly, that any man shal be received into a spirituall office, who is bound vnto the servile subiection of an earthly Master.
Canon 74.In the end, earnest supplications are ordained to be made to God, for preservation of King Sisenandus, and the Nation of the Gothes: and many Anathenus are pronounced against them, who shall presume to violate the oath of allegeance, made to the King. In the end, the Acts of this Councell are subscribed, by Isidorus, Bishoppe of Hispalis, and seven|tie other Bishops.
IN the first yeare of Chintilla,The 5. Coun|cel of Toledo. King of the Gothes, and a|bout the time of the raigne of the Emperour Heracleon, convened with Eugenius Bishoppe of Toledo, twenty other Bishops. In this Councell nothing was entreated, except a mandate was given, concerning the yeerely Letanies that should be made, three dayes immediatly following the Ides of December; and if the Lords day intervened these three dayes, Letanies should be deferred, vntill the beginning of the next weeke. In these three dayes, pardon for sins should be humbly begged at the hands of God, with teares. The rest of the ordinances of this Councell, appoint supplicati|ons to be made to God, for the preservation of the King and his children: and that they shall be accursed, who dare pre|sume to seeke the kingly authority, without the consent of the whole countrey of Spaine, and the Nobility of the nati|on of the Gothes: and that no man shal raile vpon the
 King, or lie in waite for his life.
IN the yeere of our Lord,The Councell of Rome in the dayes of Pope Martin. 652. or as others reckon, 650. Pope Martinus gathered a Councell at Rome, of moe then an hundred Bishops. The errour of the Monothelites, obstinately defended by Paulus Bishop of Constantinople, was the occasion of this Councell, together with the impi|ous edict of the Emperour Constans, set out in favour of the heresie of the Monothelites.
In this Councell, over and besides an ample confession of Faith, many decrees and constitutions were made; all tending to damne those who denyed the Trinity, or the di|vine vnity in the divine nature, or the manifestation of the second person of the Trinitie, and his suffering in the flesh, or the perpetuall virginity of the Lords mother, or the two nativities of Christ, one before all times, and another in time, by the operation of the holy spirit, or the distinction of the two natures after the ineffable vnity, or the distinction of wils, and operations in Christ. In like manner, all were damned who made opposition to the fiue preceding gene|rall Councels. In particular, Theodorus of Pharatrita, Cyrus

of Alexandria, Sergius Pyrrhus, and Paulus, Bishops of Con|stantinople, were condemned, as patrons and obstinate de|fenders of the heresie of the Monothelites. There is more frequent mention of Fathers, than of Scriptures in this Councell; a perilous example to the posterity.
The 6. Coun|cel of Toledo.IN the yeere of our Lord 653. and in the third yeere of Chintilla, King of the Gothes in Spaine, the sixt Councell of Toledo was assembled, of 52. Bishops, Eugenius Bishop of Toledo, being President. The occasion seemeth to haue beene the renovation of old heresies, and contradiction to preceding Councels. After a confession of the Faith, Le|tanies are ordained to be said,Canon 2. as was appointed yeerly, for preservation of the King.
Canon 3.It was ordained, by the advice of the Councell, with con|sent of the King and his Nobles, that no man should be to|lerated to dwell in the kingdome of Spaine, who did not professe the Catholike Faith, and that Kings in all time to come, before they were placed in their royall seate, should be bound by the obligation of a solemne oath, to interpose their authority, that this act might bee obeyed: Otherwise, let the King, refusing to put this act in execution, be coun|ted accursed, and be a faggot of the flames of everlasting fire. What Ferdinandus, King of Spaine, did, in driving out of his dominions, the Iewes, and the Saracens; some alledge, that it was done vpon the ground of this act: but now it is not a fit time to examine that question.
Canon 4.No man shall presume, by Simony or largition of mony, to attaine to Ecclesiasticall offices.
Canon 5.If any of the Clergie obtaine a pension, out of the Church|rents, let him possesse it vnder the title of Praecaria, lest by long possession, the Church rents be diminished.
Canon 6.If any person be cloathed with a religious habite, which hee hath voluntarily accepted, if afterward hee forsake it, let him be excommunicated, if hee returne not againe vnto his order.
Canon 7.The seuenth Canon, is a renewing of the foure and fifty

Canon of the fourth Councell of Toledo.
A married man,Canon 8. who voweth chastitie in time of sicknesse, if he recouer health, and haue not the gift of continencie, let him cohabite againe with his wife: but if shee die, he is de|barred from the second marriage, which notwithstanding is permitted to the wife, if shee haue not vowed. This Canon is not set downe by precept and commandement, but per|missiuely, through indulgence, and a consideration of hu|mane infirmitie.
Seruants,Canon 9. whom the Church hath set at libertie, when one Prelate dieth, and another succeedeth, they are bound to renew the charters of their land which they possesse; else their charters shall be voyde, and of none effect, if they be not re|newed within the space of a yeere next after the election of the new Prelate.
The children of them whom the Church hath set at liber|tie,Canon 10. if their parents bring them vp in learning, they shall be brought vp in that same Church from which their libertie did arise, and shall serue the Bishop of that Church, alwayes without prejudice of their libertie.
Let no man,Canon 11. vpon occasion of an accusation, be punished, vnlesse his accuser be presented: and in case he be a vile and infamous person, let no sentence be giuen out vpon the ground of such accusation, except in an action of treason against the life of the King.
He who hath committed hainous offences,Canon 12. and fearing punishment, fleeth to the enemies of his countrey for refuge, let him be excommunicated.
Let young men honour them who are in great credite and fauour with Princes:Canon 13. And let Seniors louingly cherish the younger sort, and present vnto them profitable examples of a good conuersation.
The 14. and 15. Canon intreate of the reward due to themCanon 14. and 15. who are found faithfull seruants to the King, in whatsoeuer estate, especially in the Church: and that rentes and landes bestowed vpon the Church, shall abide firmely in their pos|session without reuocation.
Canon 16. and 17. 18. and 19.In the 16.17.18. and 19. Canons, there is a commemora|tion of the bountiful kindnesse of king Chintilla toward the Church, a prouision, that no Church-men should be allured by no deceitfull perswasion, to take a course against the king: A protestation before God, his Angels, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and whole Church. That no man should enterprise any attempt against the King  his Noble estate: And they who shall presume to doe to the contrarie, are appointed to eternall damnation. In the end, prayers are made to God to giue a good successe to their meeting: and thankes are giuen to the King, by whose authoritie they were assembled. So it is manifest, that by the authoritie of Princes, Nationall As|semblies were conueened at this time.
The seuenth Councell of Toledo.IN the yeere of our Lord 662. as Functius reckoneth, and in the 6. yeere of Chindasuvindus, king of Spaine, the 7. Cou~cel of Toledo was assembled, consisting of 4. Archbishops, 30. Bishops, and a great number of presbyters, and messengers from them who could not be present. The occasion of this meeting was Theodisclus Bishop of Hispalis, a Graecia~ borne: He had corrupted the bookes of Isidorus, and dispersed many errours in his Church:  he contended for supermacie with the Bishop of Toledo. In this Councell Theodisclus was re|mooued from his office. The prioritie of dignitie was confer|red to the Bishop of Toledo.
Canon 1.In the second Tome of Councels, six Canons are referred to this meeting: First Laickes, and men also in spirituall of|fice, are forbidden to attempt any thing against the estate of their countrie, either by sedition or treason.
Canon 2.Secondlie, it is appointed and ordained, That in case any man, ministring the Sacrament of the Lords holy Supper, be hindred by any superuenient sicknesse, that ano|ther shall bee readie to finish the worke which hee hath begunne.
Canon 3.Thirdly, That the Presbyters, and the whole Clergie shal be present at the funerall of a bishop.
Canon 4.Fourthly, It is forbidden, that Bishops in their visitation

should extort or oppresse the Churches which they visite.
Fiftly,Canon 5. That men inclosed into a Monasterie, should first receiue instruction in their Monasteries, before they presume to teach others.
Sixtly,Canon 6. A commandement is giuen, That the Bishops in neare adjacent places, should bee obedient to the Bishop of Toledo, and at his commaundement they should appeare in the towne of Toledo.
CAbillonum,The Councell of Cabillo|num. vulgarlie called Chalon, is a towne in Bur|gunnie, not farre distant from Matiscone. In this towne, by the commandement of Clodoneus king of France conuee|ned 44. Bishops. Gandericus Bishop of Lions was President, and Laudilenus Bishop of Vienne. Theodorus Bishop of Arls, because hee refused to appeare before the Councell, was sus|pended from his office, vntill the next Councell.
In this Synode the Canons of the Councell of Nice had great allowance. It was forbidden, that two Bishops should be ordained in one towne: That no man should sel a Christi|an seruant to a Iew: And, that two Abbots should not be chosen to gouerne one Monasterie: That no labouring of the ground, or other secular worke, should be done on the Lords day: with many other Canons, coincident with the Canons of other Councels.
IN the dayes of the Emperour Constantinus Pogonatus,A Councel at Rome. and vnder the Popedome of Agatho, a Councell was gathered at Rome, about the question of the willes and operations of Christ: wherein it was decerned, by the suffrages of 125. Bi|shops of Italy, France, Lombardy, of the nation of the Gothes, of Britanes, and Sclauonians, That two willes and two ope|rations were to bee acknowledged in Christ: And the o|pinions of Theodorus, Cyrus, Sergius, Pyrrhus, and Pau|lus, defenders of the heresie of the Monothelites was damned. The vaunting words of the letter of Agatho, written to the sixt generall Councell, wherein he braggeth, that the Bishops of Rome neuer erred in matters of Faith, I

lay them aside at this time, for they are false, and vntrue, as I haue alreadie prooued, and shall prooue hereafter, if it please the Lord.
The eigth Councel of Toledo.IN the yeere of our Lord 671. and in the fift yeere of Rece|suvindus King of Gothes, the eight Councell of Toledo was conueened.
To this Assemblie resorted two and fiftie Bishops: Great disputation was in this Councell, concerning perjurie. In end it was resolued; That no necessitie bindeth a man to per|forme an vnlawfull oath: For Herod and Iephthah sinned, in making vnlawfull oathes, but they sinned more grieuouslie in performing vnlawfull oathes.
Canon 4. 5. 6. and 7.Marriage is vtterlie forbidden to Bishops: and places of Scripture are miserablie abused to confirme this interdicti|on of marriage. Be yee holy, as I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.16. And in another place, Mortifie your members which are on the earth, Coloss. 3.5. Miserable ignorance in this age counteth marriage to bee , that is, vncleanenesse, a member of the bodie of sin, which the Apostle commandeth to mor|tifie. Yea, and the sub-deacons, who pleaded for retaining of their wiues, in regard that in their admission, no such condi|tion was required of them, are in most seuere manner inter|dited from the companie of their wiues, or else to be thrust into a Monastery, to suffer penance vntill the last period of their liues.
Canon 8.Vnlearned men are not to be admitted to the celebration of diuine misteries, especially such as are not well acquain|ted with the Psalter.
Canon 9.Eating of flesh is forbidden in Lent, for three principall causes: First, Because the fourtie dayes of Lent are the tithes of all the dayes of the yeeres, and the tithes should be con|secrated to God: Secondlie, because that Christ, by fasting fourtie dayes expiated the sinnes of mankinde: Thirdly, be|cause it is conuenient, that a man, made of the 4. elementes, for breaking the ten precepts of the decalogue, should afflict his bodie foure times ten, dayes.
In the 10. Canon,Canon 10. the vertues where with the king shall be indewed, who shall be chosen to raigne in Spaine, are rehear|sed.
In the last Canon,Canon 11. the ordinances of preceding Councels are to be obeyed:Canon 12. and the Iewes are to bee deale with, accor|ding to the actes of the 4. Councell of Toledo. Can. 56. 57. 58. 59. and 60. c.
IN the yeere of our Lord 673. and in the 7. yeere of theThe ninth Councel of Toledo. raigne of Recesuvindus king of Gothes, by the commande|ment of the King, 16. Bishops conueened in Toledo, and made these ordinances following:
First,Canon 1. That founders of Churches, and bestowers of rentes vpon the Church, and their posteritie should haue a sollicit|ous care, that Church-rents be not abused with misorder; if it shall happen to fall out, let complaint be made to the Bi|shop, to the Metropolitane, or to the king of the countrey.
Founders of Churches,Canon 2. during their life-time, haue power to appoint men who shall attend vpon the fabricke of the Church or Monasterie which is builded, that it decay not.
If any Church-man bestow any part of Church-rent,Canon 3. vn|der the colour of prestation, let the cause be clearely contai|ned in an euidence, or else it shall be voide.
Let the goods of the defunct administrator of the Church|affaires,Canon 4. be equally diuided betwixt his heires and the Church.
If a Bishop build a Monasterie,Canon 5. let him not bestow aboue the fiftie part of the rent of his prelacie in the charges of building: and in case he build a paroch Church, for honour of his buriall place, let him not bestow aboue the hundreth part of his rent for charges of building.
To the Bishop belongeth the third part of rent of euery pa|roch Church in his diosie,Canon 6. and whether he leaue that third part to the Church it selfe, out of which it is raised, or to any other Church, his gift shall stand firme without reuo|cation.
Let no man,Canon 7. vnder pretence of propinquitie, and because

he is heire intromet with the goods of the defunct Bishop, without the fore-knowledge and consent of the Metropoli|tan, and in case the Metropolitan depart this life, let no in|termeddling with his goods bee made, without the fore|knowledge of is successour, lest by fraud and deceit the Church be damnified.
Canon 8.If any man ministring in a Church-office, alienate a part of Church-rents, the supputation of time shall begin to bee reckoned from the houre of his death, and not from the time wherein the charter was subscribed: and so after his death, let the prescription run on.
Canon 9.The ninth Canon measureth the commodity which a Bishop shall receiue, who hath taken paines to burie another Bishop.
Canon 10.Children procreated by Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, c. shall not onely be deprived of the heritage some time belon|ging to their parents: but also they shall be mancipated to perpetuall service of those Churches, wherein their fathers served. Let the reader marke, that there is a greater businesse in Councels to procure obedience to one Antichristian pre|cept, concerning prohibition of marriage; than to all the ten Commandements of Gods law.
Canon 11.Let not a servant be accepted to serue in the Ministery of the Church, before he be first set at liberty.
Canon 22.When servants are set at liberty, let the supputation of time begin at the death of him, who set them at liberty, and not at the time when the charter was made.
Canon 13.14.15.  16.Servants set at liberty, shall neither marry a woman of the Romane, nor of the Gothes blood: and they shall be sub|iect to the Church that set them at liberty: and if necessity compell them to sell lands, let the land be first offered for a competent price to one Minister in that Church, from which their liberty did arise.
Iewes, who are baptized, shall in time of solemne feastes attend vpon the Bishop of the parts where their dwelling is,Canon 17. to the end, that hee may beare testimony of the integrity of their faith: If this co~mmandement be ansgresed, the Bishop

shall ordaine the Iew either to be scourged, or to be subiect to such abstinence, as he thinketh most fit.
In the end, thanks being rendered to God for their mee|ting, and for the vnitie of their iudgements: and supplica|tions being made to God for the weale of the King Recesu|vindus, in soule and body, the Councell was dissolved.
IN the eight yeere of the raigne of Recesuvindus,The 10. Coun|cel of Toledo. King of Gothes, assembled in Toledo one and twenty Bishops: They decerned concerning the Feasts of the nativity of our Lord, and of the Lords mother, at what times they should be kept. Punishments are appointed for men of the Clergy, and Monkes, who are not found dutifull to the King, and the Countrey: That men vnmeet for spirituall offices, should not bee intruded into the Church, neither for pro|pinquity of blood, nor for hope of lucre and gaine: That widowes, professing a religious order, shall receiue an habit convenient for that order: And that women, who depart a|gaine from their professed order, shall be punished: That Parents shall not render their children to religious orders, before they be eighteene yeeres of age. Finally, Protamius Bishop of Bracara, being convict of adultery, was removed from his office, and Fructuosus was placed in his roome.
IN the seventh yeere of the raigne of Bamba,The 11. Cou~|cel of Toledo. King of the Gothes, ninteene Bishops, and seven Abbots were assem|bled in Toledo, by the Kings Commandement, Quiricus Bishop of Toledo, being President. In the beginning, after a protestation of a decent order to be kept in their Assembly, that no tumult nor contentious disputation, nor indecent laughter should disturb the comely modesty of their Assem|bly: they set downe a prolixe confession of Faith, and Canons belonging to Ecclesiasticall discipline, in the forme following:
1. That Bishops should bee well acquainted with Scrip|tures, and apt to teach. 2. That Metropolitan Bishoppes should try how the Pastors of their Dioces increase in

knowledge. That the forme of singing, vsed in the Metropo+litane Church, shal be likewise vsed in other inferiour Chur|ches. 4. That persons who haue discorded, shall not stand at the Altar, vntill the time they bee reconciled againe. 5. That Church-men shall not judge in actions of blood. 6. That Bishops should not giue sentence before a sufficient triall of the cause. 7. Bishops, who commit adulterie or murther, shall be deposed, and excommunicated, beside the punishment to be inflicted by the secular Iudge. 8. No re|ward shall be taken for ministration of the Sacramentes. 9. Bishops, before their ordination, shall giue their oath that they haue not acquired that dignitie by rewards either giuen or to be giuen. 10. He who is to be preferred to any Ec|clesiasticall office, let him first sweare that hee shall continue constantly in that true Catholicke faith, and that hee shall be obedient to Ecclesiasticall Canons. 11. Let no man refuse to receiue the Sacrament of the Supper when it is offered by him who hath a lawfull calling to ministrate it. 12. Ab|solution should bee pronounced when perill of death im|pendeth, albeit complet satisfaction be not made. 13. The holy Sacrifice shall not be ministered by persons possessed with deuils, or transported with the passions of madnesse. 14. He who ministreth at the Altar, shall haue other concur|ring with him, to the end, that if he be suddenly oppressed with any infirmitie, the other assistant brother may supply his place. 15. Councels are ordained yeerely to bee kept.
The second Councell of Brac.IF order of time be not precisely kept in commemorati|on of the Councels of Bracara and Toledo, let no man maruell, some regard must be had to the memorie of the Rea|der: and it is not meet that the Councels of Toledo, being many in number, and so frequently conueened, following vpon the necke of another (except the eleuenth Councell, conueened twelue yeeres after the 10) should be miserably disioyned: if such things be not comported with, by the fauo|rable Reader, it will bee hard to abridge this head of

Councels to the contentment of a learned Reader.
This Councell of Bracara, by Caranza, is called the first Councell of Bracara. In it many old opinions of the Pris|cillianists, and Manicheans, concerning prohibition of mar|riage, and meates, are condemned, together with the here|sies of Samosatenus, Photinus, Cerdon, and Marcion. Canons set forth in this Councell, are so coincident with the Ca|nons of other Councels, that there is no necessity to make rehearsall of them.
In the 30. Canon of this Councell, it is ordained; That no poesie shall be sung in the Church, except the Psalter of the old Testament.
IN the 4 yeere of Bambas,The 2. Coun|cell of Brac. King of Gothes, eight Bishops were assembled in Braga. In the beginning of the Coun|cell, for confession of their Faith, they made a new rehear|sall of the summe of the Nicene Faith. After this, they set downe eight ordinances, in manner following:

1. That all superstitious opinions being reiected, bread and wine mixed with water, onely should be offered in the Sacrifice, and not the liquor of milke, nor pure vnmixed wine, nor bread dipped in wine. Here marke, that the gi|ving of vnmixed wine to the people, in the Sacrament or Sa|crifice, is called superstition: such bitter fruits do ensue vp|on magnifying the traditions of men, that Christs owne in|stitution, is called superstition.
2. That vessels dedicated to God, bee not abused, and imployed to secular and humane vses.
3. A Presbyter, when he sayeth masse, let him bee cloa|thed with his Orarium on both his shoulders, and be signa|ted on his brest, with the signe of the Crosse.
4. Let no person of the Clergy cohabit with women, no not with their owne sisters, without witnesses of their conversation.
5. Vpon Festivall dayes, reliques enclosed in an Arke, shal be borne vpon the shoulders of the Levites, as the Arke of God in the old Testament was accustomed to bee borne,

1 Chron. 15.15. and not about the necke of a Bishop: and in case the Bishop will needs carry them himselfe, then shall he walke on foot with the rest of the people, and not be car|ryed in a coach by his Deacons. Here marke how mens tra|ditions are equalled to the commandements of God.
6. Presbyters, Abbots, and Levites, for the dignity of their calling, shall not bee punished with stripes by the Bi|shoppe, lest in dispersoning the principall members of his owne body, hee bring himselfe into contempt of his sub|iectes.
7. Let no honour be sold for promise of rewards.
8. Let governours of Churches haue a greater regard to the weale of the Church, then to their owne particular af|faires.

In the end, thankes is given to God, and the King, for their meeting  they subscribe the fore named ordinances. Here marke, that in the country of Spain, the King still kee|peth in his owne hand, power of convocating Councels.
IN the yeere of our Lord, 681. and in the 12. yeare of the raigne of Constantius Pogonatus,The 6. Coun|cell holden at Constantino|ple. a general Councell was assembled at Constantinople, by the authority of the Em|perour, and not by the commandement of Pope Donus, nor Agatho his successor, nor of Leo the 2. the successor of Aga|tho, as the Divall letter of Constantine, directed to Pope Do|nus and received and obeyed by Pope Agatho, cleerly testi|fies. As for the number of Bishops convened, there is an in|finite discrepance betwixt the authors, who make rehearsall of their number: the least number reckoned, is 150. The question discussed in this Assembly, was about the wils and actions of Christ. Macarius Patriarch of Antiochia, and Stephanus his disciple, pertinaciously defended the errour of the Monothelites: confirming also their opinion by the te|stimony of Honorius, sometime Bishop of Rome, whose let|ters written to Sergius, sometime Bishop of Constantinople, being read in the open audience of the Councell, made it cleerly knowne, that he also was infected with the erour of

the Monothelites. For this cause Honorius Bishop of Rome, Sergius, Pyrrhus, and Paulus Bishops of Constantinople, Cyrus Bishop of Alexandria, and Macarius Bishop of Anti|ochia, were all excommunicated: likewise Polychronius, a ridiculous Monke, and his complices were exco~municated, and with great shame and ignominy, reiected from the fel|lowship of the Church: For he offered to proue the opi|nion of the Monothelites to bee the truth of God, by wri|ting the summe of that opinion in a paper, and over sprea|ding it vpon a beere, wherein a dead man was laid, hee put the Councell in hope, that hee would raise the dead man to life againe: but after tryall, hee was found to be a lying and a deceitfull fellow, and he likewise was excommunicated.
This Councell made no Canons and Constitutions con|cerning Church-discipline, as other Councels had done be|fore: For this cause Iustinian the 2. the son of Pogenatus, ga|thered these same Fathers, who had beene in the preceding Councel, to perfect the worke which they had begun.
They made many Constitutions, but two in special, which displeased the Romane Church: First, they annulled the doctrine of the Church of Rome, concerning prohibition of marriage to men in spirituall offices. Secondly, they or|dained the Patriarch of Constantinople, to bee in equall au|thority with the Pope of Rome. These Constitutions and Canons, Pope Sergius refused to subscribe, albeit his ambas|sadors in his name had subscribed them in Constantinople.
BAmbas King of the Goths,The 12. Coun|cel of Toledo. resigned the title of his royall authority to Euringius, and he was content to be shaven, and enter into a Monastery In the first yeere of the raigne of Euringius, 33. Bishops, with some Abbots, and 13. Noble|men of the Court, convened at Toledo. The King, amongst many other things, protested, that he was content, that what|soeuer thing in his lawes seemed repugnant to reason, it should be corrected by the prudent advice of this Councel.
The Fathers of this Councell, for confession of Faith, ad|hered vnto the Councell of Nice. After this, the hand-wri|tings

and seales of Bambas, and the Nobles of his Court, and the testimony of Iulianus, ArchBishop of Toledo, are pre|sented: whereby it is knowne, that Bambas, had resigned his government in favour of Euringius, willing them to chuse him to be his successor. So it came to passe, that Eu|ringius was solemnly proclaimed to be King, and the people were assoyled from the oath of allegeance made to Bambas, and were astricted to the obedience of King Euringius.
In this Councell it was forbidden, that new Bishoprickes should be erected in villages: and the Bishop of Emerita beg|ged pardon for this, that he had ordayned a Bishop in a cer|taine village, being compelled so to doe, by the commande|ment of King Bambas. They who stand at the Altar, and sa|crificeth, are commanded to eate of the sacrifice, as often as they offer it. The acts, made in preceding Councels, against the Iewes, were renewed and amplified in this Councell: and thankes was given to God, and the King, for their mee|ting.
Other Councels of Toledo, vnder the raignes of Eurin|gius, and Egita, seeing there is little written of them, worthy of Commemoration, I over-passe with silence.



CENTVRIE VIII.
_IN the yeere of our Lord, 712. a Coun|cell was assembled at London,A Councell at London. where Bo|nifacius was present, and Brithuvaldus the chiefe Prelate of England; and the Kings of Saxons ruling in England, were com|manded vnder pain of cursing, to be pre|sent at this Councell. The purposes in|treated in this Councell were two; to wit, concerning the adoration of Images, and prohibition of marriage to men in spirituall offices. About worshipping of Images no dispu|tation was heard, whether that service did agree with the written word of God, or not. This was counted a sufficient wartant for bringing Images into places of adoration, and for worshipping them (especially the Image of the Virgin Mary) that Eguvinus, a superstitious Monke in England, of the order of Saint Benet, who afterwards was made a Bi|shoppe: affirmed that the Virgine Marie appeared vnto him in a dreame, and declared, that it was her will, that her Image should bee set vp in the Churches, and worshipped. These dreames once confirmed by the oath of Eguvinus, and approoved by Constantine Bishop of Rome, and obtru|ded by Bonifacius the Popes Legate, they were embraced in England, with little contradiction in such a corrupt time.
The other purpose entreated in this Councell, was pro|hibition of marriage, to men in spirituall offices. This doc|trine of the Romane Church, was not received without re|luctation of the Clergie. Onely, a ground was laid, where|upon followed a building of the doctrine of Divels.
The Councell of Constanti|nople, vnder Philippicus.ABout the same time, that is, about the yeere of our Lord 712. it is supposed, that the Emperour Philippicus ga|thered a Councell at Constantinople, for vndoing of the sixt generall Councell, in the which the errour of the Mo|nothelites was condemned: and that hee did this according to a promise made to a Monke, named Iohn, who fore-told him that hee would bee made Emperour, and craved this promise of him, that when hee should bee advanced to the Imperiall dignity, he should vndoe the sixt generall Coun|cell. But the writers of this History doe not make particular mention of the Fathers, who were present at this Councell. The rest of the History is cleere, that Philippicus razed the pictures of the Fathers, who had been present at this Coun|cell, and were pictured in the Temple of Sophia: and that on the other part, Pope Constantine the first, not onely cau|sed the same effiges to bee pictured in the porch of the Church of Saint Peter at Rome, but also procured that the Emperours name should be razed out of charters, and that his effigie should not bee ingraved in any kinde of coyned mettall. Also it is cleere, that Philippicus remooued Cyrus from his office, and placed in his roome Iohn, who fore-told him that he should be Emperour.
A Councell at Rome, as|sembled by Gregorie 2.IN the yeere of our Lord, 714. Pope Gregorie the second, assembled a Councell, in the which two Bishops of Brit|taine, to wit, Sedulius, and Fergustus, were present. It was ordained, that masses should bee celebrated publiquely in Temples, which custome was not in vse before. In the se|cond Tome of Councels,Sigebert. in. Chron. this Synod is referred to Gregorie the third. A great number of the Canons of this Councell doe concerne marriage, That no man should take in marri|age a woman, who was a relict of a Presbvter or Deacon, or a Nunne, or his spirituall sister, or his brothers wife, or his neece, or his mother in law, or daughter in law, or his neare cousens, or a woman whom by these or ravishing hee hath led away. And that no man should consult with Iu|chanters and Sorcerers. And that no man should violate

the mandates of the Apostolicke Chaire: no, not in a mat|ter of an haire.
GRegorie the third,A Councell at Rome, assem|bled by Grego|rie the third. after he had received a mandate from the Emperour Leo, concerning abolishing of Images, hee assembled a great Councell at Rome, of 903. Bishops: in the which the Emperour Leo was excommunicated, and deprived of his Imperiall dignity. Here marke the tyranny and fiercenesse of Antichrist, Who gaue such authority to a Roman Preacher, to dismount the Monarches of the world from their royall thrones? Yet Gregorie the third attempted such high matters, because the Emperor Leo had disallowed the worshipping of Images. Likewise, by his instigation the whole countrey of Italy refused to pay tribute to the Empe|rour. Now is the banner of Antichrist displayed against the Emperour, and this is a fore-running token, of the hatefull enmity which is to ensue betwixt the Popes and the Empe|rours, which (God willing) shall bee declared in its owne time. Likewise, Anastatius Patriarch of Constantinople, was condemned and excommunicated in this Councell. To fa|vour the Emperour, and to dislike the worshipping of Ima|ges, were two irremissable sinnes, and meriting the great A|nathems of the Bishop of Rome.
IN the yeere of our Lord,A Councell holden in France, by Bo|niface, Arch|bishop of Mentz. 742. and in time of the raigne of Charles the Great, and vnder the Popedome of Zacharias the first, Bonifaoius Archbishop of Mentz, assembled a Coun|cell, of the Bishops, Presbyters, and Clergy of France, for reformation of abuses in that countrey: or rather, as the truth is, to bring the countrey of France (as hee had already brought many parts of Germany) to a conformity with the superstitious rites of the Romane Church. It is to bee mar|ked, that this nationall Councel was assembled by the man|date of King Charles, howsoeuer Bonifacius ordered the af|faires of the Councell.
It was ordained, that Synodes should be kept yeerly, and that Clergie men should not put on armour,Canon 1. and goe to

warre-fare, except one or two Bishops, with their Presby|ters  Chaplens, to prescribe penance to them who should happen to confesse their sinnes: And that hunting and hauking, and such idle pastimes, should not be vsed by the Clergie.
Canon 2.That every Presbyter shall be ready to giue account of his ministery to his owne Bishop, in time of Lent, especially concerning his ministration of Baptisme, the summe of his Catholicke Faith, the forme of his prayers, and the order of his saying of masses.
Canon 3.That no vncouth Bishop or Presbyter, be admitted with|out the tryall, and allowance of a Synode.
Canon 4.That Presbyters and Deacons be not cloathed as secular men, with short cloakes; but with the habit of men who are in spirituall offices: And that no woman cohabite in the house with them.
Canon 5.That every Bishop haue a care within his owne bounds, to abolish all heathenish superstitions.
IN the yeere of our Lord, 755. and in the thirteenth yeere of the Empire of Constantinus Copronymus,The 7. general Councell as|sembled at Constantino|ple. a general Cou~|cell of 338. Bishops, was assembled at Constantinople, by the commandement of the Emperour. In this Councell the worshipping of Images was damned, and the placing of them in Oratories and Temples, where the divine Maiesty is worshipped, was forbidden, as a custome borrowed from Pagans, who had no hope of the resurrection, and therefore solaced the~selues with pictured similitudes of their friends, as if they had beene bodily present with them. Yea, for three principall causes they damned the worshipping of I|mages: First, because the worshipping of them is repug|nant vnto holy Scripture. Secondly, because the divine and humane nature being vnseparably vnited in Christ, and the divine nature cannot be presented by an Image: therefore it is not meete to represent his humane nature by an I|mage, left we should seeme to separate the two natures in Christ. And thirdly, because the writings of ancient Fa|thers

doe vtterlie condemne the worshipping of Images, such as Epiphanius, Eusebius, Gregorius Theologus, Athanasius, Amphilochius, Chrysostomus, and Theodorus Bishop of Ancyra. It were a prolixt thing to make a rehearsall of the sentences of all the forenamed Fathers: therefore, for breuities cause, I will heere onely make choise of one place, which is this: Eusebius Pamphili,Hist. Magd. cent. 8. cap. 9. writing to Constantia the Empresse, who was desirous that the image of Christ should be sent her hee returneth vnto hir this answere: Because yee haue written vnto mee to send vnto you the Image of Christ, I would gladly vnderstand what image of Christ yee are inquiring for: whether it bee that true and vnchangeable nature, bearing the character and ingrauen similitude of the person of the Father? or if it bee the image of the shape of a seruant, which Christ tooke vp|on him for our sakes? As concerning His diuine nature, I hope yee are not sollicitous to seeke the image thereof, beeing suffici|entlie instructed, that no man knoweth the Father, except the Sonne, and on the other part, no man knoweth the Sonne, ex|cept the Father. But if yee desire the similitude of mans na|ture, wherewith He clad Himselfe for our sakes, vnderstand, that the splender and shining brightnesse of his glorie cannot be repre|sented with dead coloures, and shaddowed pictures: For euen his Disciples in the mountaine were not able to abide the brightnesse of His shining face (Mat. Chap. 17. vers. 1. Mark. Chap. 9. vers. 2. Luk. Chap. 9. vers, 28.) how much lesse are we now able to a|bide the celestiall splender of his glorified bodie?
In this Councell Germanus Bishop of Constantinople, Georgius Cyprius, and Damascene a Monke, who were princi|pall defenders of the worshipping of images, were excom|municated.
In the Canons of this Councel, which were 19. in number; inuocation of Saints hath allowance in the 15.  17. Canon. So that in this Councell also is presented vnto vs a viue paterne of the weakenesse of Councels. Like as in euery sacri|fice there was dungue, so likewise in euery Councell there is found some note of infirmitie and weakenesse. And it is a foolishe thing to adhere to all the ordinances of

Councels, except they doe agree in all pointes with the written word of God.
The second Councell of Nice.IN the yeere of our Lord, 788. and in the eight yeere of the raigne of Irene, and her sonne Constantine, a Councell was assembled at Nice in Bythania, of three hundreth and fiftie Bishops. The Ambassadours of Adrian the first, Bishop of Rome, were present in this Assemblie. Basilius, Bishop of Ancyra; Theodorus, Bishop of Myra; and Theodosius, Bishop of Amorium; offered to the Councell their supplicant letters, confessing, that they had sinned in condemning the wor|shipping of images in the Synode assembled by Constantinus Copronymus. These reedes, shaken with the winde, and vn|constant fooles, were accepted in fauour, as a preamble vnto this malignant Councell. The Epistle of Adrian Bishop of Rome, was openly read in the Councell, approuing the wor|shipping of images. His letter was full of fables and lies, such as the fable of the leprosie of Constantine, and of the shedding of the blood of innocent babes to procure remedie against his sicknesse, and baptisme of Constantine by Syluester, the miraculous restoring of the Emperour to health after his Baptisme, and of the images of Peter and Paul, produced to Constantine before his baptisme. Such a Legend of lyes no Councell could haue heard read in their audience, if it had not bin a time in the which the mistery of iniquity was effec|tually working: For the history of the life of Co~stantine, writ|ten by Eusebius, expressely prooueth the contrary: to wit, that Constantine was not leprous, but rather a man of a cleane and vnspotted body: and that hee was not baptized by Syluester in Rome, but by Eusebius in Nicomedia. Notwithstan|ding, the letter of Pope Adrian was accepted and allowed by the Councell. And it was ordained, That the image of Christ, of the blessed Virgine Mary, and of the Saints, should not onely bee receiued into places of Adoration, but also should bee adored and worshipped: And the honour done to the image, is thought to redound to him (or her) who is present by the image, according to the words of Basilius

Magnus.Basil. contra Eunomium, . 1. But Basilius Magnus is writing in that place of Christ, the image of the inuisible God, and not of images made with mens hands.
THe Fathers of this Councell, as it were bewitched by the delusions of the Deuill, were not ashamed to confirme the adoration of images, by lying miracles, and by a foolish confabulation betwixt the Deuill and a Monke, whom Sa|than ceased not to tempt continuallie to the lust of vnclean|nesse, and would make none end of tempting him, except he would promise to desist from worshipping the image of the Virgin Mary. But argumentes taken from the fables of Monkes, and delusions of the Deuill, are not to be hearkened vnto, in a matter expressely repugnant to the written word of God.
IN the yeere of our Lord 794.The Councell of Frankford. Charles the Great, King of France, assembled a great Councell at Frankford: partlie in regard of the heretike Foelix, who called Christ the adoptiue Sonne of God in his humane nature, and was condemned in a Councell assembled at Ratisbona, Anno. 742. but hee was returned to his vomite againe: and therefore was of new againe condemned, as a notable he|retike, in the Councell of Frankford: partly also in re|spect of the great disputation that arose euerie where con|cerning the worshipping of images, disallowed in the coun|cell of Constantinople, and allowed in the second Councell of Nice.
Not onely the Bishops of France, but also of Germanie  Lombardie, as Prouinces subdued to the King of France, were present at this Councell. Likewise, Pope Adrian sent his Ambassadours, Theophilactus Stephanus, to the Coun|cel. And Charles himselfe, King of France, was present in the Councel of Frankford. The Ambassadours of Pope Adrian produced, the actes of the second Councell of Nice, hoping that the Councell of Frankford should haue giuen consent

and allowance vnto the same. But the Fathers of this Coun|cell collationed the actes of the Councell of Constantinople, with the actes of the second Councell of Nice. And they disallowed in the Councell of Constantinople the strict prohibition to picture images, either in Temples of other places. And in the second Councell of Nice they dis|allowed the Act of worshipping of images, and of honou|ring them with garments, incense, candles, and kneeling vn|to them: counting the afore-saide Act to be so impious, that the Councell in the which it was concluded, was neither worthy to be called Catholicke nor Oecumenicke. The ar|guments whereby the second Councell of Nice endeuoured to approue the adoration of images, are all refuted in the Councell of Frankford, as I haue declared alreadie in a trea|tise concerning worshipping of Images.
Concerning the argument taken from the authoritie of Epiphanius, who in his book called Panarium, reckoneth not the worshippers of images in the roll of Heretikes: it is an|swered by the Councel of Frankford, that in case Epiphanius had counted the haters of the worshippers of images, Here|tikes; hee had likewise inserted their names in the catalogue of Heretikes: but seeing he hath not so done, the Councell of Nice had no just cause to triumph so much in this friuo|lous argument, which maketh more against them, than it maketh for them.
More-ouer, in the Councell of Frankford, the Epistle of Epiphanius, written to Ihonne Bishop of Ierusalem, was read; wherein hee disalloweth the verie bringing in of images into Churches: and this Epistle was trans|lated out of the Greeke into Latine language, by Ierom. The Epistle is worthie to be read. Reade it in the Magde|burg Historie, Cent. 8. Chap. 9.



CENTVRIE IX.
_IN the yeere of our Lord, 813. by the com|mandement of Carolus Magnus, in the Towne of Mentz, were assembled 30. Bi|shops 25. Abbots,The Councell of Mentz. with a great number of Priests, Monkes, Countes, and Iudges, about reformation of the dissolute man|ners, of Ecclesiasticke and Laicke persons. After three dayes abstinence and fasting, joyned with Litanies, publicke Prayers, and imploring the helpe of God, they diuided themselues into three companies: In the first company were the Bishops, with some Noters, reading the history of the Euangell, and the Epistles, and the Actes of the Apostles, together with the Canons and workes of anci|ent Fathers, and the Pastorals booke of Gregorie, to the ende that by the Preceptes contained in these bookes, the enor|mitie of mens liues might be corrected. In the second com|panie were Abbots and Monkes, reading the rules of S. Bene|dict, for the reformation of the liues of Monkes. In the third company were Lords and Iudges, pondering the causes of all men, who came to complaine, that wrong was done vnto them.
The 1.2. and 3. Canons of this Councell, intreat concer|ning, Faith, Hope, and Charitie. 4. Concerning the Sacra|ments, to be ministred chiefly at Easter and Whitsonday, except necessitie  feare of death require preuening of these times. 5. That vnitie and concord should bee kept in the Church, because we haue one common Father in heauen: one Mother, to wit, the Church in earth: one Faith, one Baptisme, and one Celestiall inheritance prepared for vs: Yea, and God is not the God of dissention, but

of peace, according as it is said, Blessed be the peace-makers, for they shall be called the children of God. The sixt and seuenth Canons, intreat of Orphanes, and poore people, whose weak|nesse is to be supported: but no man should take vantage of their poore and desolate estate. The eight Canon recom|mendeth vnitie to be kept betwixt men in spirituall offices, and ciuill Iudges: a Canon indeede, if it had beene obserued, verie necessarie for the estate of this time. The ninth  tenth Canon, prescribeth to the Clergie, Preceptes of a modest and sober life, with abstinence from the delicate pleasures of the world, and from Theatricall Spectacles, from pompes, and vnhonest banquets: and to bee more readie to goe to the house of mourning, to comfort them who are heauie hear|ted, than to the house of banquetting. Vsurie, auarice, am|bition, and taking of rewardes, for the benefites of God, such as vse to be taken for medicinall cures, is forbidden. To be|ware of deceit and conjurations: to flee hatred, emulation, backe-biting, and enuying, wandering eyes, and an vnbri|dled tongue: a petulant, and proude gesture are forbidden: filthie words, and workes, are altogether abhorred: chastitie is recommended: the frequent visitations of the houses of Widowes, and Virgines, is prohibited: due obedi|ence is to bee giuen to Seniors: to take heede to doc|trine, reading, and spirituall songes; as it becommeth men, who haue addicted themselues vnto diuine ser|uice.
Precepts, concerning the behauiour of Monkes  Nunnes, and the fabricke of their dwelling places, I ouer-passe with silence, left I should ouercharge a short Compend with an heape of vnnecessarie thinges.
In the 32. Canon, the difference betwixt , and , is set downe. 33. The great Litanie or Rogations, to bee obserued three dayes, by all Christians, with fasting, fackecloath, ashes, walking barefooted, and all kinde of hum|ble carriage. 34.35. and 36. Publicke Fastings, and keeping of Festiuall dayes is commanded. 37. The Sabboth day is to be kept holy. In it no Merchant Wares to be sold, and

no criminall cause to be judged. 38. and 39. Tythes are precisely to be payed. And men, fleeing to Churches for safe|guard, are not to be violentlie drawne out of their refuge. 40. In Churches, and the portches thereof, let no secular judge|ments be exercised. 41. Let no ancient Church be spoyled of tythes and possessions, for the building of new Oratories. 42. Concerning Church-rentes bestowed for reparation and vpholding of Churches. 43. and 44. That no Priest say Masse himselfe alone: for if hee haue no person present except himselfe, how can hee say, Dominus vobiscum, or Sur|sum corda, or such other passages? Also frequent offering of the Sacrifice of the Masse, and presenting of the Paxe, is re|commended to Christian people. 45. That euery person bee acquainted with the Lords Prayer, and the Beliefe: and they who can no otherwise comprehend these things, let them learne them in their owne vulgar language. 46. Drun|kennesse is detested: and they who continue in this sinne, without amendement, are ordained to be excommunicated. 57. God-fathers shall attend, that their spirituall children bee brought vp in the true Faith. 48. Filthie, libidinous, songes are not to bee sung about Churches. 49. The co|habitation with women is forbidden to all the members of the Clergie. 50. Let all Bishops, Abbots, and Church men, haue such Aduocates and Agentes in their affaires, who are men that feare God, and are haters of all vnrighteous dea|ling 51. Let not the dead bodies of the Saincts be transpor|ted from place to place, without the aduice of the Princes of the countrey, or the Bishop, and Synode. 52. No dead bodie shall bee buried within the Church, except the bodie of a Bishop, or of an Abbot, or of a worthie Presbyter, or of a faithfull Laicke person. 53. Incestuous persons are to bee searched out, and separated from the fellowship of the Church, except they bee penitent. 54.55. and 56. Marriage, in the fourth degree of consanguinitie, is forbidden: and that no man shall marrie his spirituall daughter, or sister, neither the woman, whose sonne or daughter hee hath led to the Sacrament of Confirmation: and, in case they be found to





be married, they shall be separated againe. And no man shall take in marriage his wiues sister: neither shall a woman mar|rie her husbands brother.
IN the yeere of our Lord 813. a Councell was assembled at Rhemes,The eigth Councel of Rhemes. by the co~mandement of Charles the great: for it is to be remarked, that he not only asse~bled that famous Cou~|cell of Frankford, Anno. 794. in the which adoration of Ima|ges was condemned: but also, when he was now aged,  saw many abuses in the Church, hee endeuoured by all meanes possible, to procure reformation of the lewd manners of Church-men. Therefore, he appointed, at one time, to wit. Anno, 813. fiue National Cou~cels, to be conueened in diuers places, for reformatio~ of the Clergie  people: One was con|ueened at Mentz, as hath bin declared: Another at Rhemes: the third at Towrs: the fourth at Cabilone, or Chalons:  the fift at Arles. In all these Councels no opposition is made to the Councell of Frankford: neither was the adoration of Images auowed in any of these Councels. So much auai|leth the authority of a Prince for suppressing of false doctrin and heresie. In this Councell at Rhemes, Wulfarius, Arch|bishop was president. 44. canons are rehearsed in the 2. Tome of Councels made in this Councell.
In the 1. Can. it was co~cluded, That euery man should dili|ge~tly acquaint himself with the Articles of his faith. 2. That e|uery man shuld learn the Lords Praier,  co~prehe~d the mea|ning thereof. 3. That euery man, promoted to Ecclesiasticall orders, shal walke worthily, co~forme to his calling. 4. The E|pistles of Paul were read, to giue instructio~s to sub-deacons, how they shuld behaue the~selues. Yet is there not one word in all the Epistles of Paul of a sub-deacon. 5. The Gospell was read to giue instructio~ to Deacons, to minister condingly in their office. 6. Ignorant Priests are instructed to celebrate the Seruice with great vnderstanding. 7. In like manner, they are instructed how to prepare  to the Sacrame~t of Baptisme. 8. The holy Canons were read out of the De|cretall of Innocentius, for ordering the life of Chanons. 9. The rule of Saint Benedict was read, to reduce Abbots, and their Conuents, to a remembrance of their order. 10. The

Pastorall booke of Gregorius was read, to admonish Pastors of their dutie. 11. Sentences of diuers ancient Fathers were read, to admonish men of all rankes, both Prelates and subiects, to bring forth the fruit of a good conversation. 12. These things being done, they set downe a forme of receiuing of confessions, and prescribing of penance, accor|ding to the Canonicall institutions. 13. They reasoned a|bout the eight principall vices, to the end, their diuersitie being distinguished, every man might know what vices he should eschew, and teach others to beware of the same. 14. That Bishops should take heed of the reading of the bookes of the Canonicke Scripture, and the bookes of Fathers: and should attend vpon the preaching of the Word of God. 15. That Bishops should preach the Sermons and Homi|lies of holy Fathers, in such sort as all the people might vn|derstand them. The 16. Canon is coincident with the 12. 17. That Bishops, and Abbots, permit no man to solace the company with filthy gesting in their presence: but let poore and indigent people be refreshed at their tables with lectures of divine Scripture, and praising of God, accor|ding to the Precept of the Apostle, that whether wee eate or drinke, let all things be done to the glory of God. 18. Gluttony and Drunkennesse forbidden to Bishops, and the Ministers of God. 19. Let not Bishops bee rash to iudge in things secret, which are to bee referred to the iudgement of God, who can manifest things hid vp in darknesse, and discouer the secrets of the heart. 20. Presbyters shall not transport themselues from a low place to a greater. 21. Whosoever by paying money, procureth a preferment in the Church, shall be deposed. 22. No Church-man shall cohabite with a woman, except it be with his mother or sister, or such like persons, by whose company no suspition of vncleannesse can arise. Precepts given to Monkes, and Nunnes, I passe by, as I did in the former Councell.
Canon 35. The Sabbath day shall be kept holy, and in it no servile worke shall bee done, according to the Lords commandement. 36. Let no man bestow vpon the Church

that thing which by vnlawfull meanes hee hath fraudulent|ly with-drawne from others. 37. Nor yet by lies and deceitfull meanes, with-draw any thing duly belonging to the Church. 38. Let tythes be precisely payed. 39. Let no man presume to receiue rewards for his decreet and sen|tence. 40. Let prayers and oblations be made for the Em|perour, and his noble race, that it would please God to pre|serue them in all happines, in this present life, and vouchsafe vnto them celestiall ioyes in company of the Angels, in the life to come. In the 41. Canon, mention is made of a cer|taine rent, left by King Pipinus of Good memory; which they wish the Emperour Charles, Pipinus sonne, should not alter, nor transferre into another summe, in respect, that by so doing, many periuries and false testimonies might ensue. 42. And that no man should be remoued from his mansi|on, to whom the Emperours almes is distributed. 43. And that the statute may bee confirmed by his Highnesse allow|ance, whereby all contentions and strifes are ordained to haue a decision, and end. 44. And that the statute made in Bononia, concerning false witnesses, may be ratified and confirmed: with augmentation, if neede require, for es|chewing of periuries, false testimonies, and many other in|conueniences.
The Councell of Towrs.IN the yeere of our Lord, 813. and at the commandement of the Emperour Carolus Magnus, a Councell of many Bishops and Abbots, was assembled, about establishing of Ecclesiasticall discipline, in the towne of Towers.
In the first Canon, all men are admonished to be obedi|ent to the Emperour Charles the Great, and to keepe the oath of allegeance made vnto him, and to make prayers, and supplications for his prosperity and wel-fare. 2. All Bi|shoppes shall diligently reade, and frequently peruse, the bookes of holy Scripture, the histories of the Euangels, and the Epistles of Paul, together with the bookes of ancient Fa|thers written thereupon. 3. It is not lawfull for any Bi|shop to bee ignorant of the Canons of the Church, and of

the Pastorall booke of Gregorius, in the which every man, as in a liuely mirrour might see himselfe. 4. Let every Bi|shop feede the flocke committed vnto him, not onely with doctrine, but also with examples of good conversation. 5. A Bishop must not be giuen to sumptuous banquets, but be content with a moderate diet, lest hee should seeme to abuse the counsell of our Lord, saying; Take heed, that your hearts be not surfeited with gluttony, or drunkennesse: but let holy lecture be at his table, rather then the idle wordes of flatte|ring fellowes. 6. Let strangers and indigent people bee at Bishops tables: whom they may refresh, both with corporall and spirituall repast. 7. The delicate pleasure of the eare and eyes, are to bee eschewed, left by such pleasures, the minde be effeminate, and inchanted. 8. Let not the Lords servants delight in vaine gesting, nor in hunting, nor haw|king. 9. Let Presbyters and Deacons follow the foot-steps of their Bishops, assuring themselues, that the good conuer|sation enioyned vnto their Bishops, is also enioyned vnto them. 10. Let Bishops haue a great sollicitude and care towards the poore: and be faithfull dispensators of Ecclesi|asticall goods, as the Ministers of God, and not as hun|ters after filthy lucre. 11. It is lawfull for Bishops, with consent of Presbyters and Deacons, to bestow out of the Church treasure, to support indigent people of that same Church. 12. A Presbyter is not to be ordained vntill hee bee thirtie yeere old. 13. Let the Bishop make diligent in|quisition in his owne parish Church, that no Presbyter, com|ming from any other parts, make seruice in his Church, without letters of recommendation. 14. Let a Presbyter, leaving a low place, and presuming to an higher, incurre that same punishment, which a Bishop, deprehended in the like fault, should incurre. 15. A Presbyter, who attaineth to a Church, by giving money for it, let him bee deposed. 16. Let tythes bestowed vpon Churches, by advice of Bi|shops, be faithfully distributed to the poore, by the Presby|ters. 17. The families of Bishops shall be instructed in the summe of the true faith. In the knowledge of the retribu|tion

to be given to good men, and the condemnation of people, and of the resurrection and last iudgement, and by what kinde of workes eternall life may be promerited: and that the Homilies, containing these instructions, shall bee translated into Rusticke-Latine-language: to the end that e|very person may vnderstand them. Marke in what estima|tion the Latine language hath beene at this time: that in|structions in Rusticke and barbarous Latine, are counted better then instructions in good French language. 18. It is the dutie of the Bishop, to instruct his Presbyter concer|ning the Sacrament of Baptisme, what it is that they should desire the people baptized to renounce: namely, that they should renounce the divell, and all his workes, and his pomps. Now the workes of the Diuell, are murther, forni|cation, adulterie, drunkennesse, and other such like faults. But the pompes of the Divell, are pride, ostentation, swel|ling conceits, vaine-glory, loftinesse, and such other faults, as spring vp from such grounds. 19. Presbyters are pre|cisely to be admonished, that when they say the masse, and do communicate, they doe not distribute the Lords bodie indiscreetly, to children, and to all persons, who happen to be present, who if they be entangled with great sinnes, they procure vnto themselues rather damnation, then any reme|die to their soules, according to the saying of the Apostle, Whosoeuer eateth this Bread, and drinketh this Cup unworthily, hee shall be guilty of the bodie and blood of the Lord: Let a man therefore try himselfe, and so let him eate of this Bread, and drinke of this Cup.Note. By this let the iudicious Reader marke, that e|ven in the dayes of Carolus Magnus, priuate masses had no place: but they who were duly prepared, did communicate with the Priest. 20. Presbyters shall not suffer the holy Chrisme to be touched by every man. 21. Presbyters shall not resort to Tavernes, to eate or drinke. 22. Bishops and Presbyters, shall prescribe to sinners, who haue confessed their sinnes, penance, discreetly, according to the waighti|nesse of their fault. 23. Chanons, who dwell in Cities, let them eate in one Cloyster, and sleepe vnder one roofe, to

the end they may bee ready to celebrate their Canonicall houres. From the 24. Canon vnto the 32. are contained constitutions concerning Monkes and Nunnes, which I o|uer-passe with silence, fearing to be prolix.
Canon 32. All men should studie to peace and concord, but especially Christians: forsaking hatred, discord, and en|vie. 33. Lords and Iudges should be obedient to the whol|some admonitions of their Bishops: and Bishops on the o|ther part, should reverently regard them, to the end they may be mutually supported, every one with the consolati|ons one of another. 34. Lords and Iudges are to bee ad|monished, that they admit not vile and naughty persons to beare witnesse in their iudicatories, because there are many, who for a contemptible price, are ready to make shipwracke of a good conscience. 35. Let no man for his decreet, re|ceiue a reward: For divine Scripture in many places forbid|deth this, as a thing that blindeth the eyes of the blind. 36. Let euery man be carefull to support indigent persons of his owne family and kindred: for it is an impious and abomi|nable thing in the sight of God, that men abounding in riches, should neglect their owne. 37. Christians when they make supplications to God, let them in humble man|ner bow downe their knees, following the example of the Martyr Steven, and of the Apostle Paul: Except vpon the Lords day, and other solemne dayes, on the which the vni|versall Church keepeth a memoriall of the Lords resurrecti|on: and at such times they are accustomed to stand and pray. 38. Faithfull people must be admonished, not to enter in|to the Church, with tumult and noyse: and in time of prayer, and celebration of the masse, not to be occupied in vaine confabulations, and idle speeches: but even to abstain from wicked cogitations. 39. Let not the Consistories and Iudgement-seates of secular Iudges be in the Church, or portches thereof, in any time to come: because the house of God should bee an house of Prayer, as our Lord Iesus Christ saith. 40. Let it be forbidden, that Merchandize be vsed vpon the Lords day, or Iustice-Courts, because all

men should abstaine from servile labours, to the end this day may be spent in praising and thanking God, from mor|ning till evening. 41. Incestuous persons, parracides, and murtherers, are found, who will not hearken to the whol|some admonitions of Church-men, but persevere in their vitious conversation, who must be reduced to order by the discipline of the secular power. 42. Let the people be ad|monished to abstaine from Magicall Arts, which can bring no support and helpe to the infirmities of men, and beasts: but they are the deceitfull snares of the Divell, whereby he deceiveth man-kinde. 43. A frequent custome of swearing is forbidden, wherein men, vpon euery light occasion wil|ling to purchase credit to that which they speake, they take God to be witnesse of the verity of their speeches. 44. Ma|ny free subiects, by the oppression of their Masters, are re|dacted to extreame pouerty; whose causes, if our element Soveraigne please to examine, hee shall finde, that they are vniustly redacted to extreame indigence. 45. A false mea|sure, and a false ballance, is an abomination vnto the Lord, as Salomon recordeth.
The 46. Canon containeth a regrate, that tythes were not duly payed to the Church: notwithstanding, that the Church had giuen in, their complaint to the civil Magistrate: whereby it came to passe, that not only lights in the Church, and stipends to the Clergie, began to inlacke, but also the very parish Churches became ruinous. 47. When gene|rall Fastings are appointed, for any impendent calamity, let man neglect the fellowship of the humble Church, for de|sire to feed his belly with delicate foode. 48. Drunkennes and surfeiting are forbidden, as offensiue both to soule and bodie, and the ground of many other sinnes. 49. Lords and Masters are to be admonished, not to deale cruelly and vnmercifully with their subiects: yea, and not to seeke that which is due vnto themselues, with excessiue rigour. 50. Let Laicke people communicate at least thrise in a yeere, vnlesse they be hindred by some grivous sinnes committed by them. 51. In the last Canon mention is made, that

they diligently examined the cause of them who complai|ned to the Emperour, that they were dis-inherited by th donation of lands, which their Fathers and friends had be|stowed vpon the Church: and in their bounds they found no man who did complaine. Alwaies, in that matter, if any thing was done amisse, they humbly submitted themselues to be corrected by their Soveraigne Lord and King.
THe Councell of Chalons was the fourth Councell,The Councell of Chalons. con|vened in the yeere of our Lord, 813. by the comman|dement of Charles the Great, for the reformation of the Ec|clesiasticall Estate. Many of the Canons of this Councell are coincident with the Canons of the former: therefore I shall be the shorter in the commemoration thereof.
1. That Bishops acquaint themselues diligently with reading the bookes of holy Scripture, and the Bookes of ancient Fathers, together with the Pastorall bookes of Gre|gorius. 2. Let Bishops practice in their workes, the know|ledge which they haue attained vnto by by reading. 3. Let them also constitute Schooles, wherein learning may be in|creased, and men brought vp in them, that may be like to the salt of the earth, to season the corrupt manners of the peo|ple, and to stop the mouthes of Heretiques, according as it is said, to the commendation of the Church, A thousand Targes are hung vp in it, even all the Armour of the strong, Cant. chap. 4 vers. 4.  4. Let Church-men shew humility, in word, deed, countenance, and habite. 5. Let Priests bee vnreproueable, adorned with good manners, and not given to filthy lucre. 6. The blame of filthy lucre, wherewith many Church-men were charged, for this, that they allu|red secular men to renounce the world, and to bring their goods to the Church, they endeuour, with multiplyed number of words, to remoue. 7. Bishops, and Abbots, who with deceitfull speeches, haue circumvened simple men, and shauen their heads, and by such meanes doe pos|sesse their goods, in respect of their covetous desire of filthy lucre, let them be subiect to Canonicall, or regular repen|tance.

But let those simple men, who have layd downe their haire, as men destitute of vnderstanding, who cannot go|uerne their owne affaires, let them remaine in that estate, which they haue once vndertaken: but let the goods given by negligent Parents, and received, or rather reaved by ava|ritious Church-men, be restored againe to their children  heires. 8. If Church men lay vp provision of come in Victuall-houses, let it not be to keepe them to a dearth, but to support the poore in time of need, therewith. 9. Hun|ting and hawking, and the insolency of foolish and filthy iests, are to bee forsaken of Church-men. 10. Gluttony and drunkennesse is forbidden. 11. The Bishop or Ab|bot, must not resort to civill iudicators, to plead their owne cause, except it be to support the poore and oppressed. Pres|byters, Deacons, and Monkes, having obtained licence from the Bishop, may compeare in Civill iudgement-seats, accom|panied with their Advocate. 12. Let not Presbyters, Dea|cons, or Monkes, bee farmers or labourers of the ground. 13. It is reported of some brethren, that they compell the persons who are to be admitted, in time of their ordination to sweare, that they are worthy: and that they shall do no|thing repugnant to the Canons:Note. and that they shall be o|bedient to the Bishop, who ordayneth them, and to the Church, in the which they are ordayned: which oath, in regard it is perilous, we all inhibit, and discharge it. 14. Bi|shops in visiting of their Parishioners, let them not be charge|able vnto them, but rather comfortable, by preaching the Word, and by correcting things that are disordered. 15. It is reported, that some Arch-deacons vse domination over the Presbyters, and take tribute from them, which smelleth rather of tyranny, then of due order. For if the Bishoppe should not vse domination over the Clergie, but by exam|plars to the flocke, as the Apostle Peter writeth: much lesse should these presume to doe any such like thing. 16. Like as in dedication of Churches, and for receiving of orders, no money is received: even so, for buying of Balme to make Chrisme, Presbyters (keepers of Chrisme) shall be|stowe

no money: but Bishops, of their owne rents, shall furnish Baulme for the making of Chrisme, and Lightes to the Church. 17. It hath beene found in some places, that Presbyters haue payed 12. or 14. pennies in yeerely tri|bute to the Bishop: which custome wee haue ordained al|together to be abolished. 18. The receiuing of paunds from incestuous persons, and from men who pay not their Tythes, and from negligent Presbyters, is forbidden, as a thing which openeth a doore to auarice: but rather let Ec|clesiasticall discipline strike vpon transgressours. 19. Let people giue their Tythes to those Churches wherein their children are baptized,  whereunto they resort all the yeere long, to heare Church-seruice. 20. Let peace bee kept a|mongst all men, but in speciall betwixt Bishops  Countes; whereby euery one of them may mutually support another. 21. Ciuill Iudges ought to judge righteously, without ex|ception of persons, and without receiuing of rewards: and let their Officiars, Vicars, and Centenaries, bee righteous men: least, by their auarice and greedinesse, the people bee grieued, and impouerished. And let the witnesses be of vn|suspect credite: for by false witnesses the Countrey is great|ly damnified. 22. The Abbots and Monkes, in this part of the Countrie, seeing they haue addicted themselues to the Order of Saint Benedict: let them endeuour to con|forme themselues vnto his institution and rules. 23. The ordination of Presbyters, Deacons, and other inferiours, is to bee made at a certaine prescribed time. 24. Concerning Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, and Monkes, who shall hap|pen to be llaine, let the Emperour giue determination to whom the satisfacton of blood shall belong. 25. In many places, the auncient custome of publicke repentance hath ceased: neither is the auncient custome of excommunicatio~ and reconciliation in vse. Therefore, the Emperour is to be entreated, that the ancient discipline may be restored againe, and they who sinne publikely, may be brought to publike repentance: and euery man, according as hee deserueth, may either bee excommunicated, or reconciled. 26. It

is reported, that in some Churches there is contention and strife for diuidng of Church rents: It is ordained, therefore, That no Masse shall be said in those Churches, vntill they, who are at variance, be reconciled againe. 27. Neither the Sa|crament of Baptisme, nor the Sacrament of Confirmation, should be reiterated. 28. Concerning the decrees of affinitie, and in what degree Marriage may be bound vp, euery man is sent to the Canons of the Church to seeke resolution. 29. Se|ing that the man and the woman are counted in Scripture as one flesh, their Parentage is to be reckoned by like degrees in the matter of Marriage. 30. The Marriage of seruants is not to bee dissolued which is bound vp with consent of both their masters, euerie seruant remaining obedient to his owne master.Note. 31. It is rumoured, that some women by negligence, and others fraudulently, doe present their owne children to the Sacrament of Confirmation, to the ende they may bee separated from the companie of their husbandes. Therefore, wee statute and ordaine, that such women as either negligently or fraudulently present their owne children to the Sacrament of Confirmation, they shall bee compelled to doe penance all the dayes of their life: neither shall they in any wise be separated from their husbandes. 32. Let a sinner confesse vnto his Fa|ther-Confessor, all his sinnes which hee hath committed either in thought, word, or deede: because that hatred, enuye, and pride, are such pestilentious botches of the soule: and the more secretly that they are couched, the more periculously they hurt. 33. Sinnes should not one|ly bee confessed to God, according to the example of Dauid, who saith, I will confesse against my selfe my wic|kednesse vnto the Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my sinne, Psal. 32. vers. 5. But also wee should confesse our sinnes to our Father-Confessor, according to the pre|cept of the Apostle, Acknowledge your faultes one to another and pray one for another, that yee may bee healed, I at. 5.16.34. In preibing of penance, let fauour and hatred of any person be laide aside, and let the injunctions be giuen

according to the rule of holy Scripture, and according to the Canons and custome of the Church, following the ex|ample of the Physitions of the body, who without exception of persons doe adhibit cuttings, burnings, and vehement re|medies, to perilous diseases. 35. Many in doing of pe|nance, are not so desirous of remission of sinnes, as of the accomplishment of the prescribed time of their humilia|on: and beeing forbidden to eate flesh, or drinke wine, they haue the greater desire of other delicate meates and drinkes: but spirituall abstinence, which should bee in peni|tent persons, excludeth all bodily delightes. 36. Let no man sinne of purpose, to the ende hee may abolishe his sinnes by Almes-deedes: for that is all one as if a man should hyre God to grant vnto him a libertie to sinne. 37. Seeing all Canons of Councels are to be diligently read, in speciall such as appertaine vnto faith, and reformation of manners, should bee most frequently perused. 38. Bookes, called Libelli Poenitentiales, are to abolished, because the er|roures of these Bookes are certaine, howbeit the authors of them be vncertaine: and they prepare pillowes to lay vn|der the heads of them, who are sleeping in sinne. 39. In the solemnities of the Masse, Prayers are to bee made for the soules of them who are departed, as well as for them who are aliue. 40. Presbyters, who are degraded,  liue like se|culare men, neglecting repentance, whereby they might pro|cure restitution to their office, let them be excommunicated. 41. A Presbyter, who transporteth himselfe from his owne place, shall not be receiued in any other Church, except hee prooue, both with witnesses and letters sealed with lead,  containing the name of the Bishop, and of the Citie which he liued in, that he hath liued innocently in his own Church, and had a just cause of transportation. 42. Let no Church bee committed to a Presbyter, without consent of the Bi|shop. 43. In some places are found Scots-men, who call themselues Bishops,  they ordaine Presbyters  Deacons, whose ordination we altogether disallowe. 44. Presbyters must not drinke in Tavernes, wander in Markets, nor goe

to visite Cities, without aduise of their Bishop. 45. Many both of the Clergie  Laickes, go to holy places, such as Rome,  Turon: imagining, that by the sight of these places, their sins are remitted: and not attending to the sentence of Ierome, It is a more commendable thing to liue well in Hierusalem, than to haue seene Hierusalem. 46. In receiuing the Sacrament of the bodie and blood of Christ, great discretion is to be vsed: Neither let the taking of it be long differred, because Christ saith, Except yee eate the flesh of the sonne of man, and drinke his bloud, yee haue no life in you: Neither let vs come with|out due preparation, because the Apostle saith, He who eateth and driketh vnworthily, eateth and drinketh his owne damnation. 47. The Sacrament of the body  blood of Christ which in one day is accustomed to be receiued of all Christi|ans: let no man neglect to receiue it, except some grieuous crime doe hinder him from receiuing of it. 48. According to the precept of the Apostle Iames, Weake persons should be an|nointed with oyle by the Elders, (which oyle is blessed by the Bi|shop) these words inclosed in a parenthesis are added to the Text: for he saith, Is any man sicke amongst you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray for him, and an|noint him with oyle, in the Name of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shal saue the sicke, and the Lord shall raise him vp: And if he haue committed sin, it shal be forgiuen him, I am. cap. 5. vers. 14.15. Such a medicine as cureth both bodily  spirituall maledies is not to be neglected. 49. In the Councell of Laodicea it was forbidden, that Masses should bee said, and Oblations offered by Bishops, or Presbyters, in priuate houses. This question also was disputed in this Councell. 50. The autho|ritie of the Emperour, is to be interponed for reuerent kee|ping of the Lords day. 51. Because the Church is constitu|ted of persons of diuerse conditions, some are Noble, others are ignoble, some are seruants, vassalles, stran|gers, c. It becommeth them who are in eminent rowmes, to deale mercifully with their inferiours, knowing that they are their brethren, because God is one common Fa|ther to both, and the Church is one common mother to

both. From the 52. Canon vnto the 66. are contained pre|cepts of chaste and honest liuing prescribed to Prioresses and Nunnes. which I ouer-passe, as I haue done in the pre|ceeding Councels. 66. It is ordained, that prayers and sup|plications shall be made for the Emperour and his children, and for their well-fare both in soule and bodie. 67. These things haue we touched shortly, to be exhibited to our So|ueraigne Lord the Emperour. Hee who desireth a more ample declaration of all vertues to be followed, and vices to be eschewed, let him read the volume of the holy Scriptures of God.
IN the same yeere of our Lord,The Councel of Arles. wherein the preceding foure Councels were conueened,  by the mandate of the Emperour Charles the Great, another Councell was con|neened at Arles. The Canons of this Councell were in number. 25.
1. They set downe a Confession of their Faith. 2. They ordaine, That Prayers shall bee made for the Emperour, and his children. 3. They admonish Bishops and Pastors dili|gently to reade the bookes of holy Scripture: To teach the Lords people in all truth: and, To administrate the Sacra|ments rightly. 4. Laick people are admonished, not to re|mooue their Presbyters from their Churches, without con|sent of their Bishops. 5. That Presbyters be not admitted for rewards. 6. It is ordained, That Bishops shall attend, that euery person liue ordinately: that is, according to a prescri|bed rule. The 7. and 8. Canons belong to the ordering of Monkes and Nunnes. The 9. Canon pertaineth to the pay|ment of Tythes, and first fruits. 10. It is ordained, That Pres|byters shall preach the word of God, not only in Cities, but also in euery Parochin. 11. Incestuous copulations are to be vterly abhored. 12. Peace is to blee kep with all men, ac|cording to the words of the Apostle, Follow peace, and san|ctification, without the which no man shall see God, Heb. cap. 12. vers. 14.1. Let Lords, Iudges, and the rest of the people, be obedient to their Bishop:  let  judgment

be vsed: and no bribes receiued, nor false testimonie be ad|mitted. 14. In time of Famine, let euery man support the necessitie of his owne. 15. Let all weightes and measures be equall and just. 16. Let the Sabboth day be kept holy, without Markets, Iustice Courtes, and seruile labour. 17. Let euery Bishop visite his boundes once in the yeere:  if he finde the poore to be oppressed by the violence of the mightie, then let the Bishop with wholesome admonitions, exhort them to desist from such oppression: and in case they will not desist from their violence, then let the Bishop bring the cause to the eares of the Prince. 18. Let Presby|ters keepe the Chrisme,Note. and giue it to no man, vnder pre|tence of Medicine. 19. Parentes and Witnesses, shall bring vp baptized children in the knowledge of God, because God hath giuen them vnto Parents, and Witnesses haue pawned their word for their faith. 20. Ancient Churches shall not be depriued of Tythes, nor of none other pos|session. 21. That the constitution of ancient Fathers shal be kept concerning Buriall in Churches. 22. Ciuill Iudg|ment-seates shall not bee in Churches. 23. The goods belonging vnto the poore, if they bee bought, let it bee done openly in sight of the Nobles and Iudges of the Citie. 24. Let fugitiue Presbyters and Church-men bee inquired, and sent backe againe vnto their Bishop. 25. He who hath a benefice bestowed vpon him, for helping the fabricke of Churches, let him support the building of them. 26. They who sinne publickely, let them make their publicke repentance, according to the Canons. These things haue wee shortly touched, to bee presented vnto our Lord the Emperour, and to be corrected by his High|nesse wisedome.
The eight general Coun|cell.IN the yeere of our Lord, . and in the third yeere of the raigne of Basilius, Emperour of the East: and vnder the raigne of Lewis the second Emperour of the West the Ambassadours of Pope Adrian the second came to Constan|tinople. Basilius the Emperour: gathered a Councell a|gainst

Photius, the Patriarch of Constantinople. In this Councell great policie was vsed, to haue all things framed to the contentment of Adrian Bishop of Rome: Fo no man was admitted to the Councell, except only they who had subscribed the supremacie of the Bishop of Rome, a|boue all other Bishops. They who refused to subscribe the fore-saide supremacie, were contemptuously rejectd, and not admitted to the Councell. So did the authoritie of the Bi|shop of Rome proceede to further grouth, by flattering of Ba|silius, who slew his associate Michael: as it was founded in the flatterie of Bonifacius the third, who flattered that vile mur|therer Phocas, who slew his master Mauritius. In this Coun|cell Photius was deposed and excommunicated,  his bookes which he wrote against the supremacie of the Bishop of Rome were commanded to be burnt. Photius was accused for this, that he had accepted the office of a Bishop, before hee he receiued other Ecclesiasticall orders. Photius alleadgd, that this was no sufficient cause of deposition, in respect that Ambrose, Bishop of Millan; Nectarius, bishop of Constanti|nople; and of late dayes Tarasius; with consent of the Bishop of Rome; of Laickes were made Bishops. The Ambas|sadours of Pope Adrian the second answered, that Ambrose was endewed with extraordinarie giftes, Nectarius was called at an extraordinarie time, to wit, when heresie was so ouer|spred, that it was an harde thing to finde out a man who was not spotted with heresie: and concerning the aduance|ment of Tarasius to be Bishop of Constantinople, to whose admission Adrian the first gaue consent, they answered, That it was done for a speciall cause, in regard hee was a zealous maintainer of the adoration of Images. This answer decla|reth, that in case Photius also had beene a zealous maintainer of the adoration of Images, the Roman Bishop and his Am|bassadours could haue dispensed with the want of Ecclesia|sticall orders preceeding his admission to his Bishopricke, as they did in the person of Tarasius.
In this Councel also the Ambassadoures of Adrian, magni|fying the authoritie of the Pope, affirmed, that the Bishop of

Rome might judge of the actions of all other Bishops: but no man might judge of him. And albeit the Orientall Bi|shops in the sixt Generall Councell, cursed Pope Honorius after his death: yet it is to be marked (say they) that hee was accused of heresie: And in this case onely it is lawfull for inferiours to resist their superiours, and to disclaime their peruerse opinions. In this point, also they said, That none of the Patriarches and Bishops proceeded against the defunct Bishop of Rome,Hist. Magd. cent. 9 cap. 9. Caraza de Cocils. without the consent of the Roman Chaire going before them. Now obserue (good Reader) with what fidelitie Onuphrius defendeth the name of Honorius the first: as free of all suspition of heresie: when as the Ambassadours of Adrian the second, for verie shame durst not presume to doe it.
More-ouer, the worshipping of Images in this Councell got a new allowance againe, and it was commanded, That the image of Christ should be holden in no lesse reuerence than the bookes of the Gospell.
The Bulgarians also were made subject to the Romane Bishop. And Ignatius Patriarch of Constantinople, in regarde he was restored to his place againe by the meanes of the Bi|shop of Rome, hee made no opposition to the contrarie. Ne|uerthelesse, this alteration continued but short time: for the Bulgarians droue out of their bounds the Latine Priests, and were serued with Greeke Priests againe.
Diuers Canons were constituted in this Cou~cell, but so co|incident with the Canons of other Councels, that it is a su|perfluous thing to make a rehearsall of them. In the subscrip|tion of the Actes of the Councel, great controuersie fell out: for the Grecians could not abide the name of Ludouicke, Emp. of the We, because they thought, that the honourable name of an Emp. only belonged to their owne Soueraigne Lord, who was Emp. of Co~stantinople. Moreouer, a number of them came to the Emp. Basilius, and requested him, that their subscriptions might be redeliuered vnto them againe, wherein they had subscribed to the supremacie of the Ro|mane Bishop, or else the Church of Constantinople would

be in perpetuall subiection to the chaire of Rome. These subscriptions afore-sayd were restored againe, but with great difficulty.
CAarolus Caluus convocated a Councell in France,The Councell of Acciniacu~. at Acciniacum, consisting of ten Bishops. The Bishops of Lions, Vason, and Trier, were chiefe Presidents in the Coun|cell. Hincmarus Bishop of Rhemes, accused in this conven|tion his owne nephew, Hincmarus Bishop of Laudunum, as a man disobedient to his Metropolitan, and a man who for private iniuries had excommunicated all the Presbyters of his Church, debarring them from saying masse, baptizing Infants, absolving of Penitents, and burying of the dead. And Hincmarus Bishoppe of Rhemes, proponed vnto the Councell, 50. Canons, which he desired to be read, in the Synode: and they allowed all the Canons written by the Bishop of Rhemes. Also, they condemned Hincmarus Bi|shop of Laudunum, of petulancy, and compelled him to subscribe obedience to Charles his King, and to his Metro|politan: hee was also deprived of his office, and his eyes were thrust out. But Pope Iohn the ninth, vnder the raigne of Carolus Crassus,Hist. Magd. cent. 9. cap. 9. restored him to his office againe, being the more affectioned vnto him, because hee had appealed from his owne Bishop, and from the decreet of a Synode in his owne countrey, to be iudged by the chaire of Rome.
IN the yeere of our Lord,The Councell of Triburium, or Strasburg. 899. and in the eight yeere of the raigne of the Emperour Arnulphus, in the Towne of Triburium, twenty and two Bishops of Germany, were as|sembled, who made many constitutions, a great number whereof, Caranza is compelled to over-passe with silence, lest he should make a superfluous repetition of Canons men|tioned before.
First, it was concluded in this Councell, that excommu|nicate persons, if they repent not, are to be subdued by the Emperour. Canon 10. That a Bishop shall not bee depo|sed, before his cause bee iudged by twelue Bishops: and a

Presbyter by sixe Bishoppes: and a Deacon by three Bi|shops. 11. A Church-man, who committeth slaughter, shall bee deposed, albeit hee hath beene enforced vnto it. 12. Baptisme shall not bee ministred, except at Easter and Whitsunday, without necessity require. 13. Tythes are to be paid for the sustentation of the Ministery, the support of the poore, and the fabricke of the Church. 15. Let mens bodies be buried in that Parish, vnto the which they payed their tythes. 16. No buriall place shall be sold for mony. 17. Let Laicke people be buried in the Church-yard, not in the Church: but if they be buried already, let not their bodies be remooved. 18. The vessels wherein holy my|steries are celebrated, are Challices and Platters: whereof Saint Bonifacius, a Bishop and Martyr, being demanded, if it was lawfull to celebrate the Sacrament in vessels of wood? Hee answered, that of old there were golden Bishops, and woodden vessels: but now by the contrary, saith hee; the Bishops are wooden Bishops, and the vessels are vessels of gold. And Sepherinus ministred the Sacrament in vessels of glasse. Neverthelesse, this Councell straitly inhibiteth the Sacrament to be consecrated in vessels of wood. 19. Let not wine without water be offered in the holy Challic, be|cause both blood and water flowed out of the side of Christ. 20. Priests are shaven, to the end they may carry vpon their heads a similitude of the crowne (to wit, of thornes, where|with the Lord was crowned) who is their lot and portion. 21. Let not Presbyters, who are called before Iustice-seats, be compelled to sweare, but let them bee put in remembe|rance of their holy consecration, in stead of an oath. 22. The tryall of persons defamed, by the burning iron is cea|sed: but let no man giue out rash iudgement in secret mat|ters. 27. They who haue vndertaken a spirituall office, should not goe to war-fare, nor accept vpon them ciuill of|fices, according to the seventh Canon, of the Councell of Chalcedon. 31. A theese, or a robber, who is slaine in the perpetration of his diabolicall fact, let no man pray for his soule, nor distribute almes for his reliefe. 35. Let no

iustice-Courts be holden on the Lords day, neither of Festi|vall nor Fasting dayes. 39. A man who marrieth a woman of a strange countrey, but not of a strange religion, shall bee compelled to cohabite with her. 40. It shall not bee law|full for a man to marrie a woman whom hee hath polluted in adultery, during her husbands life-time. 45. Hee who hath defiled two sisters, let him be subiect to penance all his dayes, and remaine continent. 46. A woman that hath committed adultery, and for feare of her husband, who pursueth her vnto the death, shee fleeth vnto Bishoppes to seeke reliefe: let them travell seriously for the safety of her her life: and if that can be obtained, let her bee restored to her husband againe: but if that cannot be obtained, let her not bee restored: but her husband du|ring his life-time, shall not marrie another. 54. A forme of externall repentance is prescribed to them, who of preco|gitate malice, and of purpose, haue committed slaughter.



CENTVRIE X.
The Councell of Ravenna._IN the yeere of our Lord, 903. a Councell was convened at Ravenna, of 74. Bi|shops. It seemeth to bee assembled by Iohn the tenth, whereat was present Ca|rolus Simplex, the King of France. In this Councell the acts of Pope Formosus had allowance, and the Decrees of Ste|phanus the sixt were condemned and burnt.
The Councell of Rhemes.VNder the raigne of Carolus Simplex, King of France, a Councell was gathered at Rhemes apparantly (for the place is not certaine) for correcting the abuse of Church|rents. Noblemen in Court, such as Hugo, and his brother Robert, Master of the Kings horses, and Vinemarus, with di|verse others, vnder pretence of sustayning the Kinges ho|nourable estate, and paying wages to souldiers, had conver|ted to their owne vse, a great part of Church-rents, especi|ally, belonging to Abbies. Fulco Archbishop of Rhemes, vttered his minde freely in the Councell. Vinemarus one of the notable oppressors in the Court, defiled the Councell with blood, and killed Fulco Bishop of Rhemes. The Fa|thers of the Councell returned vnto their owne Churches with great feare: for the like of this was not heard, since the second Councell of Ephesus, called , that is, a Coun|cell of briggandrie, because in it, Flavianus Bishop of Con|stantinople, was slaine.
The Councell of Rome.IN the dayes of Otto the first, a great Councell was assem|bled at Rome, against Pope Iohn the thirteenth, or as o|thers doe reckon, Pope Iohn the twelfth. The principall

faults wherwith he was charged, besides perfidiousnes obie|cted against him by the Emp. were these following, to wit:

1. Peter a Cardinall Presbyter, affirmed hee saw him say masse, and communicated not himselfe.
2. Iohn Bishoppe Narrien, and Iohn a Cardinall Deacon, affirmed they saw him ordaine a Deacon in an horse-stable.
3. Benedictus with the rest of Deacons, and Presby|ters, affirmed he received money for the ordination of Bi|shoppes.
4. Likewise they sayd, albeit they saw it not with their eyes, yet they were fully perswaded, that hee accompanied with the widow of Rainer, and with Stephana his Fathers Concubine: and that he made the sacred Pallace like vnto a bawdy-house.
5. That he was an open hunter.
6. That he thrust out the eyes of Benedict his spirituall Father, and by so doing procured his death.
7. That he had gelded Iohn an Archdeacon, raised fire, and cloathed himselfe with armour in military manner.
8. That he did drinke to the divell, all the Clergie bare witnesse.
9. And that in playing at dice, hee craved the helpe of Iupiter, and Venus, and the rest of the gods of the Gentiles, whom the Apostle Paul calleth divels.
10. That hee sayd not Mattins, nor kept his Canonicke houres, nor signed himselfe with the signe of the Crosse.
11. That he distributed the golden crosses and chalices of the Church, to his harlots.
12. That hee had consecrated one Zacheus a wicked man, and vnlearned, to be Bishop to the Hungars: to the end,Luitprond. hist. l. 6. c. 6,  7. that by his seditious Sermons he might concitate them against the Emperour.

Concerning the letter written to Pope Iohn, by advice of the Emperour Otto, and his proud answer sent backe againe to the Councell, together with their last good night to him, granting to him such power of binding as Iudas had, that is, to binde his owne necke to the Gallowes. Of these

things I haue spoken in the Treatise of Succession.
The Councell of Canterbury in England.IN the yeere of our Lord, 975. a Councell was gathered in England, at Canterburie. The question debated in the Councell, was concerning the marriage of men in spirituall offices. Dunstanus at this time was Bishop of Canterburie, and he was an adversarie to the marriage of men in spirituall offices. But the question was so wel discussed by testimonies of Scripture, and the Fathers of the Primitiue Church, that Dunstanus had cause to be ashamed. For this cause hee im|plored the helpe of the Diuell: for he was knowne to be a Sorcerer. Satan compelled him to persist in his argument. And when they were convened againe, and in the heate of their disputation, a voyce sounded from the Image of the Crucifix (which was in the place of their convention) that Dunstanus his opinion was the best.
This lying miracle so dashed the multitude of simple and ignorant Priestes,Hist. Magd. cent. 10. cap. 9. that they thought it to bee the Oracle of God; but in their next meeting Falthodus, whom others call Ethelredus, a learned man of Scotland, so evidently by testi|monies of Scriptures, and Fathers, prooved that marriage was a thing lawfull to men in spirituall offices, that the an|swer which came from the Crucifix, was counted the an|swer of the Divell, whom Dunstanus served, because Christ would speake nothing repugnant to his owne Word.
The Councell of Constanti|nople.VNder the raigne of Nicephorus Phocas, Emperor of Con|stantinople, and when Polyeuchus was Patriarch, the Emperour assembled a Councell at Constantinople. The question disputed in the Councell, was this. Nicephorus ha|ving obtained the dominion of the East, tooke to wife The|ophania, the relict of Romanus his predecessor. This matter so displeased the Patriarch Polyeuchus, that hee debarred the Emperour Nicephorus from holy things, pretending these two causes: First, because the Emperour had celebrated the second marriage. Secondly, because Nicephorus had beene witnesse in Baptisme, to the children of Theophania. This

question being discussed in the Councell, in presence both of Prelats and Counsellers, the Emperours marriage was allowed, and the acts alledged by Polyeuchus was counted impious,  made by Capronimus, and that they had no force to hinder the marriage. The proud Patriarch when he was overthrowne by reason, armed himselfe with obstinacie and stiffe neckednesse, vntill Bardas the Emperours father came to him, and affirmed by an oath, that Nicephorus the Empe|rour was not witnesse in Baptisme to the children of Theo|phania. Thus were the Patriarches of the East, serious in ob|serving the traditions of men, but remisse and negligent in observing the ordinances of God. And this is a sure testi|mony, that defection from the faith had now prevayled, both in the west and East.
IN the yeere of our Lord,The Councell of Rhemes, a|gainst Arnul|phus. 992. in the ninth yeere of the Emperour Otto, and in the fourth yeere of Hugo Capeto, King of France, a Councel was gathered at Rhemes, against Arnulphus Bishop of Rhemes. His hand-writing was pro|duced, wherein hee did binde himselfe to bee obedient to Hugo Capeto, King of France; and never to come in the con|trary, vnder paine of infamy, and perpetuall malediction. Notwithstanding, he had countenanced Duke Charles, who claimed the right of the kingdome, as nearest heire thereto, being the brother of Lotharius. To Duke Charles, Arnul|phus had opened the ports of the towne of Rhemes, and made him Commander of the citie. Great disputation was in the Councell concerning Arnulphus. His friends would haue had this cause remitted to the iudgement of the Bishop of Rome. But many of the Bishops of France, mightily op|poned to the contrary. The discourse is very prolix, but the paines of reading is well recompenced with the fruitfulnesse of the disputation. This Councell toke this end, Arnulphus confessed his fault, denuded himselfe of his Episcopall ho|nour, and Gilbertus, who had beene instructor of Robert the Kings sonne, was placed in his roome. Likewise, Arnulphus was sent to Orlience to be imprisoned there, together with

Siguinus Archbishop of Senon, because hee consented not freely to the deposition of Arnulphus, but thought that this matter was overswayed by the tyranny of Courtiers, and v|surpers of the kingdome vnlawfully.
Another Councell at Rhemes, resto|ring Arnul|phus.VVHen the deposition of Arnulphus was reported at Rome, Iohn the thirteenth, was mooued with great wrath, and incontinent, excommunicated all those Bishops of France, who had consented to the deposition of Arnul|phus. In so doing Pope Iohn kept the accustomed order of the Romane Church, to wit, to pronounce a sentence be|fore a lawfull cognition, and tryall of the cause. Also hee sent an Abbot called Leo, furnished with the authority of the Romane chaire, to appoint a new Councell at Rhemes. Hugo King of France, was somewhat terrified with the cur|sing of the Bishop of Rome, and feared to oppose himselfe to so many bishops, agreeing in one minde: and therefore he suffered the councell to hold forward. The con|clusion of this Councell was, that Arnulphus was restored to his former dignitie. And left that either the Emperour Otto, or Hugo Ca|peto, should be offended, Gilbertus was promoted to be Bishop of Ravenna.



CENTVRIE XI.
_IN the yeere of our Lord 1026. and vnder the raigne of the Emp. Henry the second, a Councell was assembled at Aken, by the authority of the Emperour; who seeing the wrath of God kindled against the word,  manifold tokens of the anger of God ma|nifested in the Calamities hanging vpon the head of all people and nations, he gathered this Councel: By the authoritie whereof Priests were commanded to paci|fie the wrath of God by frequent saying of masse; the people, by fasting  abstinence;  Princes by distributing of almes to reconcile themselues to God. The Doctrine of repetance and amendement of life, was forgotten in this time of horri|ble ignorance; and all religion was turned into outward exercises of fasting; of distributing of almes; and of saying of Masses. Also new fasting daies were inioyned to be kept in most solemne manner to the honour of Iohn the Baptist  S. Laurence;Mat. 15. so that by a multitude of human traditions, daily increased; the ordinance of God (as Christ witnesseth) was made null and of no effect.
IN the yeere of our Lord,The Councell of Halignustat. 1023. and in the 21. yeere of the raigne of the Emp. Henry 2. a Councell was assembled at Halignustat, wherein Harido Bishop of Mentz, was modera|tor;  great pains were taken to make a conformitie  vnitie in obseruation of superstitious rites in Germanie, such as statut times of fasting, and abstinence from marriage at cer|taine times of the yeere, and not casting of the corporall into the fire to quench the fire kindled in a towne, which was the custome of foolish Priests at that time;  that no sword shuld be brought into the Church except the Kings sword; and

no meetings or confabulations should be in the Church or the poarch thereof, and that women should not bee ad|dicted to particular and select Masses, such as the Masse of the Trinitie and Saint Michael; but let them heare com|mon Masses for the safetie of the quicke and the dead. Al|so Lawes were made in this Councell concerning the rec|koning of the degrees of consanguinitie, and that no man should iourney to Rome for obtaining pardon for great sinnes, before hee had first confessed himselfe to his owne Priest; and fulfilled the penance prescribed by him, with many other constitutions, full of new invented superstition.
The Councel of Triburia.IN the yeere of our Lord 1030. and vnder the raigne of the Emperour Conrad the second: a Councell was as|sembled at Triburia. The Emperour was present at the Councell. After some constitutions about fasting, one arose, and said that certaine Epistles were come from hea|uen concerning peace to be renued on earth,  he was com|manded to write a coppie of these Epistles to be communi|cat to other Bishops, to the ende that nations and people might obserue these new lawes following.

Nevv lawes.1. That no man should weare armoure.
2. That no man should seeke restitution of things taken from him.
3. That no man should reuenge the wrongs, done to his blood and kindred.
4. That men should be compelled, to pardon them who smote them.
5. That euery Friday, a fasting shall bee kept with bread and water.
6. That on Saturday, there should be an abstinence from flesh and fat things.
7. That men should content themselues with this kinde of fasting for remission of all their sinnes, so that they neede none other kind of repentance.

That all men should be bound by an oath to obserue these new lawes,  they who refused to sweare obedience to these ordinances should be separated from the Church, and they

should neither be visited when they were sicke,Hist. Magd. cent. 11 cap. 9. nor buried when they were dead.
These new lawes which came not from heauen, but from the instinct of an euill spirit, many were content to receaue. Others who were of more sound iudgement specially the B. of Cambry, reiected them as repugna~t, most part, to the word of God, to the co~stitutions of the Church, to the peace of wel-ordered common-wealths,  to charitie. Alwayes consider that this was a time of horrible darknesse and ignorance, wherein any durst affirme in face of a Councell, that such lawes came from heauen, as were flatlie repugnant to the written word of God.
IN the yeere of our Lord,The Councell of Sutrium. 1046. and vnder the raigne of the Emperour Henry the third, an assemblie was gathered by the Emperour at Sutrium a towne of Italie, for pacefying an horrible schisme in the Roman Church: for three Popes con|tended for the Popedome, to wit, Benedict the ninth, Silvester the third, and Gregorie the sixt; when the fathers had conuee|ned at Sutrium, and the Emperour had considered the causes of the scisme, and the ambition of Prelats striuing for superi|oritie, they thought expedient to remoue all these three monsters, and to choose one Sindigerus Bishop of Bamberg to be Pope, whom they called Clemens the second. Moreouer the Emperour did bind the Romans with an oath,Contract. Vspergens. Platina. that they shuld in time to come abstaine from the electio~ of the Pope.
ABout the yeere of our Lord,A Councell at Rome a|gainst Berenga|rius. 1050. Leo the ninth assem|bled a Councell at Rome against Berengarius Deacon at Angiers; vpon this occasion was the Councell gathered. Berengarius saw that the opinion of Transubstantiation was ouerspred in his time, to wit, that after the words of co~secra|tion the substance of bread evanished, and the substance of the body and blood of Christ was in the Sacrament, vnder the accidents of bread and wine; which opinion he disapro|ued, and followed rather the opinion of Augustine, Ioannes Scotus, about the Sacrament of the supper. He writ also let|ters to Lanfrancus B. of Canterbury about this question. The Messenger who carried the letters did not find Lanfrancus in Normandie whether he was directed. Therefore he deliue|the

letters to some of the Clergie, who opened the letters of Berengarius and sent them to Pope Leo the ninth. After the sight whereof he assembled a Councell at Rome, and read the letters of Berengarius, and condemned him (though ab|sent) as an heretike.
A Councell at Vercellis a|gainst Berenga|rius.LEo the ninth, assembled another Councell at Vercellis a|gainst Berengarius, in the moneth of September, of the yeere of our Lord, 1050, so that both these Councels were holden in one yeere, against Berengarius. Berengarius was warned to bee present at the Councell. Lanfrancus Bishop of Canterbury was also present. In Berengarius name compeared two of the Clergie, who were taken and cast into prison. The issue of the Councell was this. The Bookes, of Ioannes Melrosius Scotus de eucharistia, were read in the Councell and condemned. Leo likewise appoin|ted in many Prouinces, Synods to be assembled against Berengarius, notwithstanding he persisted constantly in his opinion, vntill the dayes of Pope Nicolaus the second.
A Councell at Towrs against Berengarius.IN the yeere of our Lord, 1055. Pope Victor the second, as|sembled a Councell at Towrs against Berengarius. The Popes Ambassadours were present at the Councel, and Be|rengarius answered that hee adhered to no particular opinion of his owne, but he followed the Common doctrine of the vniversall Church, and that hee would not be contentious. This gentle answere mitigated the kindled affections of his Adversaries, yet he persisted in his own opinion,  for this cause Lanfrancus obiected against him that he deluded the Councel of Towrs with general  doubtsome words.
Another Cou~|cell at Rome against Beren|garius.IN the yeere of our Lord, 1059. Pope Nicolaus 2. assembled a great Councel at Rome of 100.  13. B. Berengarius was present at the Councel. Berengarius through infirmitie, sub|mitted himselfe to be corrected by Pope Nicolaus 2. and the Councel. They prescribed to him a forme of renounciatio~ of his error as they called it, which Berengarius accepted  reca~|ted. Notwithstanding afterward he published in writing a re|futatio~ of the doctrine of Transubstantiation,  damned his owne recantation. Manie other constitutions were made in this Councel, such as, that the election of the Pope

should belong to the Colledge of Cardinals; that no man should heare a Masse sayd by a married Priest; that no Laick person should be iudge to a man in a spirituall office; that no person should marrie, any of his owne consangui|nitie, vntill the seventh generation; with many other foo|lish constitutions.
IN the yeere of our Lord 1060. as appeareth,The Councell of Millan. Pope Nicholaus the second, sent Petrus Damianus to hold a Councell in his name at Millan. The questions disputed in the Councell were two chiefly, to wit, about Simonie, and the errour of the Nicolaitans. It was accounted Si|monie to receiue investment by staffe and ringe from a secular man. It was counted the errour of the Nicolai|tans when Priests married wiues. And Damianus to bring such mariages vnder the Compasse of Heresie, hee said that faults in manners, if they were obstinatlie de|nded they became Heresies. But suppose this was true (as it is a false definition) how can it bee called the heresie of the Nicolaitans, seeing that Nicolaitans were not called Heretikes in respect they had wiues, but in respect they made their wiues common, as I haue declared in the first Centurie. The issue of this Coun|cell was, that the whole Towne of Millan both Clergie and people, was in an vprore, complaining that the Towne wherein Ambrose was Bishop should be brought in subiection to the Ordinances, of any other Church. Damianus was in great feare to bee rent in pieces, albeit the Archbishop of Millan was sitting at his one side, and the Bishoppe of Luca at his other. After that the tu|mult was pacified Damianus did speake vnto the Cler|gie and people, manie things concerning the preroga|tiue of the Chaire of Rome, and the Bishop of Millan standing before the Altar, did sweare that hee should bee obedient to the ordinances of the Roman Church, in extirping the heresie of Simonie and of the Nicolai|tans, and many of the Clergie following his example

did the like, and were content like inconstant fooles to re|ceaue penance for cohabitation with their owne lawfull wifes.
The Councel of Mantua.IN the yeere of our Lord 1066. The Emperour Henry the fourth assembled a Councell at Mantua, for pacifi|ing the scisme of the Roman Church which arose be|tweene Alexander the second, and Candalus, who was called Honorius 2. They contended one against another, with ar|moure, violence, shedding of blood, and cursings. For Alex|ander conueened them who were of his faction at Rome,  deliuered Honorius to the Deuill, as an ambitious and bloodie man. On the other part Honorius assembled his fauourers at Parma, and cursed Alexander, because hee bought the Popedome by money from the Romans, and because hee accepted the Popedome without the fore|knowledge and consent of the Emperour. For pacify|ing of the outrage of these Roman vultures; the Em|perour appointed a Councell to be assembled at Man|tua, wherein Alexander was declared to be Pope, Can|dalus had pardon, and Gilbertus by whose Councell Can|dalus accepted the Popedome, was made Archbishop of Rauenna.

1. In this Councell, it was ordained that no man should heare Masse sayd by a Priest who had a concubine.
2. The sonnes of Priests may be accepted to Church or|ders; prouiding the authoritie of the Pope be interponed to giue allowance thereto.
3. He who is admitted to a Church-office, willingly and wittingly, by a Simoniake person; shal be remoued from his Order.
4. Monks destinat for monasterie, shall not be admitted to offices in the Clergie.
5. Members of the Clergie shall not accept Ecclesiasticall benefices from Laicke persons.
6. No Ecclesiasticall office or benefice shall be sold for mo|ney, but freelie giuen to them who are learned and godly.
7. No person excommunicat, shall haue power to excom|municate others.

POpe Alexander the second sent two Cardinals to Engla~d to pacifie the troubled estate of the Church:The Councell of Wintomi in England. there they conueened a Councell at Winchester, wherein they depo|sed certaine Bishops  Abbots from their offices; and name|ly Stigandus Bishop of Canterburie. Against whom these crimes were obiected. First that he had possessed the chaire of Canterburie, Robert Archbishop thereof being aliue. Likewise that he possessed another Bishopricke with it, as namely the Bishoppricke of Winchester, and thirdly that he had receiued his pallium from Benedict the tenth, a man vnlawfullie elected, and reiected by fathers.
THe Emperour Henry the fourth was young when his father died,Another Cou~|cell of Tribu|ria or Friburg. and it was couenanted amongst the Princes and Bishops of Germanie, that during the minoritie of the Emperour Henry, the Princes and Bishops by course should attend vpon the young Emperour, and should gouerne the estate of the country. The Archbishop of Breme when hee had ended his course, he gaue not place to others as it was couenanted, but insinuated himselfe into the fauour of the yong king, by giuing him Libertie to liue according to all the youthly conceits of his owne heart. The rest of the Princes and Bishops were offended at this imperious carri|age of the Archbishop of Breme, and they assembled them|selfes in Triburia, which in our dayes is called Friburg. In this Councell it was decreed that the Bishop of Breme shuld be declared to be an enemie to the countrey, except he deli|uered the king to be brought vp according to the couenant aforesaid.
IN the yeere of our Lord 1069. a Councell was assembled at Mentz vpon this occasion.The Councell of Mentz. The Emperour Henry the fourth disliked his wife, and delt secretly with the Bishop of Mentz for divorcement from her, promising to bee addicted

to his Councell, and to interpose his authoritie to bring the people of Turingia vnder the iurisdiction of the Bi|shop of Mentz; and to compell them to pay tithes vnto him. The Emperour Henry could not blame his wife of any fault. Onely he caried no good liking toward her, when the Cou~|cell was conueened at Mentz. Petrus Damianus came Am|bassador from the Pope, and by many arguments disswa|ded the Emperour from the intended diuorcement. It a|greed not with human lawes, not with the constitutions of the Church, nor with the Emperours honour, and it would raise a great scandal in the Church. And it was the Empe|rours dutie to punish such faults in others, but not to giue them example of sin in his owne person. Finallie if the Emp. would not obey wholsome admonitio~, he had power to vse the Censurs of the Church against him, and to withhold him from the honour of his coronation. The issue of the Coun|cell was this, the Emp. desisted from his purpose of diuorce|ment,  honoured his Lady with ornaments agreeing to her Princely estate, but cohabited not louingly with her.
The Councell of Ersurd.IN the yeere of the Lord, 1974. Gregorie the seuenth o|therwise called Hildebrand; hauing alreadie prepared a way to execute Antichristian pride in Councels of Millan and Mantua, before hee was authorised Pope. Now in his Popedome hee beginneth to execute those vnhappie decrees of Millan and Mantua. And hee commaundeth the Bishop of Mentz to separat the Priests of his bounds from their wifes, or else to depose them from their of|fices. The Bishop of Mentz willing to obey the Popes commandement assembled a Councel at Ersurd, wherein he declared what co~mandement he had receiued. On the other part married Priests said they had libertie to marry by the written word of God, and in doing so, they followed the ex|ample of the men of God, and fathers of the Church. Thirdly they confirmed by many reasons that it was lave|full to marrie, speciallie for avoiding fornication, and that it was an auncient custome in the Church that men

of spirituall offices married, wiues. Finally, with humble supplications and requests, they entreated the Bishoppe of Mentz, that hee would not separate them from the compa|ny of their louing wiues, and deare beloved children. But all these reasons and supplications mixed with teares, pre|vailed nothing at the Bishops hand, because hee said, a ne|cessity was laid vpon him, to obey the Popes commande|ment. The married Priests arose, and departed out of the Councell, and consulted amongst themselues, what was meetest to be done: Some of them thought it expedient to depart from the Councell, and not to returne to it againe. Others thought it better to returne to the Councell againe, and to put hands on the Bishop and spoyle him of his life, before hee could promulgate the prohibition of marriage, which the Apostle calleth the doctrine of divels.1 Tim. 4. The Bi|shop being advertised of this conspiracy against his life, re|solued with faultering words, to mitigate their wrath, pro|mising to write to the Pope, to abstaine from imposing such hard conditions to married Priests: so was their fury as|swaged. This tumult was scarce pacified, when another greater arose. The avaritious Bishop exacted tythes from the people of Turingia, besides the covenant that had past betweene him and them at Gerstundun, after great conten|tention and effusion of blood: yet the Bishop overpassing the covenant, claymed rigourously more then was covenan|ted. The people of Turingia being inraged, were purposed to haue revenged the iniuries, which this avaritious Prelate had done vnto them, with shedding of his blood: and the fervent heate of their rage was so great, that all the Bishops and members of the Clergie, who were assessors to the Archbishop of Mentz, departed from him, fearing the rage of commoued people.
This Councell began with pride, and ended with fury and tumult. The Bishop of Mentz in great wrath departed to Helegenstad, because he could hardly digest the repulse which he gat in the Councell.
Another Councell at Mentz.IN the yeere of our Lord, 1075. in the moneth of Octo|ber, a Councell was assembled at Mentz, wherein the Bi|shop of Chur, as Ambassador from the Pope, Gregorie the seventh, was present; and straitly commanded the Bishop of Mentz vnder paine of deposition from his prelacie, to proceed against married Priestes, according to the Popes commandement. The Bishoppe terrified with the Popes threatning, convened a Synode at Mentz. The married Priests finding that the Bishoppe againe was willing to exe|cute the Popes vngodly commandement, they left supplica|tions, which they had vsed in the Councell of Erfurde, and with their hands, and a vehement commotion of their bo|dies, so terrified the Bishop of Mentz, and the Popes Am|bassadour, that they were glad by flying to escape the dan|ger of their life. Not daring to assemble any mo Councels, to that effect.
The Councell of Wormes.AFter this, Pope Hildebrand in the lofty conceits of his proud and Antichristian heart, intended to gather a Councel at Rome, in the time of Lent. And he gaue warning to the Emperour to compeare before him, and to answer to such things as had bin obiected against him. The Emperor thought it no time to slumber nor sleepe, when this sediti|ous Pope threatned to cut him off from the body of the Church, if hee did not compeare before his Iudgement-seat. Therefore the Emperour assembled all the Bishops of his kingdome, to the number of 24. in the towne of Wormes: Many Abbots also were present. The question intreated in this Councell, was concerning the deposition of Pope Hil|debrand. As they were devising concerning this purpose in the Councell, Hugo Blancus, a Cardinall came from Rome, with letters from the Popes enemies, with many accusati|ons against him. These were read openly in the Councell, Hildebrand was accused of periury, and ambition, of avarice, and of pride: and they desired that Hildebrand might bee displaced, and another seated in his roome. The determina|tion of the Councell was this, that Hildebrand, who called

himselfe Gregorie the seventh, a forclopen Monke, an vsur|per of the Popedome, without consent of the Emperour, and against his oath, a false interpreter and wrester of holy Scripture, a renter of vnity, a man who mixed all divine and humane things so together, that he polluted them both, a man who heard the false accusations of vngodly people, who in one cause would be an accuser, a witnesse, a Iudge, and an enemy: who separated husbands from their wiues, and preferred whoredome to lawfull marriage: who stirred vp the people against their Bishops, and teachers: who counted no man consecrated lawfully, except hee had bought his Prelacie from his dependers, and begged it from himselfe, a seeker of popular applause, and a deceiver of the people, vnder colour of religion  a man who like to Decius, and the rest of the persecuting Emperours, and worshippers of false gods, vsurped both Empire and the Priesthood.
For all these forementioned causes, the holy Emperour, the Bishops, and Senators, and Christian people assembled with them, decerned that Hildebrand should bee remooued from the Popedome, and that the sheepe of Christ should not be committed to a Wolfe. This decreet was subscribed by all the Bishops, who were present at the Councell.
IN the yeere of our Lord,Another Councell at Triburia. 1076. another Councell was assembled at Triburia. The Princes of Saxonie and Sweue, came to the Councell with obstinate mindes, setting their whole indeavours against the Emperour, Henry the fourth. He approached neere to the towne, but the river of Rhene was interiected betweene them. The Emperour in all submissiue manner, promised to amend all the faults whereof they complained. But their hearts being possessed with a superstitious favour to the chaire of Rome, and being inclinable to sedition  alteration of the State: they returned a very hard answer to the Emperour, wherein they made a commemoration of all his youthly infirmities, and how their expectation of his amendment, had often-times decei|ued them. But seeing their consciences witnessed vnto them,

that infirmities in Princes is no sufficient cause to shake off the yoke of their obedience. Therefore in the end, they pre|tend that in case they adhered any longer to him, they were in danger to incurre the condemnation of their own soules, because hee was excommunicated by the Apostolick chaire. This Councell is like vnto a looking glasse, wherein two things may bee evidently seene, to wit, the inconstancy of people, and pride of the Roman Antichrist, bearing downe the authority of Princes, for desire of his owne advance|ment.
THe Pope had appointed a day of compearance to the Emperour to be iudged in Lent,Another Councell at Rome. as hath beene decla|red heretofore. This Councell was full of cursings, flatte|ring the Romanes, and prodigall largition of money, to those who followed the Pope. For in this Councell Gilber|tus Bishop of Ravenna was cursed. The Emperour Henry the fourth, was not onely cursed, but also denuded of his Imperiall dignity, as if the Bishop of Rome had power to conferre the kingdomes of the world to whom hee plea|seth. The flattering words of the Pope to the Romane No|bles, Senators, and People, are beyond all measure of mo|deration. For hee called them the head of the world, having power to conferre all spirituall and civill dignities to whom they pleased. Like as 270. yeeres agoe, they transferred the Empire from the Grecians, to the Germanes. And like as the Emperour may displace an vnworthy souldier, even so a souldier may forsake an vnrighteous Captaine. After this, hee distributed to his followers, 15000. talents of siluer; and so by cursings, flattery, and prodigality, hee bewitched the Romans, and engaged them against the Emperour.
The Councell of Brixia.IN the yeere of our Lord, 1080. the Emperour Henry the fourth, assembled of Germany and Italy, 30. Bishops, in the towne of Brixia-Notice, together with many Princes of his kingdome. All these consented that Hildebrand should be deposed from his Popedome, and Gilbertus Bishoppe of

Ravenna should be placed in his roome, because Hildebrand was a subuerter of Ecclesiasticall order, a troubler of the Imperiall estate, a perturber of peace, stirring vp dissention among brethren, contention among those who lived peace|bly, divorcement among married persons, and had trou|bled every thing that was setled in godlinesse, and peace. The tenour of the Decree followeth. We who are assem|bled together by the providence of God in Brixia, decerne that Hildebrand, that obstinate preacher of sacrilegious flames, and burnings; a defender of periuries and murthers; a Sorcerer, and Inchanter; a man who calleth in question the true Faith, concerning the body and blood of Christ. We (say they) decerne that such a man should bee deposed, and expelled from the Popedome, and except nee forsake it after intimation of this Decree, that hee is to be condemned perpetually.
IN the yeere of our Lord,Another Councell at Rome. 1081. the Emperor irritate with the incessant attempts of the Pope, against his life and e|state thought meet once to put an end to this labour, and to the distresses of the Empire. Therefore hee besieged the towne of Rome and tooke it. Hildebrand with the rest of the Wolfes who had troubled the sheepfold of God, they fled. The Emperour with the advice of the Roman Senate, appointed a Councell to be assembled at Rome, wherein fu|gitiue Hildebrand should appeare, and render an account of his adminstration, but hee would not appeare. Therefore he was deposed as a profane and wicked man, a louer of dis|cord, a bloody man, and an invader of the Apostolick chaire by Sorcery. And Gilbertus, by some called Wigbertus, was placed in his roome.
AFter the death of Gregory the 7. the Romans had no re|gard to Gilbertus,The Councell of Beneventu~. whom the Emperor had made Pope, but they chose another, who was Abbot in Cassinates, na|med Desiderius. He was not chosen by the Cardinalls, nor by the Pope of Rome, but by Mathildis, and the Normans,

Commanders of Apulia (as Functius recordeth) all these were enemies to the Emperour. After his election to the Pope|dome, he was called Victor the third. He assembled a Coun|cell at Beneventum, which was his natiue soyle. There hee cursed Gilbertus Bishop of Ravenna, as an vsurper of the Chaire, belonging to Gregory the seventh, his predecessor. Likewise he cursed Hugo Archbishop of Lions, and Richard Abbot of Marseil, because (as it seemeth) they had been his competitors. This man walked closely in the footsteps of Hildebrand; but his time was short, for hee died before hee could execute the proud conceits of his minde, after he had ruled one yeere and six months, Platina attributeth vnto him onely the continuance of one yeere, and foure moneths.
The Councell of Clermont.IN the yeere of our Lord, 1095. Vrbanus the second gathe|red a great assembly at Clermont, in Overnie of France. The lessons of Hildebrand were forgot by his successours. Therefore in this Councell, and the Councell of Placentia, and other Councels which I haue ouerpassed, studying to shortnesse. It was ordayned, that no spirituall office, nor rent annexed thereto, should be received from the hand of a secular man: in this Councell it was ordayned, with ad|vice of many Christian Princes, that an army should bee raised vp, and march toward Ierusalem, for support of distressed Christians, and re|covery of the holy Land, out of the hands of Infidels, as hath beene declared in the History of the life of Vrbanus the second.



CENTVRIE XII.
_THe multitude of Councels assembled in this Centurie, if they should all be par|ticularly rehearsed, I doubt not but the Reader would bee wearied in reading them, for they exceede the number of an hundred and fifteene Councels. So that I am compelled to reduce them vnto certaine principall heads, and to produce examples of every head; so shall the intention and designe of them, who assembled Councels in this time, be cleerly knowne.
Some Councels were assembled for prohibition of Priests marriages, others for excommunication of the Emperour; some for the question of investment of Bishops, being most willing to extort this priviledge out of the hands of the Em|perour, and to conferre it to the Bishops of Rome: Some were gathered for deciding the question which arose by plurality of Popes, contending hotly one against another, for the Popedome. Many Councels also were assembled for advancing of the warre, called Bellum sacrum, and set|ting forward Christians, to fight against the Saracens, for conquering the holy Land out of their hands. Some few were assembled against men, whom they supposed to bee Heretiques, such as Abelardus, and his disciple Gilbertus, and Vualdenses. When a few examples of every one of these heads shall be commemorated, the luxriant superfluity of the Councels of this Centurie, shall not be found inconve|nienly abridged.
ALexius Emperour of Constantinople,A Councell at Paris. sent letters to Vrbanus the second, wherein he declared the rage of the

Turkes, and implored support from the West. Vrbanus as|sembled a Councell of all Nations, at Paris, and was pre|sent himselfe at the Councell, incitating the hearts of all men, to driue out the barbarous Turkes from the place wherein the redeemer of the world did suffer. In this Coun|cell were appointed an hundred thousand men, out of A|quitania, Normandie, England, Scotland, Ireland, Brittan|nia, Galitia, Wastemia, France, Flanders, Lorane, and other Nations toward the holy Land, with Hademarus a Bishop, who had power of binding and losing in the Popes name.
IN the yeere of our Lord, 1110. the Bishop of Florence openly preached,A Councell at Florence. that Antichrist was already come, which hee cleerely perceived by that horrible change of the spiri|tuall Kingdome of Christ, into an earthly Monarchie: for the Bishops of Rome were rather Warriours, then Preachers of the Word of God. They opposed themselues to Empe|rours, and most contemptuously abused them; they depra|ued the articles of Faith, prophaned the Sacraments institu|ted by Christ. Idolatry dayly increased, hypocriticall disci|pline through propagation of Monastique orders, and hu|mane constitutions, were out of measure extolled. Moe were advanced to the Popedome by deceit, weapons, and slaugh|ter, then by free election. Matrimoniall chastitie was ba|nished from the order of Clergie-men, who count them|selues holy. And finally, the Bishop of Rome was like vn|to a gulfe, devouring and exhausting the substance of the world, and administrating his turnes rather by force, then reason. These abuses, and others like to these, presented to the Bishop of Florence, a notice that Antichrist was come alreadie, and openly domineered in the Church. Pascalis the second, who was Pope at this time, thought it was no time to slumber or sleepe, in such a matter. Therefore hee convened a Councell at Florence, and called the Bishop of Florence to his accounts. The arguments by which hee prooued, that Antichrist was already come, are buried in silence. Onely hee was sharply rebuked, and commanded,

that in time to come he should vtter no such doctrine.
IN the yeere of our Lord,A Councel at London. 1102. and in the third yeere of the raigne of Henry the first, King of England: Anselmus Archbishop of Canterburie, a man much addicted to Pope Paschalis, assembled a Councell at London, for prohibition of the marriages of Priests. This was an vncouth thing in England, and some counted it an holy designe, others, a matter perilous (as it was indeed) lest men attempting things that were aboue their strength, should fall into the snare of the Deuill, and into horrible Lusts of vncleannesse, which thing came to passe. For horrible Sodomie had place among the Clergie, and the yeere following, An|selmus was compelled to conuene another Councell at S. Pauls in London, and to make constitutions for punish|ment of those who were found to bee polluted with that vild lust of vncleannesse. Neuerthelesse Anselmus was one of the number of the Antichristian Clergie, who would be wiser than God, and finde out better remedies than marriage to stay the intemperat lust of men, who had not the gift of Continencie.
IN the yeere of our Lord,The Councell of Mentz. 1106. a great Councell was assem|bled at Mentz, against the Emperour Henry the fourth, who attended at Ingelheme; looking to haue beene sent for to the Councell. But the Ambassadours of Pope Paschalis and the Bishops who were present at the Councell could not delay, vntill the Emperour was sent for. But the venemous vlcer of their cankered hearts being ripe, behoued presently to break forth, before the Emp. was heard to speake for himselfe. Ther|fore they proceed against the noble Emp. being absent, and condemned him of heresie,  exco~municated him. Now his heresie was Simony, because he wold not resigne the right of investme~t of Bishops into the Popes hands. And not content with this, they for the Bishops of Mentz, Cosen,  Worms, to Iugelheime, where the E.H. 4. was,  deuested him of his im|perial orname~ts. The E. could not resist the violence of those

headstrong Prelats, because his armie and friends were not about him. But he demaunded the three Bishops in the sight of the eternall God, to declare if hee had taken any reward for admitting them to their Bishopriks. The Bishops of Mentz, Colen, and Wormes, all affirmed; that he had recei|ued no reward from their hands. How then (sayth the Em|perour) am I condemned of Simonie? I pray you fathers doe not so wickedly (sayth he) violate your oath of alled|gance. Dishonour not mine estate and horehead. And in|case I should resigne mine Emperiall Ornaments to my son; let all the estates of Germanie bee assembled, that I may doe it willingly in a lawfull assembly. But the Prelats forementioned, stirring vp one another, put hands to worke and pulled the Crowne from his head, and denuded him of the rest of his Imperiall Ornaments. The Emperour with sighes and sobbs committed his cause to God who hateth iniquitie, and in his own time can render a condigne recompence vnto it. Moreouer the Noble Emperour humblie craued at the Popes Ambassadours, and the rest of the Bishops; to bee absolued from excommunication, with promise to satisfie them, whom hee should bee found after due triall to haue offended. But these Romane Vul|turs answered him proudly that matter pertained to the Pope, he must dresse himselfe to Rome to bee absolued by the Pope, after sight of his condigne satisfaction. Now let the iudicious reader marke, if these Councels had bin like vnto the starre,Mat. 2. which led the wise men of the East to Christ; then it were good reason that we should follow them. But since they leade fro~ Christ,  from al due reverence toward the annointed of the Lord; and from all kinde of gentle|nesse, meaknesse, and humane behauiour, toward our supe|riours, it is time to remember the words of our Lord. If the blinde leade the blind,Mat. both shall fall in the ditch.
The Councell of Troyes in Champani.IN the yeere of our Lord, 1107. Pope Paschalis the second, gathered a Councell at Troyes in France, willing to finish

and perfit in France the worke begun in Germanie. And to throw out of the hands of Henry the fift, the right of in|vestment of Bishops, as hee had done out of his fathers hands. The Emperour Henry the fift, approched neere to the place wherein the Councell was gathered, but was not present thereat.
The subiect intreated in the Councell was about the in|vestment of Bishops, by all meanes possible they endevored to spoile all Laicke persons of this priuiledge; affirming that the election of Pastors should be free, and that the presump|tion of Laicke persons, in conferring of Ecclesiasticall digni|ties, must be cut off. Therefore hee promulgated the like mandars, as his Predecessours had done before him, adding also against the co~traveners of his mandats the like cursings, as his Predecessours had done before him. The Emperour Henry the fift, with aduise of the Nobles and Bishops, who were about him, sent Ambassadours to the Pope, and the Councell calling to their remembrance that the right of in|vestment of the Bishops was conferred to the Emperour Charles the Great, and that his successors had continued in possession of that right vntill his time. Therefore he reque|sted that the Pope and Councell would doe nothing preiu|diciall to his right. This Message perturbed the cogitations of the Pope, and the fathers of the Councell, but this means was found out, that this question should rest for the space of a yeere, after the issue whereof it should be reasoned at Rome. And in the meane time, no investment should bee receiued from any Laicke person. This interim, together with the place appointed for determination of the question, are manifest presages of the euent: to wit, that the Pope would not be at rest vntil hee had trampled vnder foote all ciuill domination,  vntill he had remoued out of the way that authoritie, which was a let to his vsurped prehemi|nence, as the Apostle speaketh:2 Thes. 2.7. when the yeere was exspy|red, the Emperour addressed himselfe to Rome with an army and tooke the Pope and his Cardinals prisoners. And albeit the Pope at that time condiscended that the right of invest|ment

should consist in the Emperours hand, yet afterward hee revoked the same, and in the Councell of Rome assem|bled Anno, 1112. yeeres, hee vtterly renounced that priui|ledge conferred to the Emperour, as hath beene declared in the Historie of his life.
The Councel of Triburia.THe question and controversie about investment of Bi|shops, was not like to take an ende. The Romane Chaire, like vnto a raging Sea, continually swelled, frothed and stirred vp sedition against the Emperour Henry the fift, because hee would not ouer-giue the right of invest|ment of Bishops into the Popes hands. The Bishops of Germanie the Popes footegroomes conueened at Tribu|ria, Anno, 1119. with exasperat minds, consulting how they might vndoe the estate of the Emperour, as they had alreadie vndone the estate of his father. The Emperour made hast to returne out of Italie to Germanie, and fin|ding none other way to establish his owne estate, but ei|ther by great effusion of blood, or by yeelding to the Popes desire. The Emperour after consultation with his Princes, and friends, found no outgate, except to render to Pope Calixtus the second the right of investment of Bishops. Al|so hee was compelled to ratifie the election of Pope Ca|lixtus, albeit Gregorie the eight (to whose election the Em|perour had consented) was yet aliue, so mightily prevailed the power of the Roman Antichrist.
PEtrus Abelardus, was counted an Heretike in the Councell of Soysson, and was compelled to burne his owne bookes.The Councel of Senon. Yet because hee continued in his errour, and many followed him, another Councell was conueened at Senon against Abelardus. Lewes king of France the son of old Lewis was present at the Councell, and Theobald Count Palatine, and Bernard Abbot of Clarauall, and innu|merable people desiring to heare disputation. Abelar|dus fearing popular sedition declined their iudgement

and was willing to be iudged by Innocentius the second who was Pope at that time. Pope Innocentius after hee had read the letters sent from the councell, damned Abe lardus, and or|dained his followers to be excommunicat. Abelardus de|stitute of Patrons  Protectors, entered into the Monasterie of Cluniake. Concerning his opinions I haue spoken of them in the head of Heretikes.
IN the yeere of our Lord,The Councell of Papia. 1160. The schisme that fell out betwixt two Popes, striuing for the Popedome after the death of Adrian the fourth, to wit Alexander the third, and Victor the fourth; gaue occasion to the Emperour Frede|ricke the first (being at that time in Italie) to appoint a Councel to be assembled at Papia. For remouing of the scisme, and for deciding the controversie by declaring to which of the contending Popes the Popedome should be|long. Both the Popes were warned to appeare before the Councell. The Emperour was present the first day of the meeting of the Councell, and declared to the Bi|shoppes that hee was not ignorant that to the Emperour belonged power to convocate Councels, like as Constan|tinus, Theodosius, Iustinianus, had done before him; and of lat|ter time, Carolus Magnus, and the Emperour Otto. Notwith|standing since that matters pertaining to diuine worship ought to be iudged by Bishops; hee remitted the iudge|ment of this present controuersie to the fathers met toge|ther in the assemblie. And he so departed out of the Coun|cell. Pope Alexander the third refused to appeare before the Councel of Papia, for hee would be iudged by no man. Pope Victor the fourth appeared, and was content that his cause should be examined, and iudged by the Councell. The Councell tooke this effect that Victor the fourth, was declared to bee Pope. Alexander the third on the other part beeing full of indignation, cursed the Emp. and Pope Victor and their adherents; and gathered a Councell of his fauou|rers at Clermount wherein hee openly deliuered to Sathan the Emp. Fredericke and Pope Victor, and Count Palatine,

and all other principall fauourers of Victor, so great pati|ence was in Pope Alexander, when his papall dignitie was called in question. Hee mixed as it were Heauen and Eartth together, not for zeale to the glorie of God; but for zeale to keepe his papall preheminence. For be|side the Councell which he assembled at Clermont, hee gathered another at Towrs, Anno, 1164. and was no lesse prodigall in his cursings, then hee had beene be|fore in the Councell of Clermont against the Emperour and his Competitor Victor: yea and hee sent an Ambassa|dour to Ierusalem and Antiochia, and to the Princes and Patriarchs,Tyrius lib. 18. cap. 29. of the East, for propagation of his owne au|thoritie.
A Councell at Rome.IN the yeere of our Lord, 1180. and in the twentieth yeere of the gouernment of Pope Alexander the third, a great assemblie was conveened at Rome, by the Popes authoritie: an hundreth and fourescore Bishops were assembled to|gether in the Church called Constantiniana. Their con|sultation was about the forme of election of the Pope in time to come.
Canon 1.And first it was appointed and ordained, that in case the Colledge of Cardinals did not with vniforme consent agree who should be elected Pope; if the two part of them did consent to the election of any person, the dissenting of the third part should be no sufficient cause to reiect him who was elected.
Canon 2.Secondly it was ordained that all Ecclesiasticall dignities conferred by Octavianus, and Guido, who now are accounted schismatikes; shall be null, and of none effect.
Canon 3.And that no man be admitted to the office of a Bishop before hee be 30. yeeres old, neither shall any man bee ad|mitted to be a Deacon, or Arch-deacon, or to haue the go|uernment of a parish before hee be twentie fiue yeeres of age.
Canon 4.That Bishops and Archbishops in their Visitations doe not overcharge the Church of their bou~ds with vnnecessary

charges  expenses speciallie: the Churches that are poore.
If a Bishop admit any man to bee a Presbyter or Dea|con without the title of a place that may affoorde vnto him,Canon 5. things necessarie for the maintenance of his life: let the Bishop himselfe sustaine him, vntill he prouide a liuing for him, except he be able of his owne patrimonie to sustaine himselfe.
That no man shall be excomunicat or suspended from his office,Canon 6. before hee be lawfully warned to appeare, and answere for himselfe; except in such causes as deserue sum|mar excommunication.
That no reward be taken for admitting men to spirituall offices,Canon 7. and that no money be taken for blessing them that are married, or for ministration of any other Sacrment. For at this time marriage was counted a Sacrament of the Roman Church.
That no Ecclesiastical office be pro~ised to any man before it be vaca~t,Canon 7. by the decease of the possessor. For it is an vnrigh|teous thing to put any man in expectation of another mans liuing, whereby hee may wish his brothers death. And when any place shall happen to be vacant, let it be planted againe within six months, or else hee who hath the right of plantation shall loose it at that time; and the Chapitar, or Metrapolitan Bishop, shall haue power to prouide the vacant place.
That the Brethren called Templarij or hospitales shall not abuse the priuiledges granted by them to the Chaire of Rome,Canon 9. by receiuing Churches out of the hands of Laicke people, by admitting to the Sacraments in their Churches, and to buriall, persons excommunicated; nor by admitting  deposing Presbyters without the fore-knowledge of their Bishops, and by occasion of their fraternities which they haue multiplied in many places, they shall not weaken the authoritie of Bishops, but they shal doe al things with aduice of their Bishops, and they who shall be found to haue diso|beyed this ordinance shall vndergoe the discipline,  their actions in the contrary shall be declared to be of none effect.
Canon 10.That Monkes shall not be receiued into a Monasterie for gaine, and that they shall possesse no goods as properlie be|longing onely to themselues.
Canon 11.Men admitted to holy orders, let them either liue conti|nently without the companie of women; or otherwise let them be depriued of their offices and liuings.
Canon 12.Subdeacons and others in Law offices who are sustained in the Church, let them not appeare, as procurators and ad|vocates before secular iudges, except a matter belonging to himselfe,2 Tim. 2.4. or to the Church, or to the poore, be que|stioned. Like as it is written, no man that goeth to warre, entangleth himselfe with worldlie businesse, c.
Canon 13.Let such men bee preferred to Ecclesiasticall dignities who will be actuallie resident with their people, and vndertake the cure of their soules, by doing the worke of the ministerie in their owne persons: otherwise let them depriue them of the office and benefice conferred to Rome, and hee who doth conferre them without these conditions, let him lose the right of conferring offi|ces, and benefices.
Canon 14.Pluralitie of benefices is forbidden, as a vice smelling of auarice and ambition, and is perilous to the people whose soules are neglected by Pastours, attentiue to the world heaping vp riches, and not carefull to feed, the flocke of God. By this also many worthy men are ouer-seene, whose trauels might bee worthily bestowed in feeding the flocke of God. Moreouer some Laickes are bold with|out consent of Bishops to place and to displace Pastours,  to distribute Ecclesiastical liuings according to their pleasure And to burthen Church-men with exactions, and taxations whensoeuer they please. This forme of doing is ordained to be punished with excommunication. And he who receiueth a Church from a Laicke person, without his owne Bishops authoritie, is to be debarred from the communion, and in case he perseuere obstinatly in his sin, he is to be depriued of Ecclesiastical orders. Also Laicke persons who transfer the right of tythes to other Laicke persons, they who receiue the~,

and deliver them not to the Church, shall want the honour of Christian buriall.
Church-men who haue accquired riches by Church-rents, howsoever they die,Canon 15. let their goods pertaine to the Church. Moreover because some Bishops are found in some parts who permit them, whom they call Decani, for a summe of money, to exercise Episcopall iurisdiction: it is ordained that hee who so doth, shall bee depriued from his office, and that the Bishop shall haue no power to conferre any such office.
Let not the votes of a few persons in the Church,Canon 16. hinder the ordination of them, who are thought meet by the most part to be ordained to Eclesiasticall offices.
If a question arise,Canon 17. concerning presentations of diverse persons to one Church, or concerning the gift of patro|nage: if the foresayd question bee not decided within the space of three moneths, the Bishop shal place in the Church the man whom he thinketh to be most worthy.
Seeing that the Church as a provident mother,Canon 18. should provide all things necessary for the soules and bodies of the people, left the poore and indigent parents, want the bene|fite of good education in learning. It is appointed and or|dayned, that in every Cathedrall Church, a worthy bene|fice shall be bestowed vpon a Schoole-master, to the end the teacher receiving a competent reward, for his travels, a patent doore may be opened to the increase of learning.
Diuers Churches are so heauily over-loadned with tri|bute and taxations by Consuls,Canon 19. Gouernours of townes, and Rulers of Provinces: that the estate of Bishops is worse, then was the estate of the Idolatrous Priests of Egypt, in the daies of Pharaoh;Gen. 47.22. for the Priests had an ordinarie of Pharaoh, and they did eate their ordinary which Pharaoh gaue them, wherefore they sold not their ground which Pharaoh gaue them. But now all charge of civill affaires are layd vpon Gods Church: Therefore it is ordayned vnder paine of cursing, that Governours, and Rulers of Provinces, desist in time to come from such doing, except the Prelates vpon

consideration of the great necessitie of the countrey, would voluntarily consent to support the necessitie of the Laiques.
Canon 20.Seeing that Pope Innocentius the second, and Pope Euge|nius the third, our predecessors of good memorie, condem|ned the spectacles on market-dayes, and holy-dayes, for o|stentation of their valure and strength, skirmishing one a|gainst another in sight of the people, whereby it came to passe, that some were slaine, and their soules were in ieopar|die. These spectacles are also damned by vs, and if any person be slaine in them, let him want the honour of Chri|stian buriall.
Canon 21.This containeth a commandement of superstitious obser|vation of dayes.
Canon 22.Let no men presume to alter the ancient custome of ex|actions, without the authority and consent of Princes.
Canon 23.Persons diseased with leprosie, it is permitted to them, to haue their owne Church, and their owne Pastor.
Canon 24.They who furnish armour to the Saracens, who fight a|gainst Christians, or who take Christians prisoners who are busie in their lawfull callings, or who spoyle them who haue made ship wracke, let them be excommunicated.
Canon 25.Manifest vsurers shall be debarred from the communion: and if they repent not, they shall want the honor of Christi|an buriall, and no man shall receiue their offering.
Canon 26.Iewes and Saracens shall not be permitted to haue Chri|stian servants in their houses, no not vnder pretence of edu|cation of their children. Also the testimony of a Christian against a Iew shall be admitted; and if any Iew through the mercy of God, be converted to the Christian religion, hee shall in no manner of way be secluded from his possessions.
Canon 27.In the last Canon, after a smooth preface, that Pope Leo said, Ecclesiastical discipline is content with a Priestly iudg|ment; but vseth not bloody revenges. Alwayes Pope Alex|ander in this Councell thought it lawfull, to borrow the power of secular Princes, to persecute those whom he called Heretiques in Gasconie, Tholuse, and other parts. These he calleth Cathari, Patrini, or Publicani, but out of que|stion

they were Valdenses, who being driven out of Lions, Pope Alexander would grant them no corner in the world to rest in: But meitated by his cruell edicts, all Princes, Nobles, Lords, Governours, to pursue them with fire and sword, and all kinde of hostility; promising to them who so doth, if they bee vnder Ecclesiasticall censure, indulgence, and relaxation of two yeeres, of the compleat time of their penance: and to those who doe zealously pursue them, such security in their persons and goods, as vseth to bee confer|red to such persons as visite the holy graue, and are taken vnder the protection of the Church. Others of Aragon, Navarre, and other places, whom also hee calleth He|retiques, and who practised against Christians, all kinde of mercilesse in humanity, neither sparing sex nor age: I cannot vnder|stand of what kinde of Here|tiques he meaneth, for their heresie is not ex|pressed.



CENTVRIE XIII.
Concilium La|teranense._ABout the yeere of our Lord, 1215. Pope Innocentius the third, gathered a generall Councell at Rome, wherein the doctrine of Transubstantiation was ratified. Also the Grecians were ordayned to turne to the obedience of the Church of Rome,The conclusi|ons of this Councell. to the end there might be one shepheard and one sheepfold, and that they should desist from dete|sting the Priests of the Latin Church, whom the Grecians so abhorred, that they would not say masse vpon the Altar which the Latin Priest had touched, vntill it had beene cleansed and washed. Also that they should not rebaptize such as were baptized by Latin Priestes, and that all these things should be observed vnder paine of cursing. And fi|nally, it was concluded, that an army should bee sent vnto Syria, for reliefe of the Christians there, and the recouery of the holy Land, and that processions, supplications, and fa|stings, should be kept monethly, for the more easie obtai|ning of it.
Concilium Lugdunense.LIkewise in the yeere of our Lord, 1273. Gregorius the tenth, gathered a generall Councell at Lions; where Michael Paleologus Emperour of Constantinople, was pre|sent, who by the slaughter of Theodorus Luscaris sonne, com|mitted to his custody,Note. had vsurped the Empire. This Mi|chael (I say) being present at the Councell, acknowledged the superiority of the Church of Rome, wherevnto the o|ther Grecians were so farre from condiscending, that they

abhorred the said Emperour, and would not suffer his body to be buried amongst other Christians.
In this Councell also was concluded, that the tenth part of all Ecclesiasticall rents for the space of six yeeres, should be payed, to furnish out an army to fight against the Infidels, for recovering of the holy Land; and a full remission of sinnes, was promised to all them who would vnder|take a part of this war-fare.



CENTVRIE XIIII.
The Councell of Vienna._IN the yeere of our Lord, 1311. Pope Clement the fift bearing rule, a generall Councell was assembled at Vienna, wherein he set forth a booke of Papall decrees,Liber Clementi|arum, received by the Coun|cell. called Liber Clementiaru~, which was received, allowed, and ratified, by the Councell. And albeit (as Nauclerus witnesseth) Clemens himselfe before his death, repented the setting out of this booke, and commanded it to be burnt; yet the Popes succeeding him, and namely, Iohannes the two and twentith,The contents of this booke. confirmed and authorized the sayde booke againe, together with the Decretals of Gregorius, and Bonifacius; because these bookes most highly advanced the seat of Rome, exeeming the Bishop of Rome from subiec|tion to generall Councels, and attributing power to him, to receiue, or to reiect the Emperour, after hee is chosen; comparing the Pope to the Sunne, and the Emperour to the Moone: finally, counting it a thing necessary vnto e|ternall life, that every person bee subiect to the Bishop of Rome.
The feast of Corpus Christi ordained.In this Councell it was ordayned, that the feast of Cor|pus Christi should be kept, with many indulgences granted vnto them, who should celebrate this feast.
Likewise it was Decreed, that the way to reduce Infi|dels to the true faith, was not by armour and shedding of blood,Note. as the preceeding Popes had done, for the space of three hundred yeeres, though in vaine; but by preaching of the Word of God, to gaine their soules to the Lords Kingdome. And for this cause it was ordained,

that Schooles should bee erected, and forraine tongues should bee learned, namely, the Hebrew, Chaldaicke, and Arabique languages. Finally, it was ordained, that the name and remembrance of the order of Templaries should be rooted out,The Tem|plars rooted out. and this Decree was put in execution, by all Christian Princes, who in one day vtterly rooted out the sayd order of Monkes, as formerly hath beene declared.



CENTVRIE XV.
The Councell of Constance._IN the yeere of our Lord, 1414. the Em|perour Sigismund, and pope Iohn the 23. gathered a generall Councell at Con|stance, for pacifying of a Schisme,The occasion of this Coun|cell. which was between three Popes striving for the Popedome; to wit, Pope Iohn, whom the Italians set vp; Pope Gregorie, whom the French-men set vp; and Benedict, whom the Spaniards placed. In this schismaticall, ambitious, conflict, every one defended his owne Pope, to the great disturbance of Christian Nations. This Councell endured foure yeeres space. The first be|ginning of it (as the manner was) is with a masse of the holy Spirit. As they were singing, according to their custome, the Hymne, Veni sancte spiritus, there was at the same time, a certaine paper set vp in the Church, by some well disposed persons, as it seemed, wherein was contained these words following;Note. Alys rebus occupatinunc, adesse vobis non possumus: that is, wee are otherwise occupied at this time, wee cannot intend to come to you. In this Councell, was not onely Pope Iohn the 23. deposed, for many grievous and haynous crimes, obiected and prooved against him, but also Gregory and Benedict,All the three Popes deposed sustayned the like censure; and Pope Martin was chosen, as hath beene declared. Many wicked things were decreed and done in this Councell; as namely, in the eight Session thereof, a sentence of condemnation was gi|ven out against the doctrine of Iohn Wickliffe,A decree a|gainst Iohn Wickliffe. Against the Communion in both kinds. and for the hatred of his memorie, his bones ordained to be raysed out of his sepulchre, and to be burnt. In the thirteenth Session it was ordayned, that no Priest vnder paine of excommu|nication, should communicate vnto the people vnder both

kindes of bread and wine.Iohn Husse condemned. In the 15. Session the Sentence of Iohn Husse his condemnation was read and published, and he was deliuered to the secular power to be burned.
In the 19. Session it was decreed that notwithstanding the safe conduct giuen by the Emperour and kings; inquirie may be made against a man for heresie, by a sufficient iudge, and processe to be made according to Law.
In the 21. Session a sentence of condemnation was pro|nounced against Ierom of Prague;Ierom of Prague con|demned. and hee was deliuered to the secular power to be burned. And finallie nothing was decreed in this Councell or enacted worthy of memorie, but this only that the Popes authoritie is vnder the Councell,The Councell aboue the Pope.  that the Councell ought to iudge the Pope, yet albeit Arti|cles were giuen in to the Councell crauing reformation of the Corrupt life of the Clergie and namely of the Court of Rome, and Ioannes Gerson Chaunceller of the vniuersitie of Paris himselfe gaue in 75. abuses which hee willed to bee corrected and amended, no reformatio~ was obtained; because the chiefe gouernors of the Councell themselues being men of corrupt and filthie conversation, hated aboue all things the Articles of reformation.
But on the other part this new Pope Martine,Martin not ha|ving leasure to reforme the abuses of the Clergie erects an inquisition for repressing of the Hussits. although hee could not finde time and leasure to reforme the abuses of the clergie, yet found he time to deuise a cruell  bloody inquisition against the true professours of the Gospel whom hee called Heretikes, and for repressing of the Hussites hee deuised a strict inquisitio~, which afterward followed in many Countries, and namely in the countrie of Spaine.
IN the yeere of our Lord,The Councel of Basil. was gathered a generall Councell at Basil; which as it indured longer then any o|ther Councell before celebrat and holden in the Church (for this continued almost 17. yeeres) so likewise was it most troublesome, in respect that Iulian Cardinall and Deacon of S. Angel, being appointed president of the Councel, by Pope Martin the fift and after his death being also approued by his successor Eugenius the fourth.
A generall Councell a|boue the PopeThis Iulian (I say) suffered a certaine question to be reasoned freely in the Councell, touching the authoritie of generall Councells; after which reasoning it was conclu|ded that the generall Councell is aboue the Pope, and that all persons ought to be subiect to the generall councells, as children are subiect to authoritie of their mother. This con|clusion grieued the Pope the more, that this matter being once concluded in the Councell of Constants alreadie; was now againe ratified and more amply discoursed in the Councell of Basil, for this cause he would haue transported the Councell to Bononie.Eugenius seeketh to translate the Councel from Basil to Bono|nie, but by the Emperour is forced to ra|tifie the Coun|cell of Basil. But the Emperour Sigismund (who was a great fauourer and protector of the Councell) with aduice of the fathers of the Councel; admonished Eu|genius that hee should not onely leaue off his intended pur|pose of transferring the place of the Councell, but also by his owne appearance before the Councell of Basil, ratifie his subiection to the same, which if he refused to doe they would proceede against him as a person contumacious,  obstinat|ly, rebelling against the voyce of the Church. The Pope was so dashed with this admonition, that he was constrained to dissemble for a time, and to confirme the Councell of Basil with his Apostolike letters.Eugenius after the Emperours death holds contrarie Councels. But after the death of the Emperour (who died in the sixt yeere of the Councell) Eugenius tooke vpon him greater boldnesse, and first held a contrarie Councell at Ferraria and afterward at Florence, pretending that he behoued to meet with the Greekes for vniting of them to the West Church; who because they would no wayes passe the Alpes, he was compelled for their commoditie to keepe a Councell in some neerer place.Eugenius de|posed. The Councell of Basil although weakned by the Emperours death, proceeded not the lesse to the deposition of Eugenius; and elected Amedeus Duke of Sauoy, to be Pope whom they called Foelix the fift. To this Councell were the Bohemi|ans and Morauians invited, who after they had receiued suf|ficient suretie and pledges for their safe passage  returning againe, sent Ambassadours to the Councell, by whose earnest trauels it was obtained that the Bohemians and Morauians

should haue the communion celebrat vnto them vnder both kinds.The Bohemi|ans obtaine to haue the Sa|crament vn|der both kinds. Aeneas Syluius changeth his opinion with his state of life.
The Historie of this Councell was written by Aeneas Syl|uius who was present at the same, and liked well of the pro|ceedings and determinations thereof, as may appeare by his owne writings; and namely by a certaine Epistle of his written to the Rector of the vniuersitie of Colen, wherein he reioyceth for a certaine treatise of the said rectors which came into his hands: reprouing the rudenesse and rashnesse of such as deny the Bishop of Rome and his consistory, to be subiect to the Generall Councell, and that the supreme tribunall seat of iudgement standeth in the Church, and not in one Bishop. Notwithstanding the same Syluius who by his learned writings advanced the decrees of the Councell of Basil, yet afterward being promoted to that papall digni|tie himselfe, turned his coat; and returned againe to the old filthy pride of the Chaire of Rome, which magnifieth it selfe not onely aboue the Church, but also maketh it selfe companion to God himselfe.
IN the yeere of our Lord,The Councell of Florence. 1439. while as the Councell of Basil was yet sitting vndissolued; Eugenius the fourth per|ceiuing that matters went against him in Basil, he held a con|trarie Councell at Florence, where he brought to passe that the Emperour and Patriarch of Constantinople with the rest of the Grecians there present, were perswaded to receiue the sentence of the Church of Rome concerning the procee|ding of the holy Ghost, also to receiue the communion in vnleauened bread, to admit Purgatorie, and to yeeld them|selues to the authoritie of the Romish Bishop, wherevnto notwithstanding the other Churches of Grecia would in no wise assent at their comming home; in so much that with a publict execration, they did condemne afterward all those Legats which had consented to those Articles, that none of them should be buried in Christian buriall.
It is to be noted in this Councell, that the Grecians who agreed to other opinions of the Roman Church, yet could

neuer be induced to beleeue their doctrine of transubstan|tiation. Notwithstanding they were content to set forth vnto Note. the people a Bull of agreement which they called Bulla Con|sensus, and the difference of opinions in that point of doc|crine was not thought a sufficient impediment to stay the promulgation of this agreement. Howbeit afterward as it were forgetting what they had done themselues in the Cou~|cels of Florence  their Bulla Consensus, they cry out that there is no agreement  vnitie amongst the Protestants, be|cause there is some difference of opinions about the Sacra|ment among them. In the time of this Councell, Iosephus Patriarch of Constantinople died,  Eugenius required that presently before the dissolution of the Councell another should be chosen; but to this the Grecians would not agree, affirming that it was not lawfull to choose a Patriarch of Co~|stantinople, but onely in their owne Church there. The Emperour Paleologus after his returning liued not long.
The agree|ment of the Grecian Church with the Roman, an euill presage of the destructi|on of the Gre|cian Empyre.And finallie this agreement was counted of the Grecians infortunat, and an euill presage immediatly before the vtter ruine of the Orientall Empire and the destruction of the towne of Constantinople. For within 14. yeeres af|ter this agreement at Florence, the famous citie of Constantinople was taken by Mahomet Em|perour of Turkes, the Emperour Constan|tine the Brother of Paleologus was slaine, and the Empire of the East was cut off.



CENTVRIE XVI.
_THis Councell of Trent begun in the yeere of our Lord,Concilium Tri|dentinum. 1546. the fourth of Ianuary, in the Popedome of Paulus the third. In the first session thereof an oration was made by the Popes Legat,Sessio prima. declaring the causes of the calamitie of the Church. In the second Session the Articles of faith were read and confirmed:Sessio secunda. and that was kept the fourth of Februarie.Sessio tertia. The third Session was kept the eight of April, wherein it was decreed that the old Latine translation of the Bible should onely be vsed and accounted authentike in Churches and Schooles; and that the rule in expounding of the Scriptures should bee this, to expound them as the Church and the ancient fathers haue expounded them be|fore. As also the number of the bookes accounted holy and Canonicke Scriptures were rehersed.Sessio quart. the fourth Session was kept the 17. day of Iune, where it was decreed that all men should beleeue that originall sinne was vtterly taken a|way in Baptisme,Co~cupiscence accounted no sinne. in such sort that the concupiscence which remaineth in our nature after Baptisme is not to be accoun|ted a sinne, vntill wee giue the consent of our minde there|to. And because the Law of God plainely condemneth it, and the Apostle Paul in plaine words sayeth, I had not knowne concupiscence to haue beene a sinne, except the Law had sayd thou shalt not covet; lest they should seeme to Proclame to the world their manifest contradiction to the Scriptures: they lenifie their decree againe with this distin|ction that the Apostle calleth it a sin, not because it is a sin properlie and indeede, but because it commeth of sin,  tendeth also thereto. Howbeit (with those fathers licence)

the Apostle Paul declareth his owne sense and meaning, that hee calleth concupiscence sinne, because it is a transgressi|on of the Law, so that he accounteth it a sinne properly and indeed. Also in this Session they decerne, that the mother of our Lord was not conceived in originall sinne.
Sessio quinta.In the fift Session was decerned, that even after the fall of Adam, and in the nature of man before his regeneration, there remaineth a free-will to doe good; which being wake|ned by God, and stirred vp, is a fellow-bearer with his grace.
Sessio sexta.In the sixt Session was concluded, that man is iustified partly by faith in Christ, and partly by workes; and that our iustification stands not in a free forgiuenesse of sinnes, and a free imputation of the righteousnesse of Christ, to all them who beleeue in him.
Sessio septima.The seventh Session was kept the third of March, an. 1547. wherein was decerned that all men should beleeue, that the Sacraments of the Church were seven in number; to wit, Baptisme, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Vnction, Orders, and Matrimonie. After this seventh Ses|sion, the Popes Physition affirmed, that the ayre of Trent was corrupted;Diuers Bishops remoue from Trent to Bo|nonia. whereupon many of the Bishops were mo|ved to depart from Trent, to Bononia; onely the Bishoppes of Spaine remained still at Trent, being commanded by Charles the Emperour, so to doe. For the Emperour had gathered in Ausbrugh an assembly of the States of Germa|ny, and had induced the most part by menaces and threate|nings, and some also by alluring promises, to submit them|selues to the generall Councell of Trent.
And this being obtained of the States of Germa|ny, the Emperour sent the Cardinall of Trent, toge|ther with his Ambassadour Mendoza, desiring that the Pope would cause the Bishoppes that were retyred to Bo|nonia, to come backe againe to Trent.Note. The Pope vn|willing the Bi|shops should returne to Trent. But the providence of God pitying the weakenesse of Germany (whom the Em|perour had induced, to bee obedient to the Councell of Trent) hardened the Popes heart, who would not consent

that the Bishops should goe backe againe to Trent, but vpon strict conditions: 1. That the Bishops of Spaine who re|mained yet still at Trent, should first come to Bononia. 2. The Emperour should make good, that all the States of Germany should absolutly submit themselues to the Coun|cell of Trent. 3. That the Fathers to be gathered againe at Trent, might haue liberty to depart out of the towne freely and safely, when they pleased, and to make an end of the Councell when they would thinke good.The Emperors Ambassador protesteth a|gainst the Councell of Bononia. The Emperours Ambassadour Mendoza, seeing that his Masters petition was little set by, declared that the Councell was not lawful|ly translated from Trent to Bononia, and therfore protested, that all things that should bee done there, should bee of no force. Thus the first meeting of the Councell of Trent vn|der Paulus the third, had an end: and their remaining to|gether at the Councell of Trent, was two yeeres.

The second meeting of the Councell of Trent.
THe second meeting of Bishoppes in the Councell of Trent, was in the dayes of Pope Iulius the third, in the month of September, anno, 1551.
In the first Session of the Councell,Sessio prima. which was kept the first of September, Abbas Bollosanus, Ambassadour of the King of France,The King of France by his Ambassador protesteth against the Councell of Trent. appeared, declaring that the King was so disturbed with warres within his dominions, that he could not send the Bishops of his Land to Trent. Next, that the King of France acknowledged not the convention kept at Trent, for a generall Councell, but for a convention ga|thered for the weale of a few, not for the common vtility of all the Church: and therefore neither hee himselfe, nor the subiects of his kingdome, were bound to be obedient to the decrees of that convention.
The second Session was kept the eleventh day of Octo|ber,Sessio secunda. wherein the doctrine of Transubstantiation was con|firmed, yet diverse questions pertaining to those matters, were deferted till the comming of the Protestants of Germa|nie,

to whome allso they granted their safe conduct.
Sessio tertia.The third Session was kept the 25. of November, where|in was confirmed, that Penance, and extreme Vnction, were Sacraments of the new Testament. The Ambassadours of the Protestants,The Prote|stants confes|sion of Faith eiected. would haue given in the confession of their Faith, and summe of their doctrine, to the Councell, but the Popes Legate repelled them; because they did not sig|nifie in the title thereof, that they would submit themselues to the Councell. In the meane time there was warre in Ger|many, betweene Charles the Emperour,The wars be|twixt the Em|perour and the Duke of Saxo|ny, cause of the Councels breaking vp. and Maurice Duke of Saxonie, which was the cause of the hastie dissolution of the second meeting of the Councell of Trent, vnder Pope Iulius. For the Bishops of Mentz and Cullen, made haste to returne to Germany. Likewise all the Bishops of Italy, hea|ring that Duke Maurice had taken the town of Ausbrough, returned home;  the Spanish Bishops alone, who remained a space behind the rest at Trent, assembled themselues toge|ther the 29. of Aprill, anno 1552. and put off the Councell till a new meeting, after the issue of two yeeres, or more, as should be found meet.


The third meeting of the Councell of Trent.
THe Bishops of Spaine supposed, that the Councell should haue met againe within two yeeres. Neverthe|lesse, there intervened nine yeeres before it could be gathe|red againe. For after the death of Iulius the third, vnder whom the second meeting was, succeeded Marcellus, who lived not aboue the space of 20. dayes in his Popedome: and after him Paulus the fourth, who governed foure yeeres, two moneths, and 27. dayes. And after him Pius the fourth, in whose time this last meeting of the Councell of Trent was appointed.Sessio prima. Their first Session was kept the 18. day of Ianuary, anno, 1562. wherein was decreed, that the bookes written by diuerse Authors, since the springing vp of here|sies (for so they called the preaching of the Gospell) should be viewed and revised: and that all who had fallen backe

from the vnity of the Church of Rome, vnto any kinde of heresie, should be exhorted to returne againe, with promise of great clemency, and indulgence, if they would so doe.
The second Session was kept the 26.Sessio secunda. day of February, anno, 1562. wherein certaine persons were specially nomina|ted and chosen, to examine those bookes which was suspect of heresie, and to report their iudgement backe againe to the Councell. Likewise, all men were exhorted to resort to the Councell, with peaceable hearts, voyd of all contenti|on and heate, and safe conductors were promised to them, who would come thereto.
In the third and fourth Session nothing was done,Sesso tertta,  quarta. but the time of keeping the next Session was appointed.
In the fift Session kept the 26.Sessio quinta. day of Iuly, anno, 1562. it was decreed, that the Laike people were not bound by an absolute necessitie, to communicate vnder both formes of bread and wine. But the Church had power to dispose con|cerning the outward ministration of the Sacraments (pro|viding the substance were kept) according as they should find expedient for the good of the receiuers.
The sixt Session was kept the 17. day of September,Sessio sexta. anno, 1562. wherin was co~cluded that the whole Masse was a pro|pitiatorie sacrifice for the quicke  the dead:  whosoeuer should say, that it was onely a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and a commemmoration of Christs death onely, are pronounced to be accursed.
The seventh Session was kept the 15. day of the monethSessio Septima. of Iuly, anno, 1563. wherein certaine Canons were set forth concerning the Sacrament of Orders, and it was accounted a Sacrament of the new Testament.
In the eight Session,Sessio Octava. it was not onely decreed, that mari|age is a Sacrament of the new Testament: but also the Ro|man Church assembled at Trent, as a troubled Sea that can not rest, but cast out her froth and filth to the shore, laying aside all shame and due reverence to the Scriptures of God, they pronounce all men to be accursed,Note. who will not grant that the Church hath power to dispense with the Law of

God conteined in the 18. of Leviticus, not onely to grant libertie to persons to marrie, who are forbidden there to marrie, but also to interdite and forbid mariage betweene persons, who haue libertie by the Law of Leviticus to mar|rie.
Sessio ona.The ninth and last Session of this Councell, was kept the third day of December, anno 1563. wherein the doc|trine of purgatorie was confirmed with invocation of Saints, keeping of Reliques, kneeling to Images, giving of Indul|gences, superstitious Fastings, and keeping of festiuall daies, to the end that the Roman Church should seeme in no point to haue erred. All past through, and all was allowed, by them; but the Lord will onely allow that doctrine which is agreeable to his blessed Word: To whom be be praise for ever Amen. .


FINIS.





