








THE Schoole of VERTVE, the second part: OR, The Young Schollers Paradice.
Contayning verie good Precepts, wholesom Instructions, the High-way to good manners, dieting of Children, and brideling their Appetites. Godly Graces, and Prayers.
Verie fit for all Children to learne, and the elder sort to obserue.
LONDON, Printed by Edw: Griffin for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at his shop being the signe of the Bull, neare S. Austins-gate by Pauls-Churchyard. Anno Dom. 1619.



To the Reader.

Ightly conceiue me, and obserue me well,
Doe what here is done for Childrens good.
CHrist in his Gospell (as S. Make doth tell)
HAth not forbidden Children, nor withstood
ANy that should but aske the ready way,
REgarding Children, not to say them nay.
DIrecting all that came, how faith should be,


WHat they should craue of Gods high Maiestie,
EUen Saluation, through their faithfull Prayer,
SEnding their contemplations into the ayre,
TO his high throne, whose loue so guide vs all,
EUen to the end we neuer cease to call.


Eternall Father Patron of true pietie,
Blesse vs O God we pray, euen by thy deitie.




A Table of the poynts principall contained in this Booke.

1 A digression for children how they ought to be in|structed.
2 How they ought to prepare themselues in the morning when they rise.
3 Their morning Prayer in meter.
4 The charge of Children in their carriage and be|hauiour.
5 Their charge in going and comming from schoole.
6 Laying the Cloth, and making ready the Table.
7 Godly Graces before and after meat in meter.
8 Their manner of demeanor in seruing at the Table, and Dinner being ended, and the allow|ance and disallowance of certaine misdemea|nors in companie or presence of their betters: as in

Silence at the boord
Seruing or filling Drinke
Going on errands
Going to schoole againe.
Keeping close the lips
Yawning
Laughing
Biting the lips  tongue.
Using the browes
The eyes, the forehead
The countenance
The nose, the breath.
Spitting
Hammering in speaking
Belching
Uomiting.
Snuffling in the Nose,
Nesing, colour of the Chekes naturall
Keping close the mouth.
Keping cleane teeth, and kembing the head
Hanging downe the head
Cariage of the body.
Hanging the head aside
Priuie members
Urine, or wind
Sitting, courtesie.
Gate in going
Apparrell, c.

9 Behauiour at the Church.
10 Forbidding walking or talke in the Church.
11 Rules for Children in guiding them for apparrel.
12 Ordering Children in their dyet and drinking.
13 Moderating Childrens appetites from sawcines.
14 Thankesgiuing with godly Graces and Prayers for Children.






The Schoole of Vertue.

A digression for Children how they ought to bee instructed.
_CHildren (draw neare) attend what I say
Obserue well these precepts,
and marke them I pray,
Though many rules formerly
haue beene set out,
To quicken the spirits of Children in doubt,
Yet youth is so fickle, and loath to be taught,
That being obserued, tis vnseemely and naught:
For Childrens instructions in vertue and good,
Foure things must be noted, and many withstood.
The first to be marked, is so that the mind
Be seasoned with vertue, and godlie enclind.
The second to ayme at the liberall arts,
To practise and exercise Schollerlike parts.
The third, to be taught as times doe require,
All moderate actions this age doth desire.
The fourth that comming to more yeares  strength
That all to ciuility he bend at the length,
Obserue well the rules which now shall ensue,
And find them right wholesome, delightfull, and true.


How thou oughtest to prepare thy selfe, when thou risest in the morning.
WHen moderate slep thy head hath possest,
And giuen thy body his naturall rest,
Shake sluggishnesse off, bethinke the of things,
That for thy soules health swet melody brings.
Seuen houres for a childe is temperate and good,
If more, it offendeth and hurteth the blood.
With heart then vnfained, to God first of all
Frame well thy petition, and thus to him call.


Morning Prayer.
THou father of mercy and maiesty great,
That sittest aboue in superiour seat,
Cast downe on me (God) thy pittifull eyes,
And order my doings when I shall arise.
O Father omnipotent, doe not permit.
My thoughts to be wauering, bad or vnfit:
But that my heart may goe with my tongue
In prayer deuout; and though I be young,
Assist me (O God) with wisdome and wit,
That in this day following, whether I goe, or sit,
Or stand, or what euer my thoughts shall conceiue,
It all may be done with thy fauour and leaue.
So guide me with vertue and loue of thy will,
That no wicked temptings my purpose may spill;
Blesse me and my doings with fauour and grace,
O Lord let not Sathan thy Gospell deface:
Nor lead me to wickednesse by night or day,
All this of thy grace I doe heartily pray,
That when it shall please the hereafter to call me,
No subtill deuices of Sathan enthrall me:
Lord guid me with godlinesse, then shall I sing
Praise onely to God our heauenly King.
Amen.


The charge of children in their carriage.
THy prayer so commended to God: haue a care
To wash hands  face, and to kembing thy haire,
And then for the schoole bethinke thou to goe,
The secrets of God the better to know.
In entring to schoole, let eyes be vpcast,
To God for his blessings formerly past,
To endue the with godlinesse, vertue and piety,
Sent the from heauen from God in his Deity.
For without his help can nothing be done,
Nothing be finished, nothing begunne.
Then marke thou with diligence being so prouided,
What shall at schoole be sayd or decided.
Let not thy thoughts goe wandring about,
And not minding thy practice, abroad for to scout:
And answer with shamefastnesse what is required,
For modesty in youth is chiefly desired.
Deserue not correction, as nere as thou mayst,
Nor to thy Schoole-master giue any distaste,
Nor yet thy companions, or schoole-fellowes kinde:
Obserue what I speake, and beare it in minde.
Be ready to teach, and not to confute
Thy schoole-fellowes arguments, when you dispute.
Let Christ haue his library plac't in thine heart,
And euer of Scriptures be reading a part.
Let all be well measured what thou shalt read,
Not posting away with't, or making much sped:
For haste ouerthroweth the minde and the wit,
Eschew and abandon then things so vnfit.
If all at an instant thou not comprehend,
To morrow seke further, thy fault to amend.
Desire of Authors to read of the choyce,
Of such, as for eloquence carry the voyce;
As Cicero, Salust, Gellius, and Terence,
Quintilian and others, great Authors of reuerence.
Obserue all with care and diligent eare,
Thy learning the greater shall grow and appeare.



The charge of children in going from schoole and comming.
IN going from schoole, obserue it full well,
In streets stand not staring, nor tales se thou tell,
What hath bene at schoole, sayd, spoken, or done
Among thy companions: but home get the gone,
And vnto thy parents fee duty thou doe,
With reuerent carriage and modesty too,
Not bold or vnmannerly, gentle and milde,
And shew them the office of a dutifull childe.
If that thou haue time, ere dinner begin,
Rehearse to thy selfe the lesson or thing
Thou heardst at the schoole, let time be well noted,
The deper with wisdome thy braines will be quoted.


Laying the cloth, and making ready the table.
BE sure to be ready, the bord to prepare
At times: as accustom'd with diligent care:
The table-cloth first se fairely be spread,
Faire trenchers, cleane napkins, the salt  the bread,
Let glasses be scowred, in countrey guise,
With salt and faire water, and euer deuise
The place most conuenient, where they may stand,
The safest from breaking and nerest at hand.



Grace before dinner.
BLessed is God in all his gifts,
And holy in all his deeds,
Our help is in the name of the Lord,
From whence all good proceds,
Who giues repast to hungry hearts,
And comforts rich and poore,
His name be euer sanctified,
From henceforth euermore,
Blesse vs (O Lord) and this our meat,
By thy grace to vs sent,
God grant we vse it moderately,
Our bodies to content. Amen.


Another.
THe Lord, who sends to all mens vse,
In all their time of need,
Prouiding all and euery thing,
His children for to fed,
Blesse vs (O God) and these thy gifts,
Of thy great mercy sent,
Lord giue vs grace to vse them well,
And grace for to repent,
And eke amend our wickednesse,
In time while we haue space,
So shall our soules for euermore,
In heauen with the haue place. Amen.


Grace after meat.
GLory and euerlasting praise be giuen to the most high and mighty God, the most holy and blessed God, and the great King of heauen, who hath fed our hungry bodies in such abundance, and giuen vs this so pleasant and comfortable refection. Fill vs (O Lord) with grace and gladnes in thy holy Spirit, that we may also be found worthy to taste of thy spirituall and heauenly food: and be for euermore dwelling in thy presence. And that we neuer be ashamed or con|fused, when thou shalt bee pleased to call vs to ac|count, euery one according to his deds, through our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ. Amen.


Another.
WE giue the thankes most gracious God,
Which by thy power and might,
Hast all prouided graciously,
And sent all things aright,
Who giuest strength to Christians all,
To magnifie thy name,
Grant that for these thy benefits,
We all may doe the same,
And in thy lasting Kingdome (Lord)
Uouchsafe that we may taste
The food of immortality,
And heauenly swet repast. Amen.


Dinner ended.
Thinke and haue a carefull minde,
To help the poore, the lame and blinde,
Remember God, who sent thy store,
Whose name be prais'd for euermore.
Blessed is hee that considereth the poore and nedy, the Lord shall deliuer him in the time of trouble.
He that taketh pity vpon the poore, lendeth vnto the Lord, and looke what he layeth out, the Lord will repay in his kingdome.


Demeanour in seruing at the table.

STand straight vpright,  both thy fet,
together closely standing,
Be sure on't, euer let thine eye
be still at thy commmanding.



Obserue that nothing wanting be,
which should be on the bord.
Silence.Unlesse a question moued be,
be carefull: not a word.


Seruing or fil|ling drinke.If thou doe giue or fill the drinke,
with duty set it downe,
And take it backe with manlike chere,
not like a rusticke Lowne.


If on an er|rand.If on an errand thou be sent,
make haste and doe not stay,
When all haue done, obserue the time,
serue God and take away.


To Schoole againe.When thou hast done and dined well,
remember thou repaire
To schoole againe with carefulnesse,
be that thy chefest care.


And marke what shall be read to the,
or giuen the to learne,
That apprehend as nere as may be,
wisdome so doth warne.


With stedfast eye and carefull eare,
remember euery word
Thy Schoole master shall speake to the,
as memory shall afford.



To vse the browes.Let not thy browes be backward drawn,
it is a signe of pride,
Exalt them not, it shewes a hart
most arrogant beside.


The eyes.Nor let thine eyes be gloting downe,
cast with a hanging looke:
For that to dreamers doth belong,
that goodnesse cannot brooke.


The fore-head.Let forehead ioyfull be and full,
it shewes a merry part,
And cherefulnesse in countenance,
and pleasantnesse of heart.


Countenance.Nor wrinckled let thy countenance be,
still going to and fro:
For that belongs to hedge-hogs right,
they wallow euen so.


The nose.Nor imitate with Socrates,
to wipe thy sniuelled nose
Upon thy cap, as he would doe,
nor yet vpon thy clothes.


But kepe it cleane with handkerchiffe,
prouided for the same,
Not with thy fingers or thy sleue,
therein thou art too blame.



Blowing or breathing.Blow not alowd as thou shalt stand,
for that is most absurd,
Iust like a broken winded horse,
it is to be abhord.


Snuffling in the nose when you speake.Nor practize snufflingly to speake,
For that doth imitate
The brutish Storke and Elephant,
yea and the wralling cat.


Neezing.If thou of force doe chance to neeze,
then backewards turne away
From presence of the company,
wherein thou art to stay.


The Cheekes.Thy cheekes with shame fac't modesty
dipt in Dame Natures die,
Not counterfet, nor puffed out,
obserue it carefully.


Breathing.Keepe close thy mouth, for why, thy breath
may hap to giue offence,
And other worse may be repayd
for further recompence.


Lips.Nor put thy lips out like a foole
as thou wouldst kisse a horse,
When thou before thy betters art,
and what is ten times worse.



Yawning.To gape in such vnseemely sort,
with vgly gaping mouth,
Is like an image pictured,
a blowing from the south.


Which to auoyd, then turne about,
and with a napkin hide
That gaping foule deformity,
when thou art so aside.


Laughing.To laugh at all things thou shalt heare,
is neither good nor fit,
It shewes the property and forme
of one with little wit.


Biting the lip.To bite the lip it semeth base,
for why, to lay it open,
Most base dissembling doggednesse,
most sure it doth betoken.


Biting the vp|per lip.And so to bite the vpper lip,
doth most vncomely shew,
The lips set close (as like to kisse)
in manner seme not so.


The tongue.To put the tongue out wantonly,
and draw it in agen,
Betokens mocking of thy selfe,
in all the eyes of men.



Spitting.If spitting chance to moue the so
thou canst it not forbeare,
Remember doe it modestly,
consider who is there.


If filthinesse, or ordure thou
vpon the floore doe cast,
Tread out, and cleanse it with thy foot,
let that be done with haste.


Hammering in speech.If in thy tale thou hammering stand,
or coughing twixt thy words,
It doth betoken a liers smell,
that's all that it affords.


Belching.To belch or bulch like Clitipho,
whom Terence setteth forth,
Commendeth manners to be base,
most foule and nothing worth.


Vomiting.If thou to vomit be constrain'd,
auoyd from company:
So shall it better be excus'd,
if not through gluttony,


Keeping the teeth cleane.Kep white thy teth,  wash thy ,
with water pure and cleane,
And in that washing, mannerly
obserue and kep a meane.



Kembing the head.Thy head let that be kembd and trimd,
let not thy haire be long,
It is vnseemely to the eye,
rebuked by the tongue.


Hanging down the head.And be not like a slothfull wight,
delighted to hang downe
The head, and lift the shoulders vp,
nor with thy browes to frowne.


Carriage of the body.To carry vp the body faire,
is decent, and doth shew
A comely grace in any one,
Where euer he doth goe.


Hanging the head aside.To hang the head on any side,
doth shew hypocrisie:
And who shall vse it trust him not,
he deales with policie.


Priuy mem|bers.Let not thy priuy members be
layd open to be view'd,
It is most shamefull and abhord,
detestable and rude.


Vrine or winde.Retaine not vrine nor the winde,
which doth thy body vex,
So it be done with secresie,
let that not thee perplex.



Sitting.And in thy sitting vse a meane,
as may become thee well,
Not straddling, no nor tottering,
and dangling like a bell.


Curtesie.Obserue in curtesie to take
a rule of decent kinde,
Bend not thy body too far foorth,
nor backe thy leg behind.


The gate in going.In going kep a decent gate,
not faining lame or broken,
For that doth seeme but wantonnesse
and foolishnesse betoken.


Apparrell.Let thy apparrell not excede,
to passe for sumptuous cost,
Nor altogether be too base,
for so thy credit's lost.


Be modest in thy wearing it,
and kep it neat and cleane,
For spotted, dirty, or the like,
is lothsome to be sene.


This for thy body may suffice,
how that must ordred be:
Now at the Church thou shalt obserue
to God how all must be.




How to behaue thy selfe at the Church.

AT all times, as oft as to Church thou doest goe,
Remember what duty to God thou doest owe,
Discouer thy head, and humbly bow
To God, for his mercy to send it the now:
Thus humbly, thou being on bended knes,
Art bound to pronounce such words out as these:
O Father of mercy and God of all good,
Which hast sent thy son to shed his dere blood
For my redemption and safety from hell,
Where my mortall enemy the Diuell doth dwell,
Great God (of thy mercy) so guide thou my heart,
That hell nor his fury in me haue no part,
Me thinkes that with millions of Angels so bright,
My heart so enriched by thy heauenly light,
Thy Gospell assuring thy wonderfull powers,
And feding my heart so with spirituall flowers
And Manna from heauen, assureth saluation
To such as repent and make contemplation.
Good Lord (of thy mercy) my gracious maker,
Of all thy good gifts let me be partaker,
Enrich me with wisdome, and guide me with grace,
And with the in the heauens assure me a place,
Lord prosper my doings in worldly affaires,
Protect me from tedious and troublesome cares:
From hands of my foes (good Lord) set me fre,
That enemies none may haue power of me.
Amend thou mine enemies, and giue them a space,
And hearty repentance to call for thy grace,
Forgiue their faults, Lord, thou their hearts turne,
To waile their offences, and earnestly mourne.


This prayer and others,
when as thou hast said,
Rise vp with deuotion,
and be not afrayd.


Obserue to demean the,
so reuerent in place,
That God may adorne
the with mercy  grace.



Not to walke in the Church.

IN seat sit thou quiet, and walke not about,
For tis most vnsemely, without any doubt,
Tis fit in a faire, or in some market towne,
And not in Gods house for to walke vp and downe.


The Church is ordained for sermons, orations,
And prayers diuine for the soules recreations.
And not like a play house, vnhallowed to be,
Despising the reuerence to Gods Maiestie.


Giue eare most attentiue to what thou shalt finde,
For Gods word is light to the godly in minde,
Great ease commeth (out of the reuerent text)
For troubled in heart and in conscience perplext.



Doe all this with duty and reuerend heart,
And God will reward the full well for thy part,
Obserue well the times, for to stand or to knele
The more inward ease of thy heart shalt thou fele,


To knele on the ground with one kne alone,
Is euen as comely as though it were none,
How can thy deuotion be hearty and sound,
If thou doe refuse to lay knes to the ground?


Tis like to the Souldier, who mockingly came,
Saluting our Sauiour, and gaue him the name
(Haile King of the Iewes) his knee was so bent,
Not with any duty, nor godly intent.


If thou in the Church alone chance to bee,
Still let heart and thy tongue be so free,
As neuer to cease: but with due veneration,
To call to the Lord with vnfained contemplation.


Let neither thy tongue be talking nor tattling,
Nor settle of any thing to be a prattling,
Nor let thine eyes walke, nor cast them about,
For of that deuotion there is a great doubt.




Necessary rules to be obserued for the guiding of children in their apparrell and otherwise.
LEt not children haue their pleasures in the or|dring of their garments, some delight to haue them iagged and cut: but such fantasticknesse ought to be reformed by wiser and elder, considering their foolishnesse is beyond measure, if all may bee done at their pleasure: and ancient writers repute them out of their wits and mad men that fauour it.
Againe, painted and gawdy apparrell is not so fan|tasticke in childrens eyes; but as costly to the parents purses, whereby ancient writers proclaime such pa|rents fellow-fooles with their children.
The modesty and decency of the vestments of chil|dren are strong and good, not curious to the eye alone: And such as are cleane and without fowlnesse or fil|thinesse: Which after the estate and meanes of the parents ought to bee principall, so long as by the crafts man it be made with reasonable, and good form and fashion.



How to order a childe in his diet for drinke.
FOr a childe to make the beginning of his dinner drinke, is a good way to bred him vp to drunken|nesse. Especially, if he take it for wanton custome, and not for necessity of thirst. It is dishonest to bee suffered, and anoysome to the health of the body of a childe.
Let not a childe drinke after he hath supt hot broth, immediately vpon it; much lesse if he haue bene fed with milke.
Let not a childe drinke aboue twice or thrice at the most at one meale, and that gently, and not without reason: who bestoweth wine and beere on his childe beyond reason, defameth and abuseth him more by dishonouring his reason, and prouoking him to an vn|reasonable diet.


To moderate the appetite of a childe from saw|cinesse and being liquorish.
SOcrates being olde, would not drinke of the first cup: for why? his braine was light, and the first drinke is euer the most fuming and ouercomming.
If thy childe be set with his betters, let his hand be last in the dish. And that hee doe it not at all, vn|lesse he bee first bidden. Neither suffer your children

to put their hands or fingers into brothes, sawces caudles, or such like, at the table especially. Other wise let correction bridle their wantonnesse.
If he be of sensible yeres, let him forbeare his fin|gers in a dish, and vse a knife without chusing at his pleasure: for it is vnsemely.
Homer often reprehendeth sawcinesse in these  such like words, They boldly put their hands into the meat that is set before them. And as it is vnsemely to a liquorish person to traine his hands to euery side of the dish, so is it more vile to turne the best morsels in a dish towards thy selfe.
To gnaw bones belongeth chefly to doggs, but is is a ciuill thing to picke them cleane with a knife.
The licking of a dish belongeth to cats and dogs and not to children nor men, be the reliques neuer so swet, and betokeneth liquorishnesse, not manners.
To drinke or speake with meat in the mouth, is most vnciuill and dangerous withall.
Let the children rise from the boord when nature is sufficed, either by asking leaue, or withdrawing them|selues.
Let children beare away with them their tren|chers, saluting their parents, and first the chefe in the company, then the rest.

When the dinner is ended, let children euer bee ready to giue God thankes: euery man holding their peace, let the children turne their faces reuerently to him that sitteth vppermost at the boord, saying:


Grace after meat.
O Reuerend, most holy, and immortall father of heauen, powre downe thine inestimable bles|sings vpon these thy creatures, which thou hast giuen vs moderately to fed vpon, for the sufficing of our hungry bodies: Giue vs grace, to call vpon thee euer|lastingly, and grant vs, we humbly besech thee, for euer to obtaine thy continuall fauour and comfort, for our needfull sustenance, soberly to vse thy louing gifts, and willingly to adore thy holy name, through our onely Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ. Amen. God preserue thy vniuersall Church, the King and Queenes most excellent Maiesties, the Prince and No|bility. God send vs peace and truth in Iesus Christ. Amen.



Grace before meat.
BLesse vs (O Lord) we beseech thee with thy cele|stiall fauour, and sanctifie these thy creatures, which (of thy louing mercy) thou hast bestowed vpon vs: adorne them with thy fauour, enrich vs with thy continuall grace, and so possesse vs with reuerence to thy most blessed Maiesty, that what wee receiue may be thankefully taken, thy holy name for euer blessed and worshipped, and our hungry bodies sufficiently recreated through the same, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. God preserue, c.


Grace after meat.
GLory and honour be to thee (O God) which hast fed vs since our creation and tender yeeres: now (blessed Lord) enrich vs so with gladnesse and ioy, that our hearts may reioyce to consider of thy tender care euer had ouer vs, and continuing still thy for|mer fauours: O Lord encrease our faith, and grant vs thy euerlasting peace. Amen.



Grace before Supper.
AS day doth passe, so night doth come,
and man still waxeth old,
Which warneth vs our liues to mend,
in sinne not to be bold.
For suddenly the Lord will come,
his trump will vs awake,
And then from world  worldly things,
our farewell we must take.
Lord grant vs that we may in time,
so farre embrace thy loue,
That euermore we may receiue it
of the from aboue,
Blesse vs (O Lord) and this our meat,
our King and Queene defend,
And grant thy people may enioy
thy peace vnto the end. Amen.


Grace after Supper.
AS we haue felt thy grace (O Lord)
abounding in the gift
We haue receiued from thy hands,
so we our hearts doe lift,
Proclaiming honour to thy name
with reuerent heart and hand,
Desiring thee to blesse and keepe
vs with thy holy hand.
That when we haue refresht our selues
with sleep and quiet rest,
We may extoll with reuerence
thy name so holy blest.
Preserue, O Lord, thy faithfull Church, c.


Grace before meat.
OF Diues and of Lazarus
the Scripture telleth plaine,
How Diues liu'd in wealth and ease,
and Lazarus in great paine,
The rich man he was clothed well,
and fared of the best,
But Lazarus for hunger great,
could take but little rest:
But crying aad lamenting still,
for some man to releeue him,
With crums that fell from Diues boord,
whereof no man did giue him.
Thus perished poore Lazarus,
and that by want of food,
And also the rich glutton died,
for all his worldly good:
Where he in torments punished
with euerlasting fire,
May mooue our hearts to charity,
and prayer with full desire,
That God he may inspire our hearts
to loue and help the poore,
Whereby we may most sure in heauen,
be blest for euermore,
Where we may raigne with Lazarus,
with ioyes that be incomparable,
Euen by the loue of Iesus Christ,
vnto our soules most profitable. Amen.


Grace after meat.
NOw we (O Lord) haue had repast,
and eke our bodies fed,
O Lord preserue vs with thy grace
at boord and eke at bed:
O Lord behold the comfortlesse,
and send vs grace, that wee
May help the poore, according as
Our states and wealth may bee. Amen.
God saue, c.




A Prayer to bee sayd in the Morning.
O Most gracious God, In the name of thee, and thy Sonne, and the holy Ghost. Amen.
O Lord God blesse, preserue and kepe vs, and haue mercy and compassion on vs this day following, and for euermore. Amen.
Our Father which art in heauen, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdome come, thy will be done in earth as it is in heauen, giue vs this day our daily bread,  forgiue vs our trespasses, as we forgiue them that trespasse against vs, and lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer vs from euill, for thine is the kingdome, the power and the glory, for euer and euer. Amen.



O Most gracious and euerliuing God, Creatour and Maker of all the world, by whose power we haue receiued comfortable ease and rest, without in|terruption of any meane or inferiour power, and hast permitted vs quietly to come to the beginning of this day: Protect vs and kepe vs (O Lord) within the same by thy might and maiesty, and through thine e|ternall power. And kep vs (Lord) that we may bee possessed with no sinnefull thought, nor incurre any manner of wrong, nor rush into any kinde of danger, either of the soule or body: But whatsoeuer wee doe (O Lord) that it may wholly redound to thy honour and glory, and to the aduancement of thy euerlasting name, and that by thy gouernment we may be ordred to doe all in equity and righteousnesse, according to thy holy will and pleasure: to thy honor and glory,  to thy euerlasting praise, from this time forth for euer|more, world without end. Amen.



A Prayer for children ere they goe to Schoole (to be sayd.)
EUerlasting God, which of thy free abundance hast bestowed vpon all mankinde all things need|full, and hast prouided for all men, such sundry graces, as in thy fatherly wisdome are meetest: Powre vpon me (thy most vnworthy seruant) the spirit of vnderstanding, knowledge, and vtterance, and reueale vnto me (O Lord God) the hidden secrets of thy glorious Gospell, that whatsoeuer I shall stu|dy, read, thinke, say, or doe, it may redound to thy honour and praise: O Lord guide my heart  tongue aright, that I may (with sence and reason) compre|hend what I shall read, or what I shall bee taught: To the end, that vnderstanding the right, I may not any way erre: But with purenesse and sanctitie of heart I may euer praise thy most magnifi|cent and euerlasting name, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.



A Prayer to be sayd by children after they haue studied, at their going to bed.
I Giue thee most humble and hearty thanks, O most gracious  blessed Father of heauen, in that it hath pleased thee, of thy most gracious goodnesse, to heare my request. O Lord still giue me grace to go onward in vnderstanding and knowledge, that I may euer|more praise thy holy name, and grant me thy grace to amend my life, and to returne vnfainedly vnto thy seruice. And for as much as no creature can breath without thy protection and fauour, vouchsafe to ex|tend thy mercies vnto mee this night, that I may peaceably and quietly take that rest, which thou hast appointed for the refreshment of my body and minde, the night and darknesse being by thy goodnesse ordai|ned, as a time conuenient to take the same in, and to cease from our bodily labours. And grant vnto me (O Lord my God) who of my selfe am neither a|ble to lie downe, nor being laid able to rise vp, thy e|speciall assistance  help, that I may repose my selfe, and receiue (at thy mercifull hands) swet and com|fortable rest, not according to the gredinesse of cor|rupt nature, but as shall bee most expedient for the comfort and refreshing of my wearied body and mind,

that both may be strengthened and enabled to goe for|ward with that study and exercise, which thou hast or|dained and appointed for me. Lastly, grant me true repentance for my sinnes, blesse and defend my pa|rents, brethren, sisters, kinsfolke, neighbours, and others, whom thou wouldst I should commend to thy fatherly protection, wheresoeuer they remaine, and for the more true and zealous calling vnto the for these things, giue me grace in faith, to say that prayer which thy sonne Iesus Christ hath taught mee saying, O our Father which art in heauen, c.

FINIS.







