




AN
EXPOSITION
OF AL THE PRINCI|PAL
SCRIPTVRES VSED
in our English Liturgie.
TOGETHER WITH A REASON
why the Church did chuse the same.
By IOHN BOYS Doctor of
Diuinitie.
Prouerbs 1. 8.
My sonne heare thy fathers instruction, and forsake not thy
mothers teaching.
August. epist. 118. cap. 5.
Ipsa mutatio consuetudinis, etiam quae adiuuat vtilitate, per|turbat
nouitate.
AT LONDON
Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, and are to be sold
by William Aspley, at the signe of the Parot in
Pauls Churchyard. 1610.




TO THE MOST
REVEREND FATHER
IN GOD, RICHARD BANCROFT, LORD
Archbishop of Canterburie, Primate of all
England, and Metropolitane, Chancellor of the
Vniuersitie of Oxenford, and one of his
Maiesties most honorabe priuie
Counsell; my very good
Lord.
_AS Christ,Tertullian, vti Mldonat. in 6. Ioan. 44. so the Church, and
as the Church, so the Li|turgie
of the Church is
crucified betweene two
malefactors: on the left
hand Papists, on the right
hand Schismaticks; the one cannot say wher|in
it is trulyLetter of Pius 5. to Q. Eliza|beth,  Bristw motiue 34 deficient, the other will not say
but that it is efficient, vnder which the Gos|pell
hath so prospered, as thatDod exposit. prefac. Com|mandements. England is
swept from Babel, and Hierusalem situated in our
owne country: yet both as at a common Turke
shoote bitter arrowes against it. And the
reason hereof is very plaine, because euery

Pope is an open Schismatik, and euery Schis|matick
a secret Pope. These Foxes (asPraet. Com|ment. in Galt. Lu|ther
speakes) are tied together by the tailes, al|though
by their heads they seeme to bee contrary;
combined in faction, howsoeuer different
in faith. Against the Romanist I vse a sword,
against the Nouelist a buckler, against both
armour of proofe: for these Scholiall anno|tations
in part descrie, but my larger exposi|tions
of the Gospels and Epistles hereafter
shall more fully describe, their malicious or
ignorant misconstruing of our Church.
In the meane while and for euer I
wish all happinesse to your
Grace: and rest your
Humble seruant to be com|manded
in the businesse of
God and his Church,
IOHN BOYS.



THE CONTENTS OF THE
Tract ensuing.

1 The Ministers Inuitatorie. page 1
2 The Confession and absolution of sinnes. 2
3 An exposition of the Pater Noster. 3
4 An exposition of O Lord open our lips. 7
5 The Hymne of Gloria Patri. 12
6 An exposition of the 95. Psalme. 13
7 Te Deum and Benedicite omnia operae. 21
8 An exposition of the Benedictus. 22
9 An exposition of the 100. Psalme. 28
10 An exposition of the Creed. 30
11 Dominus vobiscum. 48
12 Cum spiritu tuo, and other Responsories. 49
13 An exposition of the Magnificat. 51
14 An exposition of the 98. Psalme. 62
15 An exposition of the Song of Simeon. 66
16 An exposition of the 67. Psalme. 76
17 The Creed of Athanasius and the Letanie. 83
18 An exposition of the Decalogue. 84
19 The peoples offering. 108
20 An exposition of the words of Paul, 1. Corinth. 11. 28. containing the summe of the Ministers exhortation before the Communion. 109
21 Sursam corda. 118
22 Gloria in excelsis. 119
23 An exposition of the Peace of God, c. and the Grace of our Lord Iesus Christ. 120
24 Amen. 124







THE MINISTERS
INVITATORIE.

At what time soeuer a sinner doth repent c.
_ALL these texts of holie writ premised,
are (as it were the bels of Aaron) to
stirre vp deuotion, and to toll all in to
Gods house. The whole ring consists of

two notes especially,

Mans miserie.
Gods mercie.


The which are two chiefe motiues
vntoLuther. loc. com. tit. de In|uocat. prayer, as we finde, precept Matth. 6. 9. Prayye after
this maner; Our Father which art in heauen.Bernard. ser. de nat. B. Mariae qui inscribitur  aquae ductu. Admonens
adoptionis diuinae, Pater Noster;  peregrinationis terre|nae,
Quies in coelis; vt simul intelligamus egere nos auxi|lio,
quia peregrini;  fiduciam petendi concipiamus, quia
filij dei.
And paterne Luke 15: want and woe in the leaud sonne,
pitie and plenty in the good father, occasioned repentance,
neuer repented. Of the one it is commonly said;Nathan Cby|traeus in via|tico. Oratio sine
malis, est quasi auis, alis. Of the other; I will come into thine
house euen vpon the multitude of thy mercy: Psalm. 5. 7. To
thee will I sing, because thou art my refuge, and mercifull God.
Psal. 59. 17. In the vulgar Latine; Deus meus misericordia
mea. WhereuponI lcum Tow. 8. sol. 414. lege plura. Dearly belo|ued. Augustine; O nomen sub quo nemin de|sperandum
est.
Wherefore the Minister out of a due consideration of
both, exhorteth his people in an Apostolicall stile, to con|fesse
their sinnes humbly to the Lord, who is able to heare,
because Almightie;Almighty and most merciful Father. and willing to helpe, because most mer|cifull.



The Confession of sinnes.
THe matter and manner of which Confession all other
Liturgies approoue, both ancient (as the Liturgies of S.
Margarinus Ribl. oth. pat. tom. 4 col 21. , of S.Ibidem col. 37. Basil, of theCol. 65. Syrians, of theCol.  10. Ethiopians) and
moderne (as the Scotish, Geneuian,Imprinted at Middleburgh 1586. English admonitioners
 forme of common praier,Discourse of the troubles of Franckford, pag. 7. Italian, Spanish, Dutch) all
which allot Confession of sins a place, and this place prin|cipally.
The reason hereof is taken out of Gods own booke,
Prouerbs 18. 17. Iustus in exordi sermonis accusator est sui.
The iust man in the beginning of his speech is an accuser of
himselfe: for so reade S. Ambrose ser. 4. vpon the 118. Psalme.
S. Hiom. lib. 1. contra Pelagian. Melancthon in loc, and from
the practise of Gods owne people the Iewes: as that noble
gentleman Philip Mornai notes in lib. 1. de Missa. cap. 3.
The Nouelists only mislike the Ministers absolution, and
therfore in the Conference at Hampton Court, Ian. 14. 1603.
they gained so much as to haue it in a more milde terme cal|led,
Remission of sins. Herein resembling the people ofPimenta de statu rei Chri|stian. in India Orien. Ben|gala,
who are so much afraid of Tigers, as that they dare not
call them Tigers, but giue them other gentle names. Ne si
propriam nomenclatur am tribuant, co~tinu dilacerentur. Con|cerning
absolution, see the Gospell Dominic. 19. post Trin.


The Pater Noster.
THis Praier excels all other inBellarmin. de bonis opribus in particular. lib. 1. cap. 4. many respects, as being
theTertull, lib. de orat. cap. 1. Gospels Epitome, compiled by Wisdome it selfe,
soCyp. ser. de orat. Dom. large for matter, so short for phrase, so sweet for order,
as that it deserueth worthily to haue both the Best and the
Most place in our Liturgie. TheTrtull. vbi supra. First, as guide to the rest:
the Most, as a necessaryHooker Eccles. polit. lib. 5. . 35. complement to supply whatso|euer
is wanting in other: and therefore it is vsed at the end
of the Letanie, at the end of the Communion, at the end o
Baptisme, at the end of other sacred actions: (asDurandus ra|tional iuin. ffie. lib. 5. cap.  . 17. one fitly)
Tanquam sal omnium diuinorum officiorum.

It hath
three parts:

1. A proeme; Our Father, c.
2. A petition; Hallowed be thy name, c.
3. A conclusion; For thine is kingdome, c.




In the first note those
three things required in
an absolute agent:

1. Will, because hee is ours: for e|uery
one wisheth well vnto his
owne, and hee that doth not is
worse then an Insdel: 1. Tim. 5. 8
2. Skill, because a father. Your
father knoweth whereof you stand
in need: Matth. 6. 8.
3. Power, because in Heauen.
Strength commeth from heaue
1. Macchab. 3. 19.


So that if we aske, we shall haue; if seeke, we shall finde;
if knocke, it shall be opened vnto vs: because God is a fa|ther,
Our father, our father in heauen.
Our] Admonisheth vs ofCyp. vbi supra  Ambros. lib. 5. cap. 4. desa|cramntis. mutual loue; for without loue,
there is no true faith, and without true faith, no true prayer:
Rom. 14. 23. As the Serpent doth cast vp all his poyson be|fore
he drinke, so wee must degorge our malice before wee
pray.
Father] Vsed heere ratherrinus Cat. tit. de precat.  Magdcburg. cent. 1. col. 139. essentially, then personally. So,
God is a father in creation: Deut. 32. 6.
In education, Esai. 1. 2:  quasiGermanus Patriarc. Con|stant. exposit. oral. dom. ; happilie
more fitly, .

In instruction,

Inwardly by his Spirit: Rom. 8. 26.
Outwardlie by his Preachers: Matth.
10. 20.


In compassion: Psal. 103. 13.
In correction: Heb. 12. 6.Glossa in loc. Quiexcipitur  numero flagel|latorum,
excipitur  numero filiorum.
In yeeres: Dan. 7. 9.
But a father in respect of his adoptionCyp. August. Ambros. c. more principal|ly:
Rom. 8. 15. 16.

In Heaue

Mysticall: asLib. . de sr. dom. in monte. tom. 4. fol. 81. Augustine andvbi sup. coe|lum est ibi vbi cessat culpa. Ambrose
construe it: in holy men of heauenly con|uersation.
Who are his proper1. Cor. 3. 16. temples
andHeb. 3. 6. houses in whom hee will dwell:
Ioh. 14. 23.
Materiall: as other generally: for albeit hee
be present euere where, yet hee doth ma|nifest

himselfe to blessed soules and Angels in heauen, and
to vs in glory from heauen especially: Psal. 19. 1. Gen. 19. 24.
1. Thess. 4. 16.




Petition.
THe petition in the iudgements ofCaluin. In|stit. lib. 3. cap. 20 . 35. Maldonat  lansen. in loc. neotericall authors
hath sixe branches: whereof three concerne our loue,
wherewith wee loue God in himselfe, and three wherewith
wee loue our selues in God: inCaictan. cm. in 22^a^e. Thom. q. 83. art. 9. signe whereof the pro|nowne
Thy, is affixed to the three first, thy name, thy king|dome,
thy will: but the pronownes Vs, and Ours, to the rest.
Our bread, our trespasses, leade vs not c.

Or (asAlbertus  Gorran. in Matth. 6. other diuide) the petition is,

Precatio bonorum.
Deprecatio maloru~.



A request for good things, whereof the

First concernes Gods glorie, Hal|lowed be thy name.
Rest our good,Gorran. Gui|do manipul. cu|rat. vel vt alij summum, me|dium, infimum. of

Glorie; Thy king|dome c.
Grace; Thy will c.
Nature; Giue vs
this day our dailie
bread.




A deprecation of euill, which is ofTertull. lib. 2. cont. Marcion. cap. 14. two sorts:

Malum culpae, an euill which is sin

Past, Forgiue vs our trespasses c.
To come; Leade vs not into temptatio~.

Malum poena, an euill which is a punish|ment, for sinne, De|liuer vs fromAgreeable to the Churches exposition in the common Catechisme:  Melancton loc. com. tit. in|uocat. euill

Internall, and hel|lish conscience.
Externall, bodilie dangers.
Eternall, euerla|sting death.



In one word, from all that thou seest euill for vsBellarm. Cat. cap. 4., be it
prosperitie, or aduersitie: so wee pray in the Letanie; Good
Lord deliuer vs in all time of our tribulation, in all time of our
wealth, c.August. epist. 121. cap. 11. Nondum enim sumus in eo bono, vbinullum patie|mur
malum.

 ra|tional. diuin. lib. 4. cap. 47. . 8. Other affirme that the first three petitions are concer|ning
the life to come: the last three concerning the life pre|sent:
that which is in the middle, Giue vs this day our daily
bread, concerning both.
These seuen (if wee make so many petitions) areBeauxamis ar. Euang. tom. 2. fol. 220. corre|spondent
to the seuen gifts of the blessed spirit, Esai. 11. 2.
and seuen beatitudes, Matth. 5.Durandus vbi supra . 9. against the seuen capitall
sinnes:De religione Christian. lib. 3. cap. 3. Ramus hath obserued that this prayer answereth
the Decalogue.
God is our father: Ergo, we must haue no other gods.
In heauen: Ergo, no grauen Image, c.
Hallowed be thy name: Ergo, not take his name in vaine.
Thy kingdome come, thy will be done: Ergo, wee must san|ctifie
the Sabbath, and worship him according to his
word.
Giue vs this day our daily bread, that hauing sufficient, we
may be rather helpfull, Honour thy father, c. then hurtfull,
by wronging our neighbour, in deed, Thou shalt not kill, not
commit adultery, not steale: In word, Thou shalt not beare false
witnesse, c.
Leade vs not into temptation: Ergo, not couet our neighbours
house, nor his wife c.
Forgiue vs our trespasses: Ergo, bound to keepe the whole
law: which occasionedLoc. com. tit. de inuocat. Luther to say, Docet oratio domi|nica
nos esse quotidianos peccatores,  totam vitam esse poeni|tentiam:
all our life to be nothing else but aBernard. ser. 3. de Ieiunio qua|drages. Lent to pre|pare
our selues against the Sabbath of our death, and Easter
of our resurrection.


Conclusion.
SOme cauill at our Seruice book for omitting this clause;
yetInstitut. lib. 3. cap. 20. . 47. Caluin doth acknowledge that it is not extant in
any Latine copies: of whichAnnot. in lo|cum. Erasmus andIansen.  Maldonat. in loc. D. Fulke answere to Rhem. praefa. sect. 38. other Di|uines
haue sundrie coniectures. Howsoeuer, the Church is
blamelesse, seeing ourMatth. 6. 13. Bible, which is Iudex quo, receiueth
it, and the Minister, which is Iudex qui, the speaking booke,
doth vsually repeate it: and so saying it, in their opinion
wee doe well: and not saying it, according to the paterne

of all the Latine, and some of the Greeke Fathers, and of
S. Luke himselfe, not ill.

It containes

A Reason of our prayer; for thine is king|dome,
c.
A testification of our assurance that God
will heare our prayer, Amen.


Thine is] Earthlie Princes haue kingdome, power, and
glorie from God, Dan. 2. 37. but God hath all these from,
and in himselfe: 1. Chron. 29. 11. Seeing he hath interest in
all things, it is our dutie to come vnto him for euery thing:
and as he hath right to all, so power to dispose of all: and
therefore we cannot doe any thing we desire, but by power
receiued of him. And if his be power and kingdome, then
it followeth necessarily, that his is all glorie. Therefore we
must inuocate his holie name, that hereby wee may giue
him his due. This one dutie is Alpha, and Omega, the first
thing wee must beg, hallowed be thy name: and the last wee
must performe, Thine is glorie: for euer]Genebrardus in lt. Psalm. It is a Rabbiicall
conceit that the last Psalme hath thirteene Halleluiahs an|swering
thirteene properties in God, specified, Exod. 34.
6. 7. Now in that the Prophet doth begin and end with
Halleluiah, stirring vs vp in euery verse of that Psalme, and
in euery sentence of euery verse, to praise the Lord, hee
doth insinuate that this one is our only seruice: for where|as
after twelue Halleluiahs a thirteenth is added, it doth sig|nifie,
that when wee haue done all, wee must begin againe
with Gods praise, that as his mercie is from euerlasting, to
euerlasting, from euerlasting predestination, to euerlasting
glorificatin; so our praise for euer and euer: here we must
begin the Psalme of glorie, but because God hath appoin|ted
in this short life, that wee should not sing in Longs, but
(as Musitians speake) in briefes and semibriefes, it must be
continued in the quier of heauen heereafter, or in this
world for euer and euer intentionally, though not actually.
For as the wicked compnd. lib. 7. cap. 21. if hee could liue for euer, would sinne
for euer; so the good man, if God should suffer him to
breathe on earth for euer and euer, hee would not cease to
serue him euer and euer.

Amen.] The which word is theHieron. in 6 Matth. seale of all our petiti|ons,
to make them authenticall: importingChurch Cat. Musculus, Vrsi|nus, c. both assent, and
assurance that our requests shall be granted. And therefore
(asPerkins vpon the Lods praier. one notes aptly) this men, is of more value then all the
rest, by how much our faith is more excellent then our de|sire:
for it is a testification of our faith, whereas all the peti|tions
are only testifications of our desire.De vita Chri|sti part. 1. cap. 37. Ludolphus hath
comprised all in this short paraphrase.
PAter noster: Excelsus in creatione, suauis in a more, di|ues
in haereditate; qui es in coelis: speculum aeternita|tis,
corona iucunditatis, the saurus felicitatis. Sanctificetur
nomen tuum: vt nobis sit mel in ore, melos in aure, iubilum
in corde. Adueniat regnum tuum: non illud mod poten|tiae,
quod nunquam euertitur, sed istud gratiae, quod saepius
auertitur: adueniat ergo iucundum sine permixtione, tran|quillum
sine perturbatione, securum sine amissione. Fiat vo|luntas,
non nostra, sed tua, sicut in Coelis ab Angelis, sic etiam
in terra ab hominibus: vt omnia quae non amas, odio habea|mus;
quae diligis, diligamus; quae tibi placent, impleamus.
Panem, doctrinalem, sacramentalem, victualem, nostrum: sed
ne putetur a nobis, dicimus da nbis: quotidianum, qui suffi|ciat
nobis. Et dimitte nobis debita nostra. Quae cunque contra
te commimus, aut contra proximos, aut contra nosmet ip|sos.
Sicut  nos ttimus debitoribus nostris, qui nos offen|deunt,
vel in verbis, vel in personis, vel in rebus. Et ne nos
inducas in tentationem; mundi, carnis, Diaboli. Sed libera nos
 malo, praesenti, praeterito, futuro. Haec potes, quia tuum est
regnum  potentia; haec vis, quia tua gloria, nunc  in secula,
Amen.



Psalm. 51. 15.
Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth
shall shew forth thy praise.

AS man is a little world in the great, so the tongue a
great world in the little.Hieron. poster. exposit. in Psal. 119.  Nihil habet medium, aut
grande malum est, aut grande bonum. If good (as Eunapius
said of that famous Rhetorician) a walking librarie, a whole

Vniuersitie of edifying knowledge: but if bad (asCap. 3. 6. S. Iames
doth tell vs) a world of wickednesse. NoPlutarch. Aesop. better dish for Gods
Pars optima digna quae sit hostia. Prudent. hym. de Rman. marty. publike seruice, when it is well seasoned: againe, none
worse when ill handled.
So that if we desire to be doore-keepers in Gods house,
let vs intreat God first to be a doore-keeper in our house,
that he would shut the wicket of our mouth against vnsa|uory
speeches, and open the doore of our lippes, that our
mouth may shew forth his praise. This was Dauids praier,
and ought to be thy practise, wherein obserue three points
especially:
Who: the Lord.
What: open my lippes.
Why: that my mouth may shew thy praise.
For the first; man of himselfe cannot vntie the strings of
his own stammering tongue, but it is God only which ope|neth
aColos. 2. 3. doore of vtterance. When we haue a good thought
it is (as the schoole doth speake) gratia infusa; when a good
word, gratia effusa; when a good worke, gratia diffusa. Man
is as a locke, the spirit of God as a key,Apocal. 3. 7. which openeth and no
man shutteth; againe, shutteth, and no man openeth. He did o|pen
the heart of Lydia to conceiue well, Acts 16. the eares
of the Prophet to heare well, Esay 50. the eies of Elishaes
seruant to see well, 2. Kings 6. and here the lips of Dauid to
speake well. And therefore whereas in the former verse he
might seeme too peremptory, saying, my tongue shall sing of
thy righteousnesse; he doth as it were correct himselfe by this
latter edition, and second speech: O Lord, I finde my selfe,
of my selfe, most vnable to sing or say, but open thou my lips,
and touch thou my tongue, and then I am sure my mouth
shall shew thy praise.
This doctrine sheweth in generall our dependance on
God, inActs 17 28. whom we liue, and moue, and haue our being; from
whom only commethIames 1. 17. euery good and perfect gift.
Man is Gods image: Gen. 1. 26. SomeDidus de la Vega. con. 7. super Psal 4. nitential.  Olaster in cap. 1. Gen. translators vse
the word which signifieth a shadow. Now as an image or
a shadow doth onely mooue as the bodie whereof it is a
likenesse; when the body doth stretch forth an arme, the

shadow presently hath an arme; when the bodie doth put
foorth a legge, the shadow hath a legge. So man in all his
actions, as a shadow depends on God, as the sole foundation
of all hisDan. 5. 23. being.
In more particular, this ouerthroweth allLocus contra Pelagians, vti Genebrardus in loc. workemon|gers,
and (if I may so speake) babling word-mongers. If a
man cannot open his owne lips to praise God, much lesse
direct his owne heart to please God: if not able to tune his
tongue, let him not presume to turne his soule.
And if a man cannot open his mouth aright, let him not
picke it with a false key, but rather pray with Dauid in the
141. Psalme: Set a watch O Lord before my mouth, and keepe
the doores of my lips. As it is absurd in building to make the
porch bigger then the house; so, monstrous in nature, when
wee commit burglarie, breaking the doores and pulling
downe theEcclesiasticus 8. 24. barres of our mouth, that the narrow passage
may be made wide for our bigge words, and high conceits.
A foule fault when our words are either too many, or too
mightie: Ecclesiastes 5. 1.
2. Point what: Open my lips.
DauidPsal. 14. 5. elsewhere thinkes our mouth too much open,
and S.Cap. 3. 8. Iames that our tongue is too glib and vnrulie. Lin|gua
facil volat,  ideo facile violat (saithSerm. de Tri|plici custodia manus, linguae, cordis. Bernard.) In old
age, when all other members are dull and stiffe, theErasmus com. de lingua  August. lib. 10. Confess. cap. 37. quotidiana or|nax est humana lingua. tongue
notwithstanding is quicke and nimble. What neede any
then pray for opening their lippes? I answere with the Pro|phet
Ieremie, chap 4. vers. 22. They are wise to doe euill, but to
doe well they haue no knowledge. Men haue tongue enough
to speake ill, an open mouth to blaspheme God, and slander
their neighbour; but like Plinies Astomi, no mouth, no
lippes, no tongue, possessed with a dumbe diuell when they
should speake well.
Hierome,In locum. Basil, Euthymius, and other ancient Doctors
obserue, that naturall corruptions, and actuall sinnes are the
very rampiers which stop this free passage. So Dauid him|selfe
doth expound himselfe, vers. 14. Deliuer me from blood
guiltinesse, O God, and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousnesse.
His vnthankfulnesse did crie: his adulterie crie: his mur|ther

crie vnto the Lord for reuenge: but alas, himselfe was
mute, till God in exceeding great mercie did stop the
outhes of his clamorous aduersaries, and gaue him leaue
to speake.
Here we note the great wisedome of the Church assigning
this place to this versicle in this booke: namely, before
the Pses, Lessons and Collects: and yet after the Confession
and absolution of our sinnes, insinuating that our mouthes
are silenced only by transgression, and opened only by God:
and therefore when wee meete together in the Temple to
bee thankfull vnto him, and to speake good of his name,
wee must craue first, that according to the multitude of his
rich mercies; hee would pardon all our old sinnes, and then
put into our mouth a new song: that, as the seruice is holie,
the time holie, the place holie; so we likewise thePulchra non est las in ore . Hieron. in. loc. persons
holie, who sing, Holy, holy, holy, c.
Deus faciat tm commodum, qum Ecclesia fecit accommo|dum.
Our fathers in this imitated the learned Hebrew Do|ctors,
inioyning that this verse should be said at the begin|ning
of euery prayer, inGenebrardus in locum. tractatu Berachoth: that is, their
Liturgie, being the first part of the Talmud, as Pet. Galati|nus
lib. 1. cap. 5. do Arcanis:  Saxtus Senesis Bibliothec. lib. 2
pag. 121.
My lips] A part for the whole, sufficient abilitie to praise
God: Ex abundantaMat. 12. 34. cordis os loquitur. He doth intreate
God then, as before, for a cleane hart, and a right spirit, that
hisMsculus in locum. old ioyes of conscience may bee renued, and all the
whole man throughly repaired, a goodLucs Lossius in locum. desire to begin, a
ready will to continue, a constant resolution to end in Gods
holie seruice.
The key of the mouth ought not to stand in the
doore of the lippes, but to be kept in the cabinet of the
minde.
ForEcclesiasticus 21.6. the heart of fooles is in their mouth, but the mouth of
the wise is in their heart. Dauid therefore doth desire first a
newverse 10. soule, then a new sog. The tongue is ambassadour
of the minde; as often as we speake without meditation be|fore,
so often the messenger runneth without his errand.

And idle words are not little sinnes, of which one day wee
shall giue greatMat. 12. 36. account.
The mind then and the mouth must goe together: in ci|uill
communication, hee that will not speake idlely, must
thinke what he speakes; and he that will not speake falsely,
must speake what he thinks. In holy deuotion, God must
be praised vpon wllPsal. 150. 5. tuned Cymbals, and loud Cymbals, in
his quier: first tune well, a prepared heart, then ound well a
cheerfull tongue like thePsal. 45. 2. pen of a ready writer. Albeit
mentall praier at sometime, and in some place, be sufficient:
yetThom. 22 . qust. 83. art. 12 vocall, in Gods publike worship, is necessary, to stir vp
and blow the coales of zeale both in our selues and others.
Open lips in open seruice.
Why: 3. part.
That my mouth may shew thy praise. That as ofRom. 11. 36. thee, and
through thee, and for thee are all things; so to thee may be
prais for euermore. See Pater Noster.
God is of himselfe, and in himselfe so great, so good, as
that we cannot any way detract or adde to his glory. Nec
August. in Psal. 134. Non  be|nedictione, nec inuitur male|dict. nostra. Id.  in Psal. 66. elior si , nec deterior si vituperaueri. I answere,
though we cannot make Gods praise greater in it self, yet
we may make it seme greater vnto other; it is our duie to
sheforth his praise in all our words and actions too: for al|beit
we cannot make a new God, and a new Christ, (as the
Papists de) yet or good example, and gratious speech,
may make ltle Christ a grea Christ; occasion all those with
whom we conuerse to magnifie the Lord now, who little
regarded him before. See the .
This annunciation of praise consists of often repetition
and particular enumeration of Gods especiall goodnesse to|wards
vs.In locum tom. 8. fol. 339. Augustine therefore doth glosse the text thus:
Ladem tuam, qua creatus sm. Laudm tam, quia vt consi|erer
iam monitus sum. Ladem tuam. quia peccans non de|relictus
sum. Laudem tuam, quia vt securs essem mundatus
sum.
Hugo Cardi|nal. n. Luc. cap. 10. 27. Hugo cmprehends all, which concernes vs all, in foure
words: God is to be praised, qui Creator  esse, Conserua|tor
in esse, Recreator in  Glorificator in optimo esse: qui

August. de lib. arbitrio lib. 3. cap. 15. non reddit Deo faciendo quod debet, reddet ei, patiendo quod
debet.
The whole text doth teach all men generally the lan|guage
of CananEsay 19. 18., that is, what and how to speake, that
their mout may glorifie God, and edifie their brethren.
Especiall Pastors toEsay 50.. minister a word in time to the weary;
so to tune their notes, as that they may be like apples ofProu 25. . gold
 of iluer. In all their sermons to preach Iesus for
Iesus. hunting not after their owne, but his glory Lord open
my lips that my mouth may shew not My praise, but Thy
praise, saith Dauid.


Gloria Patri.
THis Hymne is of good credit, and great antiquity.De religiare Christian.  cap. 19. Ra|mus
acknowledgeth ingenuously both. It is a para|phrastticall
exposition of that excellent spech, Rom. 11. 36.
Ex notat pa|trempe filium: in spir sanct. Lombard. lib. 1. st dist. 36.  Augustin. de Trin. lib. 6. cap 10. Of him and through him, and for him are all things, to him be
glory for euer, Amen: vsed in the Church to manifest our
sound iudgement in matter of doctrine concerning the sa|cred
Trinitie. We must (saithEpistol 78.  Melanct. expo|sit. symbol, Ni|ce. tom. 1. fol. 403. Basil) as we haue receiued,
euen so baptize, and as we baptize, euen so beleeue, and as
we belieue, euen so giue glory. Baptizing we vse the name
of the Father, of the Sonne, of the holy Ghost: confessing
the Christian faith, we declare our beliefe in the Father, and
in the Sonne, and in the holy Ghost: ascribing glory to God,
we giue it to the Father, and to the Sonne, and to the holie
Ghost. And howsoeuer Anabaptisticall Antipodes, out of
their ambitious humour to contradict all other, and heare
themselues only speak, would haue thrust out of the Church
all solemne set formes of holy seruice: yet Gloria Patri stands
still, and like a true Martyr doth shew the greatest counte|uance
in lowest estate.
For antiquitie, such as looke lowest affirme that it was
ordained first byAlcuinus lib. de offic. diuin. Damasus, ann. Dom.Florilegus fol. 104. 376. Others, that it
was enacted in that famous Councell of Nice, consisting of
318. Bishops vnder Constantine the Great, an.Magdeburg. Cent. 4. col. 617. 320.
aebadius in lib. aduersus Arrian. insinuates, that it was
vsed in the Church long before. The curious in this point

may further examineDe Missa lib. 2. cap. 6. Bellarmine, and that Oxenford of
learning, Master RichardEcclesiast. polit. lib. 5.  42. Hooker.


Venite exultemus Domino.
IT is euident, not only byAugust. lib. 10. Confess. cap. 33.  prooe. in Psal. 118. Tertullian. lib. de Velandis virginib. cap. 7. Church history, but also by the
Scripture, that Psalmes haue alwaies taken vp a great
roome in diuine seruice.Scaliger de emendat temp. lib. 6. pag. 273. edit. 1593. Mat. 26. 30. 1. Cor. 14. When you
come together, as euery one of you hath a Psalme.
Let not any then wonder at our often Psalmodie both af|ter,
and before the word expounded, and read: and some|time
interlaced betweene both. A custome continued in all
other reformed Churches of Scotland, France, Flanders, c.
Aboue all other Psalmes,Master Dee|ring Lect. 15. vpon the Epi|stle to the He|brewes. our Church hath fitly chosen
this, as a whetstone to set an edge vpon our deuotions at the
very beginning of publike praiers in the Temple: teaching
plainly for what matter, and after what maner, it behoueth
vs to serue God in his Sanctuary. For it consists of two parts:

1. An exhortation to praise God, in the 1. 2. 6. verses.
2. An allegation of causes why we should doe this, and they bee taken either from his

Mercies,

In generall; for creating and ruling the whole world: 3. 4. 5.
In particular, for electing his Church. 7.

Iudgeme~ts, in the

8. 9. 10. 11. setting before their eies a fearefull example, and that in their owne Fathers, for, omitting this ex|cellent dutie.




In the first part two points are remarkable:

Who must praise; Let vs sing, let vs come, let vs worship.
How

Where; Before his presence.
Whereto; Sing to the Lord.
Wherewith; with our voice:



Let vs sing: with our heart, heartily: with hands and knees,
O come let vs worship and fall downe and kneele before the Lord
our maker.

For the :For he made this Psalme.  content alone to praise God,
but exciteth all other about him to doe the ame: O come let
vs sing.Heb. 4. 7. Now Dauid may be considered

As a

Priuate man.
Publike person,

Prince.
Prophet.



Here then is a threefold paterne in one: An example for
Masters to stir vp their amilie; an example for Preachers to
exhort their people; an example for Princes to prouoke their
subiects vnto the publike worship of the Lord. It becom|meth
great men, especially to be good men: as beingGreg. Nazan. vn|printed
statutes, andArist. speaking  vnto the rest. This affe|ction
was inGen. 18. 19. Abraham,1 Cor. 9. 22. Paul,Iosua 14 15. Iosua, and ought to be in
all,Heb. 3. 13. exhorting one another while it is called to da.
You hold it a good rule in worldly businesse, not to say
to your seruants, Come ye, goe ye, arise ye: but, let vs come,
let vs goe, let vs arise. Now, shall the children of this world
be wiser in their generation, then the children of light? Do
we commend this course in mundane affaires, and neglect it
in religious offices? Assuredly if our zeale were so great to
religion, as our loue is towards the world; Masters would
not come to Church (as many doe) without their seruants,
and seruants without their masters; parents without their
children, and children without their parents; husbands
without their wiues, and wiues without their husbands: but
all of vs would call one to another, asEsay 2. 3. Esay prophecied;
O come let vs goe vp to the mountaine of the Lord, to the house
of the God of Iacob, hee will teach vs his waies, and wee will
walke in his pahs. And, as Dauid here practised, O come let
vs sing to the Lord, let vs heartily reoice in the strength of our
saluation.
How First where;Where. before the Lord, before his presence, vers.
2. 6. God is euery where;Psal. 139. 7. Whither shall I goe from thy spirit?
or whither shall I goe from thy preence?
True God is a circle, whose Center is no where, Circumfe|rence
euery where: yet is he said in holy Scipture to dwell
inMat. 69. heauen, and to be present in his Sactuarie more spe|cially;

manifesting his glorie from heauen, his grace in the
Church principally. For hee said in theExod. 20. 24. Law, In all places
where I shall put the remembrance of my name, I will come vnto
thee: and in theMat. 18. 20. Gospell, Where two or three are gathered
together in my name there am I in the middest of them. Albeit
euery day be a Sabbath, and euery place a Sanctuarie for
our priuate deuotions, according to the particular exigence
of our occasions; yet God hath allotted certaine times, and
certaine places for his publike seruice: Leuit. 19. 30. Ye shall
sanctifie my Sabbaths, and reuerence my Sanctuarie.
God is to be worshipped euer, and euery where. Yet the
seuenth of our time and the tenth of our liuing, must more spe|cially
be consecrated to that honour which hee requires in
the Temple. And thereforeComment. in locum. Caluin is of opinion that Da|uid
vttered this speech vpon the Sabbath: as if hee should
say, Come let vs sing to the Lord, not in priuate only, but
let vs come before his presence with thanksgiuing. As in
the 100. Psalme: Goe your way into his gates, and into his
courts with praise.
The consideration of this one point, that God is in eue|ry
place by his generall presence; in this holie place by his
especiall presidence, may teach all men to pray not hypo|critically
for fashion, but heartily for conscience; not only
formally to satisfie the law, but also sincerely to certifie our
loue to the Lord our maker, giuing vntoMat. 22. 21. Si Caesar in Nummo quaerit imaginem suam Deus non quae|rit in homine Imagine~ suam? Augustin. ear. uius Psalmi. Caesar the things
which appertaeine to Caesar, and vnto God the things which be|lon
to God. That we may not only praise where we should,
but, as it followeth in the diuision Whereto:Whereto. Let vs sing to
the Lord; let vs reioyce in the strength of our saluation, let vs
shew our selues glad in him.
Euery one in his merrie mood will say; Come let vs sing,
let vs heartily reioyce: But as good neuer a whit as neuer
the better. Silence is a sweeter note then a loud, if a leaud
sonnet. If we will needs reioyce, let vs (saithPhilip. 4. 4. Paul) reioyce
in the Lord: if sing, saith Dauid, let vs sing to the Lord.
Vaine toyes are songs sung to the world; lasciuious ba|lads
are songs sung to the flesh; Satyricall libels are songs
sung to the Diuell; onely Psalmes and Hymnes, and spirituall

songs areColoss. 3. 16. melodie for the Lord. Pe debes Domino exultare si
vis securus mundo insultare, saithTom. 8. fol. 730. Augustine vpon this
text: we may not exalt but insult ouer the world, the flesh,
the diuell; our exaltations and exultations are due to God
only.


Venite exultemus Domino.
LEt vs worship and fall downe and kneele before the
Lord our maker: not before a Crucifix, not before a
rotten Image, not before a faire picture of a foule Saint:
these are not our makers, we made them, they made not vs.
Our God, vnto whom we must sing, in whom wee must re|ioyce,
before whom we must worship, is a great King aboue
all gods: hee is no god of lead, no god of bread, no brazen
god, no wooden god; we must not fall downe and worship
our Ladie, but our Lord; not any Martyr, but our Maker;
not any Saint, but our Sauiour: O come let vs sing vnto the
Lord, let vs heartily reioyce in the strength of our saluation.
Wherewith:Wherewith. with voyce, Let vs sing; with soule, let vs
heartily reioyce; with hands and knees, let vs fall downe and
kneele,Comely ge|stures in the Church. with all that is within vs, with all that is without
vs; he that made all, must be worshipped with all, especial|ly
when we come before his presence.
Here let vs make a stand, and behold the wise choice of the
Church, assigning this place to this Psalme, which exciteth
vs to come to the Temple quietly and ioyntly, Come let vs
sing; and when wee are come, to demeane our selues in
this holie place cheerefully, heartily, reuerently. I would faine
know of those who despise our Canons, as not agreeable to
the Canon of holy Bible, whether their vnmannerly sitting
in the time of diuine seruice be this kneeling; whether their
standing bee this falling downe; whether they giue God
their heart, when as they will not affoord him so much as
their hat; whether their lowring vpon their brethren, bee
singing to the Lord; whether their dutie required here, bee
to come in, to goe out, to stay in the Temple, without any
respect of persons, or reuerence to place.
I would such as doe imitate the Turks inSum. conser. pag. 27. habite, would

likewise follow them in humble comportment while they
pray:Augerius Bus|bequius legat. Turcicae epist. 3. Magna cum Ceremonia,  attentione sacris suis inter|sunt
Turcae: nam si vel digito scalpant caput, perisse sibi preca|tionis
fructum rbitrantur: quid eim si cum Bassis sermo tibi
habendus, ergo multo magis si cum Deo. Thinke of this yee
that forget God, hee will not bee mocked, his truth is eter|nall,
heauen and earth shall passe, but not one ot of his
word shall passe: if an Angell from heauen, or diuell on
earth, if any priuate spirit shall deliuer vnto you rules of be|hauiour
in the Church, contrarie to this Canon of Gods
owne spirit, let him be accursed, Anathema. Let vs sing, let
vs worship, let vs, who feare God and honour the King, fall
downe and kneele before the Lord our maker.
Thus much of Dauids exhortation to praise God. The
reasons why we should praise, follow, Set downe
First briefly, God is our Creator; therefore let vs worship
and fall downe and kneele before the Lord our maker, vers. 6. He
is our Redeemer; therefore let vs sing vnto the Lod, let vs
heartily reioyce in the strength of our saluation: vers. 1.

Secondly, more at large from his

Mercies in generall: vers. 3. 4. 5.
Iudgements.


For the Lord is a great God:] Most mightie, almightie,
able to doe whatsoeuer he will, and more then he will too.
See the Creed.
In himselfe so great, that the heauen of heauens cannot
containe him, much lesse any barren braine inwombe him:
and therefore Dauid here being not able to set downe the
least peece of his greatnes in the positiue degree, comes to
the comparatiue, shewing what he is in comparison of other:
A great King aboue all gods.
As being more excellent and mightie then any thing, or
all things that haue the name of God,

Whether they be Gods in

Title,

Eloim. Psal. 8. 5. Angels in heauen.
Psal. 82. 6. Princes on earth.

Opinion,

AsColoss. 3. 5. gold is the couetous mans god,Philip. 3. 19. bellicheere the Epicures god, anPsalm. 96. 5. Idoll the superstitious ma~s god.




Now the Lord is the King of all gods in title, for he made
them: of all gods in opinion, for he can destroy them.Heb. 1. 14. An|gels
are his messengers, andProu. 8. 15. Princes his ministers, allRom. 13. 1. po|wer
is of the Lord. The manner of getting kingdomes is
not alwaies of God, because it is sometime by wicked
meanes; yet the power it selfe is euer from God, and there|fore
stiled inPsam. 50. 1. scripture, the God of gods, as theEcclesiast. 5. 7. Wise man
saith, higher then the highest: for religion and reason tell vs,
that of all creatures in heauen an Angell is the greatest; of
all things on earth, anTertullian ad Scapulam: Om|nibus maior dum solo deo minor. Emperour is the greatest: but the
Lord (as you see) is greater then the greatest, as being abso|lute
Creator of the one, and maker of the other:Augustin. in lo|cum. Quantus
Deus est qui Deos facit! How great a God is hee that makes
gods, yea  marres them too at his pleasure! surely this is a
great God,  a great king aboue all gods. And therfore in what
estate soeuer thou be, possesse thy soule with patience, re|ioyce
in God, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might: feare no man, no diuell, no other god, he y^ is greater
the~ al these shal be thy defence; he will performe whatsoeuer
in his word he did promise concerning this life  the next.
In his hand are all the corners of the earth] A reason to proue
that God is a great King aboue all gods: he is a great God,
because a king of gods: and he is a King of gods, because in
his hand are all the corners of the world, subiect to his power
and prouidence.
The most mighty Monarch on earth is king as it were but
of a molehill, a Lord of some one angle: but in Gods hand
are all the corners of the earth, and the strength of the hils. i. of
most puissant potentates, in comparison of who~ al other are
low valleyes; I say the strength  height of the hils are his.
Antichrist doth extoll himselfe2. Thess. 2. 4. aboue all that is called
God: and the Pope doth make himselfe Lord of Lords, vsur|ping
theHarding con|fut. of Iewels A|polog. part. 2. cap. 3. whole world for his diocesse: yea hee hath a triple
kingdome, according to his triple crowne; Supernall, exten|ded
to heauen, in canonizing Saints; Infernall, extended to
hell in freeing soules out of Purgatorie; Terrestriall, exten|ded
ouer the whole earth, as being vniuersall Bishop of the
Catholique Church. But alas, vaine man, hee is but a ox in

an hole, many corners of the earth are not his; England (God
be praised) is not his, Scotland, Holland, Denmarke not his, a
great part of France, the greatest part of Germany none of
his; many thousands in Portugall, Italy, Spaine, none of his;
the great Cham, the Persian, the Turke, the least whereof is
greater then himselfe, none of his. And albeit all the Kings
of the earth should be drunken with his abomination, yet
should he bee pastor vniuersall of the Church, but as the di|uell
isIob. 12. 31. prince of the world; not by his owne might, but by
others weakenesse, as SaintRom. 6. 16. Paul said, He is our master to
whom we giue our selues as seruants to obey.
So likewise the gods of the superstitious Heathe~ haue not
all the corners of the world: for, as themselues ingeniously
confesse, some were gods of y^ water only, some of the wind,
some of corne, some of fruite,August. de ci|uit. lib. 4. cap. 8. Nec omnia co~memoro, quia me
piget quod illos non pudet. As Heretikes haue so many Creeds, as
heads: so the Gentiles (asLib. 1. aduer|sus Symachum. Prudentius obserued) had so ma|ny
things for their god, as there were things y^ were good.
Quic quid humus, pelagus, coelum, mirabile gignunt:
id duxre Deos, colles, freta flumina, flammas.
So that their god is not as our God,Deut. 32. 31. euen our enemies
being Iudges. Other hold some parcels of the earth vnder
him, and some lay claime to the whole by vsurpation. But
all the corners of the world are his by right of creation, as it
followeth in the next verse.
The sea is his, for hee made it.] An argument demonstra|tiue,
to shew that all the world is subiect to his power: and
therefore in the Creed, after Almightie, followeth instant|ly,
Maker of heauen and earth.
If any shall demaund why Dauid nameth heere first and
principally the Sea, before all other creatures: answere may
be giuen out ofLib. 32. nat. hist. in prooem. Ipsa se natura vincit numero|sis modis. Plinie; God, who is wonderfull in all things,
is most wonderfully wonderfull in the Sea. Whether we consi|der
(asPsalm. 104. Dauid elsewhere:)

The

1. Situation of it.
2. Motion.
3. Innumerable creatures in it.
4. Wonderfull art of sailing on it.



Yet God in the beginningGen. 1. 9. made this vnruly foaming
fuming beast, and euer since ruled it at his becke: for hee
Psal. 65. 7. stilleth the raging of the Sea, and the noise of his waues;Iob. 38. 8. hee
shutteth vp this barking curre in the channell, as in a kennell;
he laieth vp the deepe, as in aPsalm. 33. 7. treasure house, saying to the wa|ters,
Iob 38. 11. Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further, and here shall it
stay thy proud waues.
Hitherto concerning the greatnes, and goodnes of God
in generall. Now Dauid in the seuenth verse proceedes, in|timating
that the Lord of all in common, is our God in spe|ciall.
Hee is the Lord our God, as being the people of his pa|sture,
and the sheepe of his hands: that is, himselfe doth feede
and fauour the Church in a more particular sort, commit|ting
this charge to none other. See preface of the Deca|logue.
The last reason is from iudgement: for God vseth all
meanes to winne men vnto him. The summe whereof is,
that wee must not harden our hearts, and obstinately settle
our selues in sinne, as our forefathers in the wildernesse: but
rather heare the voice of the Lord speaking vnto vs out of
his word all the day long, the whole time of our life gene|rally,
but on the Sabbath day more specially, let in his anger
hee sweare that wee shall not enter into his rest. Reade this hi|storie,
Numb. 14. Exod. 17: for, as1. Cor. 10. 11. Paul doth teach, these
things are written for our ensample, vpon whom the ends of the
world are come. Lege historim, ne fias historia. The iudge|ments
of God are like thunder claps, poena ad vnum, terror
adomes. As in a Common-weale, places of execution are
publike, ad terrorem populi, because (as Plato said) Nemo
prudens punit quia peccatum est, sed ne peccetur. And another
ancient Philosopher to the same purpose: Malefici non per|eunt
vt pereant, sed vt pereundo alios deterreant. That the
Seneca lib. 1. de Ira. cap. 6. State which had no benefit by their life, should make vse
of their death. In like manner, almightie God in this huge
Theater of the world, doth make some spectacles vnto o|ther,
all of vs being either actors, or spectators: and so by
consequence must take example by other, or else make ex|ample
to other. See Epist. Dom. 9. post Trin.



Te Deum.
THat Hymnes accurately framed by deuout men accor|ding
to the word, may be sung in the Church with the
Psalmes of Dauid, and other spirituall songs taken out of the
word; we can alleage precept, and example: Precept, Colos.
3. 16. Admonish your selues in Psalmes and Hymnes, c.
In loc.  Cal|uin. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 20. . 32. Marlorat doth construe this of singing in the Church:
and Haymo, that Hymnes were godly songs, inuented by
the Christians of that age. For Gods holy Church hath vsed
this custome from theEusbius hist. lb. 2. cap. 7. Donysius de diuin. nom. c. 4. Concilium To|let an. 4. can. 12. Primitiue times, euen vnto this pre|sent
day.
Concerning Te Deum in particular: it is approued by
Bellarm. de bons ocribus in particular. lib. 1. cap. 12.  14. Luther, and held by ourFox Martyr. fol 799. Martyrs a good Creed: (as it is
thought generally) composed by those two great lights of
the Church, AmbroseVigner an|swer to Barro|nius. pag. 17. who was the most resolute Bishop,
and AugustinePerkins Treat. Conscience. c. 2. who was the most iudicious Doctor of all
the Fathers.
It is reported by Dacius, a reuerend Bishop of Millane,
that in his time, who liued vnderGreg. lib. 3. Dialog. cap. 4. Magdburg. Cent. 6. col. 702. Iustinian,Barron. tom. 7. fol. 294. anno 538. this
Hymne was receiued and vsed in the Church: which argu|eth
it of greater antiquity, then vpstart Popery. The Noue|list
(asCon. Faustum lib. 22. cap. 34. Augustine writes of Faustus the Manichee) Vel non
intellgend repreendit, vel reprehendendo non intelligit: Ei|ther
too much passion, or else too little knowledge.


Benedicite omnia opera.
TH Cantie is a rapsodie, gathered here and there from
dius Psalmes of Dauid, as theof the Church Bible. marginall notes indi|gitate:
cited often by the learned and ancientCyp. serm. de lapsis  orat. Dom. fathers, and
not censured for it by the Lutheran Historiographers. Cent. 5.
colum. 219.
Imprinted at Melburgh with the Dauidicall Psalmes in
English meeter:August. de Ci|it. lib. 11. cap. 9.  de natura boni, cap. 16. Chrysost. hom. 4. ad pop. an honour denied vnto the Church Psalter
in prose. In a word, I finde this Hymne lesse martyred then
the rest, and therefore dimisse it, as Christ did the woman,
Iohn 8. Where be thine accusers? Hath no man condemned
thee? no more doe I: goe thy way.



Benedictus. LVKE 1. 68.
THe Benedictus, Magnificat, and Nunc dimittis, are said
in the Church daily, whereas other Psalmes of Dauid,
Asaph, Moses, are read but monethly. The reasons hereof
are manifest, and manifold; I will onely name two:
First, these most excellent Hymnes (asHooker Eccle|siast. pelit. lib. 5.  40. gratulations
wherewith our Lord and Sauiour was ioifully receiued at
his entrance into the world) concerne vs so much more then
the Psalmes of Dauid, as the Gospell more then the Law,
and the new Testament more then the old. For the one are
but prophecies of Christ to come, whereas the other are
plaine discoueries of Christ already present.
Secondly, these songs are proper onely to Christianitie,
whereas other Psalmes are common to the Iewes, as well as
to the Christians, wherewith they praise God in their Syna|gogue,
so well as we praise God in our Church. A Iew will
sing with Asaph and Dauid that the Messias of the world
shall come, but he cannot, he will not acknowledge with
Zacharias and Simeon that he is come. So that the Nouelist
herein misliking the Churches custome, doth seeme to play
the Iew; which I rather ascribe to the lightnes of his folly,
then to the waight of his malice. Sententiam Ecclesiae non in|telligit,
August. co|fess. lib. 12. cap. 25. sedamat suam, non quia vera est, sed quia sua est.
It is fitly placed after the second Lesson, as an Hymne of
praise to magnifie God for the comfort we receiue by the
sweet tidings of the Gospell: Blessed be the Lord God of Is|rael,
for visiting and redeeming his people.

It hath two princi|pall
parts:

1. Concerning Christ and his king|dome.
2. Touching Iohn the Baptist and
his office. vers. 76. c.


It is very remarkable, that Zacharias who was dumbe,
vers. 20, doth now not onely speake, but also prophecie. He
was made speechlesse, because he was faithlesse: but now be|lieuing,
his lips are opened, and his mouth doth shew forth
Gods praise: saying, Blessed be the Lord.
Let no man in his affliction despaire: for (asLib. 2. in Luc. cap. 1. Ambrose

notes) if we change our manners, Almightie God will al|ter
his mind. Nec solum ablata restituit, sed etiam insperat
concedit: He will not onely restore that which was taken a
way, but also giue more then we can expect.Iob 24. 12. So he bles|sed
the last daies of Iob more then the first: for whereasIob 1. 3. he
had but 7000 sheepe, 3000 comels, 500 yoke of oxen, and
500 shee asses: afterward the Lord gaue him 1400 sheep,
6000 camels, 1000 yoke of oxen, and 1000 asses. In the
second of Ioel; If you will turne to me (saith the Lord) with all
your heart, with fasting, weeping, and mourning, I will render
vnto you the yeeres which the grashopper hath eaten, the canker
worme, and the caterpiller. And moreouer, I will powre out my
spirit vpon all flesh, and your sonnes, and your daughters shall pro|phecie,
c. In the 9. of Matth. when Christ saw the faith of
the palsie man, he did not onely cure the sores of his body,
but also the sinnes of his soule; Sonne, be of good cheere, thy
sinnes are forgiuen thee.

In the first part two
points are to be con|sidered
especially:

1. Who to be blessed; the Lord God
of Israel.
2. Why: first for promising, then for
performing redemption vnto the
world.


Blessed] That is, praised, as Psalme 18. 47. Matth. 22. 39.
So that Zacharias here remembring a great benefit, begins
his Hymne with thanks, Benedictus Dominus. Hereby sig|nifying,
that it is our first and chiefe duty to be thankfull,
to blesse God, who doth so wonderfully blesse vs in all the
changes and chances of this mortall life, to say withIob 1. 21. Iob;
The Lord giueth, and the Lord taketh, blessed be the name of the
Lord. God be praised, and the Lord be blessed, is the lan|guage
of Canaan: whereas vnthankfulnesse is the diuels
text, and the blasphemies of wicked men are Commentaries
vpon it.
The Lord] For, asLib. 1. Ethic. cap. 12. Aristole said; Praise is onely vertues
due: but none is good,Marke 10. 18. except God. Other are to be prai|sed
in him, so fare forth as they haue receiued any gift or
good from him, onely the Lord worthy to be praised in and
for himselfe.

God of Israel] So called inBeauxamis in loc. two respects: first, in regard
of his loue towards them, as being his peculiar incloser out
of the Commons of the wholeworld: Deut. 7. 6. Psalme 76.
Esay 5.
Secondly, in regard of their seruice to him, heeEuthymis is God
of other, will they nill they. Psal. 99. 1. The Lord is King, be
the people neuer so impatient; he sitteth betweene the Che|rubims,
be the earth neuer so vnuiet: but Israel willingly
submitted her selfe to serue him cheerefully with all her
heart. The Diuell is prince of the world, because the wicked
of the world be ready to giue place to his suggestions: but
the Lord is God of Israel; that is, of all good men, because
they resist Satan, and yeeld to his gouernment, desiring dai|ly
that his kingdome may come, and his will be done in
earth as it is in heauen.
He doth vse this title,Maldonat. in lecum. rather then another, in generall,
to describe the true God, and to distinguish him from the
gods of the Gentiles, who were not gods, butPsal. 96. 5. : that
is, Diuels (asIn Psalmum praedic. Euthyms obserues.) In particular this title
did best fit his occasion, because Christ the redeemer of the
world, was promised vnto theRom. 9. 4. 5. Iewes, Abraham and his seed
for euer: and therefore blessed be the Lord God of Israel.
Why? First for promising: then for performing.
The promises of God touching the Messias, areIansenius con|cord. cap. 5. two|fold:
1. Made by himselfe, to Adam, Abraham, Isaac: vers.
72. 73.
2. Made by his seruants: As he spake by the mouth of his
holy Prophets, which haue been since the world began: vers. 70.
He spake] The Prophet is but the voice: God himselfe is
the speaker, as Iohn Baptist said; I am theIob 1. 23. voice of him that
crieth in the wildernesse.
By th mouth] In the singular number: forGorran.  Beauxamis in locum. albeit they
were many, yet they spake but one thing, from one spirit,
as it were with one mouth.
Which haue been since the world began] ForActs 3. 24. all the Pro|phets
haue foretold of these daies.Matth. 17. 3. In the transfiguration,
Moses and Elias are said to talke with Christ: signifying

hereby, (saithHom. 6. in cap. 8. Leuit. Origen) that the Law and the Prophets,
and the Gospell agree all in one. And therefore Peter was
vnwise to make three Tabernacles for one.

Holy Prophets: holy by

Place,Caluin. in loc. separated fro~ the pro|phane
vulgar, and consecra|ted
to this high calling.
Grace, for being hallowed and
elected to this office, they


spake by the1. Pet. 2. 21. holy Ghost: endued also with gifts of sancti|fication;
in so much that Prophets, and holie men, hereto|fore
were voces conuertibiles, as it isCyrillus  Maldonat. in Ioan. 9. obserued out of the
old Testament, Gen. 20. 7. and new, Luk. 7. 16. Ioh. 9. 17.
This may teach the Prophets in our time to be walking
Sermons, Epistles and holy Gospels in all their cariage toward
the people. Praedicat viua voce, qui praedicat vita  voce. He
doth preach most, that doth liue best.
As it is said of Iohn the Baptist,Maldonat. in cap. 11. Mat. Cum miraculum nullum
fecerit, perpetuum fuit ipse miraculum: So a good man doth
alway preach, though hee neuer comes in pulpit. Whereas
such a Minister as is no where a Minister but in the Church,
is like2. Sam. 17. 23. Achitophel, who set his house in order, and then
hanged himselfe. The word preached is as Aarons rod; if in
the Preachers hand, it is comely: but if he cast it from him,
it will happily proue a Serpent. That which God hath ioy|ned
together, let no man put asunder, Holinesse and Prophe|cie.
O Lord indue thy Ministers with righteousnesse, that thy
chosen people may be ioyfull.
As God is mercifull in making, so faithfull in keeping his
promise: for he visited and redeemed his people.
Visited] In the better part: for visitation in mercie, not in
iudgement, as Psal. 8. 4. Gen. 21. 1.
If Christ did visit vs in our person, let vs visit him inMat. 25. 36. his
members. All of vs are hisLuke 16. 1. stewards, and the good things
he hath lent vs are not our owne, but his; either the goods
of the Church, and so wee may not make them Impropria|tions:
or else the goods of the Common-wealth, and wee
may not inclose them. He is the best subiect that is highest
in the Subsidie booke; so he the best Christian that is most

forward in subsiaijs, in helping his brethren with such gifts
as God hath bestowed vpon him.
The whole world (saith S.1. Epist. 5. 19. Iohn) lieth in wickednes, sicke,
very sicke vntoRom. 6. 23. death. All wickednesse is weaknes, euery
sinne is a sore; Couetousnes an insatiable dropsie; Pride a
swelling tympanie; Lasinesse the Gentlemans gout: Christ
therefore theGorran. in lo|cum ex Augu|stino. great Physition of the world, came to visit
vs in this extremitie: we did not send for him, hee came of
his owne loue to seeke and saue that which was lost. It is a
great kindnes for one neighbour to visit another in sicknes,
but a greater kindnes to watch and pray with the comfort|lesse:
yet the greatest kindnesse of all is to helpe and heale
him. Euen so, and much more then so Christ loued y^e world;
he came not only to see it, but to saue1. Timot. 1. 15 it; not only to liue
among men, but also to die for men: as to visite, so to re|deeme.
The Lord did endure the crosse, that the seruant
might enioy the crowne: the Captaine descended into hell,
that the souldier might ascend into heauen: the Physition
did die, that the patient might liue.Liber de Sen|tenijs. Bernard pithily: Tri|plici
morbo laborabat genus humanum, principio, medio, fine:
idest, natiuitate, vita,  morte. Venit Christus,  contra tri|plicem
hunc morbum, attulit triplex remediu~. Natus est, vixit,
mortuus est: eius natiuitas purgauit nostram, mors eius de|struxit
nostram, vita eius instruxit nostram. As S.Rom. 4. 25. Paul in
two words; He died for our sinnes, and rose againe for our iu|stification:
that is, (saithSum. 3. part. quaest. 53. art. 1. Aquinas) he died to remoue from
vs all that which was euill, and rose againe to giue vs all
that which was good. All is infolded in the word Redeeme,
the which (as Interpreters obserue generally) doth implie
that wee are deliuered from the hands of all our enemies,
and they be principally foure:

The

World.
Flesh.
Diuell.
1. cor. 15. 26. Death.


Christ ouercame the world on earth, the flesh on the
Crosse, the diuell in hell, death in the graue: now being
the Churches head, and husband, hee tooke her dowrie,

which was sinne, (for she had nothing else of her owne) and
indowed her with all his goods.Cant. 6. 2. I am my welbeloueds, and
my welbeloued is mine. So that Christ was borne for vs, and
liued for vs, and died for vs,  rose againe for vs: and there|fore
though the diuell cry, ego decipiam; the world cry, ego
deficiam; the flesh cry; ego inficiam; death cry; ego interficiam:
it makes no matter in that Christ crieth,Mat. 11. 28. ego reficiam, I will
ease you, I will comfort you, I will visit and redeeme you.
See Gospell on whit sonday.
His people] The Iewes, as sent to themMat. 15. 24. Act. 13. 46. first, and princi|pally,
whom he did visit in his own person, whereas all other
diocesses of the world were visited by Commissaries: I say
first, for afterward all people were hi ople: Visitait omnes
gentes, quomam omnes egentes. In  we are all one, there is
neither Iew nor Grecian, neither bond nor free, neither male nor
female: Gal. 3. 28.
In Psal. 148. Augustine sweetly: The belieuing Gentiles are more Is|rael,
then Israel it selfe: for the Iewes are the children of Abra|ham
according to the flesh only, but we are the children of
Abraham after the spirit: they be theIohn 8. 39. sonnes of Abraham,
who doe the works of Abraham. But what was Abrahams
chiefe worke? TheGen. 15. 6. Scripture tels vs, Abraham belieued, and
it was imputed vnto him for righteousnes. So that asGal. 3. 29. Paul con|cludes,
all belieuers are true Israelites, Abrahams seed and
heires by promise. See Nunc dimittis.
But shall we now sinne because grace doth abound? God
forbid. He hath deliuered vs from the hands of all our enemies,
that we might serue him without feare, in holinesse and righte|ousnes
all the daies of our life.Gorran. in loc. Sine timore inimici, non sine ti|more
domini. Behauing our selues in this presentTit. 2. 12. world re|ligiously
towards God, righteously towards our neighbor,
soberly towards our selues.

Examine these
fiue circumstan|ces
exactly:

1. Who did redeeme; The Lord God of
Israel,August. ser. 27. de temp. factor errae, factus in terra, yea
fractus in terra.
2. Whom: Such as sate in darknes and in the
shadow of death. HisRom. 5. 10. enemies,Ephes. 2. 12. aliants
from his common wealth, and open trai|tors

to his kingdome.
3. From what: From the hands of all our
enemies.
4: With what: With his owne1. Pet. 1. 19. pretious
bloud, the least drop whereof had bin
meriti infiniti; yet his death only, was
meriti definiti.
5. For what:1. Pet. 2. 24. That being deliuered from
sinne, we should liue in righteousnes.


Consider these points, and thinke not this Hymne too
much vsed in our Liturgie: but sing with Zacharias daily,
Benedictus Dominus: and say withPsal. 116. 11. Dauid; Quid retribuam
domino, pro omnibus quae tribuit mihi?August. serm. 151. de temp. Prim nihil eram, 
fecit me: pereram, quaesiuit me: quaerens inuenit me; captiuum
redemit me, emptum liberauit me, de seruo fratrem fecit me. We
owe our soules, our selues to God for creating vs, more then
our selues for redeeming vs.
Concernig Iohn Baptist, and his office, which is the se|cond
generall part of this excellent song; see the Gospell Do|minic.
3.  4. Aduent.


Iubilate Deo. Psal. 100.
THe Church doth adioine this Psalme to the Benedictus,
as a parallel: and that not vnfitly, for as the one, so the
other, is a thanksgiuing vnto God, inforced with the same
reasons and arguments: in so much as Zacharias is nothing
else but an expounder of Dauid, or Moses. AsQuaest. 73. su|per Exod. Augustine
wittily; The new Testament heth hidden in the old, and the old
is vnclasped in the new.
Paulinus in 1. Leuit. vti Magdeburg. Cent. 5. col. 90. Lex antiqua nouam firmat, veterem noua complet:
in veteri spes est, in nouitate fides.
O be ioyfull in the Lord, (saith the Prophet) blessed be the
Lord God of Israel (saith our Euangelist) Why? because the
Lord hath made vs, and not we our selues; we are his people and
the sheepe of his pasture. That is, he hath visited and redee|med
his people. ForIn locum. Augustine, Hierome, Caluin, Turre|crematensis,
other old, and new writers interpret this of our
Regeneration, rather then of our Creation. According to

that ofEphes. 2. 10. S. Paul: We are his workmanship, created in Christ Ie|sus
vnto good works, c.
The Lord is gratious, his mercy is euerlasting.] That is, he
promised euermore by the mouth of all his holy Prophets
since the world began, that wee should be saued from our
enemies, and from the hands of all that hate vs.
His truth indureth from generation to generation.] That is,
hee did in due time performe the mercie promised to our
forefathers, he remembred his holy couenant, and kept that
oth which hee swore to our father Abraham, and his seed
for euer.
To what end? That we might serue God with gladnesse, as
Dauid in his text: that is, serue him all the daies of our life
without feare, as Zacharias in his glosse.
GodAugust. lib. 2. de serm. Dom. in mont. tom. 4. fol. 812. insinuated himselfe to the Iewes, as a Lord: Exod. 20. 2. but to the Christians, as a father, Mat. 6. 9. And there|fore
seeing wee are translated from theGalat. 4.  5. cap. bondage of ser|uants,
vnto the liberty of sonnes;Hieron. in loc. hauing in stead of the
Law, which was exceedingActs 15. 10. grieuous, a burthen which is
Matth. 11. 30. light, and a yoke which is easie, let vs serue the Lord with
gladnes, and come before his presence with a song: Non in amari|tudine
murmurationis, sed in iocunditate dilectionis, as Augu|stine
vpon the place.
The whole Psalme doth afford many profitable doctrines
and vses, in that the Prophet doth double and treble his ex|hortation:
O be ioyfull in the Lord: serue him with gladnesse:
with a song: Go into his gates with thanksgiuing: into his courts
with praise: be thankfull: speake good of his name; he doth insi|nuate
our sloth and dulnes in that behalfe: and therefore it
behoueth all men, especially teachers of men, in season and
out of season to presse this duty.
It teacheth all people to praise God with a good heart
cheerfully: vers. 1.
Not in priuate onely, but in the publike assembly also for
publike benefits receiued of the Lord: vers. 3.
Our bodily generation, and ghostly regeneration, are
not of our selues, but only from God: vers. 2. See Epist. Dom.
post. Pasc.

Who is alway the same in his truth and goodnesse to|wards
vs abeit we be variable in our loues and promises one
to another; vers. 4. See Nunc Dimittis.


The Creed.
THis Apostolicall Creed is pronounced after the Lessons,
and the Nicene Confession after the Gospell and Epistle:
because faith (as PaulRom. 10. 17. teacheth) is by hearing, and hearing by
the word of God. We must first heare, then confesse for which
cause the Church ofScot. Liturgie praters after Serm. Scotlana also doth vsually repeate the
Creed after the Sermon.


I beleeue in God, c.
Albeit the Creed be not protocanonicall Scripture, yet
(asSerm. 38. Ambrose speakes) it is the key of the Scriptures: and
(asSerm. 115. de temp. Breuiter complexaregula fidei vt mentem instruat, nec oneret memo|riam. Idem. ser. 119. de temp. Augustine) a plaine, short, absolute summe of all holie
faith.Thom. 22ae. quaest. 1. art. 9. Other Confessions, as the Nicene, and Athanasian
are receiued of the Church not as new, but rather as exposi|tions
of this oldBllarm. de Iustificat. lib. 1. cap. 9.. For as the foure Gospels are indeed but
one Gospell; so the three Creeds are in substance but one
Creed. And therefore I thought good in my passage tho|row
the whole Seruice booke to touch vpon it a little, gi|uing
you rather a briefe resolution, then a full absolution
thereof.

Obserue then
in it the

Title: The Creed of the Apostles.
Text: I belieue in God, c.



In the title
note the

Worke: Creed.
Authors: Apostles.


It is called in English, Creed, of the first word Credo: as
the Pater Noster is of the two formost words, Our Father:
in other languages, Symbolum; the which hath three signi|fications:

1. A shot.
2. A badge.
3. A ring.

ARuffin. exposit. Symbol.  Au|gust ser. 115.  181. de temp. shot: because euery particular Apostle conferred his
particular article to this spiritual banquet, at least the whole
doth arise out of theirEuseb. Emis|sen. hom. 1. de Symbol. common writings.

2. ARuffin. vbi sup.  Erasmus explan. Symb. badge. For as a souldier is knowne in the field by
his colours and coate to what Captaine he doth belong: so
the Christian is distinguished by this Creed from all vnbe|leeuers,
and misbeleeuers. In token hereof, by good order
of the Church, wee stand vp at the Creed, openly to manifest
our faith and allegiance to Christ Iesus our Generall.
3. APlin. nat. hist. lib. 33. cap. 1. ring. TheAngelus del Pas praeamb. ad Symb. cap. 4. mettall whereof is digged out of the
rich mines of the Bible, refined with the fire of Gods holie
spirit, and accurately framed by the blessed Apostles.
It is the very wedding ring wherewith the Minister in our
Baptisme married vs vnto Christ, when as in the publike
congregation Christ for his part solemnely protested by
the mouth of his Minister that he would be our God: and
we likewise vowed for our part, by Godfathers and God|mothers,
that wee would bee his people. The Creede then
ought to be respected as the signet on our right hand, and
as the mariage Ring on our Loues finger.
Now for the authors, it is said to be the Apostles (as some
thinke) made byHieron. epist. ad Pamma|chium, tom. 2. fol. 173.  Magdburg. cent. 1. lib. 2. col. 66. themselues after they had receiued the
holy Ghost, and that before they departed out of Ierusalem
to preach the Gospell vnto all nations:Baronius an|nal. tom. 1. fol. 317. Anno Christi 44.
Imperatoris Claudij, 2. Iulij 15.
Anglican. Confess. art. 8.  Caluin. In|stit. lib. 2. c. 16. . 18. Other, that it is the Apostles, as being consonant to their
doctrine; theirs for the matter, but not for the manner.
All agree that it is the Gospels abrigement, which Christ
taught his Apostles, the Apostles the Church, and the
Church hath deliuered vnto vs in all ages: and therefore
though it be not the scripture of God, yet it is thePerkins ex|posit. Spmbol. word and
truth of God: of greater authoritie then other Ecclesiasticall
traditions, whether they be Confessions of particular Chur|ches,
or writings of priuate men.


The Text.

The text hath two parts:

Articles.
Assent: Amen.



Lexicon Theo|log. Altenstaig. in verb. articulus. Articulus ab ar|ctando

Passiue, quia quiddam est arctatum
in se.
Actiue, quia alios arctat ad credendu~.



In the profession, or whole bodie of articles, two points
are remarkable:

The

Act
Obiect
of faith.



Act: I beleeue. Where note the

Personalitie: I.
Formalitie of faith: be|leeue
in.


Howsoeuer one must pray for another, saying Our Fa|ther;
yet euery one must beleeue for himselfe: I beleeue:
Habacuck 2. 4. See Gospell on S. Thomas day.

Formalitie: Beleeue in. For (asSer. 181. de temp. Augustine andLib. 3. sent. dist. 23. Lombard
teach) there is
great difference
betweene

Credere deum, to beleeue there is a God.
Credere deo, to beleeue God.
Credere in deum, to beleeue in God.


Multi  mali, many bad men, yea theIames 2. 19. Diuell himselfe
doth beleeue that there is a God: but a Christian ought to
beleeue inIohn 6. 29. God: that is,August. tract. 29. in Iohan. tom. 9 fol. 167. Credendo amare, credendo in eum
ire, credendo ei adhaerere. Confessing God to be his God, in
whom he puts all his trust and confidence, manifesting his
faith inIames 2. 18. deedes, as well as in words: according to that of
Lib. 4. cap. 14. Irenaeus: To beleeue, is to doe as God will.

The matter or ob|iect of the Creede concerneth

God

Essential|ly in

Name: God.
Attri|butes,

Almighty: Maker of heaue~ and earth.


Personally

Father.
Sonne.
Holy Ghost.

Church.



Concerning the name,De doctrin. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 6. Augustine saith it is impossible
that foure letters and two syllables, Deus, should containe
him, whom the heauen of heauens could not containe:
Dionysius de diuinis nom. cap. 1. Dei nomen mirabile nomen, super omne nomen, sed sine no|me.
ForGranat. dux pes. cap. 1. if all the land were paper, and all the water inke
euery plant a pen, and euery other creature a readie writer:

yet they could not set downe the least peece of his great
greatnes. De Deo cum dicitur, non potest dici. No name can
expresse his nature fully: yet he doth vouchsafe to be prai|sed
in our words, and by our mouthes, or rather indeed by
his owne words, and owne spirit; for he must be called and
called vpon, as he hath reuealed himself in Scripture, where
hee is knowne by the nameExod. 15. 3. Iehoua, or God: and therefore
this name is not properly communicable to any creature,
though1. Cor. 8. 5. analogically giuen to many.
In God.] Not gods, as the Nicene Creed, in one God. For
God (asLib. 5. Consi|derat. ad Euge|nium. Bernard said) is vnissimus, the most one:Tertull. lib. 1. aduersus Mar|cion. cap 3. si non est
vnus, non est, either one or none.

Attributes:

Almightie.
Maker of

Heauen.
Earth.



God is able to doe whatsoeuer he will, andThom. 1. part. quaest. 15. art. 5. more then
hee will too: more by his absolute power, then hee will by
his actuall: Matth. 3. 9. 6. 53.
He can neither lie, nor die: Dicitur enimAugust. de ci|uit. Dei, lib. 5. cap. 10. omnipotens fa|ciendo
quod vult non patiendo quod non vult.
Creator.] His almightines doth proue that he is God, and
the creation of the world that he is almighty, Ierem. 10. 11.
Let any make a world (saith Augustine) and hee shall bee
God. Angels, men, and diuels can make and vnmake some
things: but they cannot make them, otherwise then of
some kinde of matter which was before: neither can they
vnmake them, but by changing them into some other thing
which remaineth after. Only God made all things of no|thing,
and can at his good pleasure bring them againe to
nothing.
Du Bartas 1. day, 1. weeke, fol. 8. Nothing but nothing, had this Lord almightie,
whereof, wherewith, whereby, to build this Citie.
Of heauen and earth.] And all that therein is: Exod. 20. 11.

2. Cor. 12. 2. Heauen is three|fold,
where

Soules are, the glorious, or heauen of
heauens: 1. Kings 18. 27.
Fowles are, the airy heaue~: Gen. 1. 30.
Stars are, the firmament: Gen. 1. 17.


Earth containeth land and sea: Psal. 24. 1. Nam omni|potens

August. Soli|loqui. cap. 9. van eadem manus dei creat in coelo angelos,  in
terra vermiculos: non superior in illis, non inferior in ist is.
Thus (asRamus de re|ligion. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 9. one said) almightie God is knowne, ex postico
tergo, licet non ex antica facie: by his effects, ad extra, though
not in his essence, ad intra. Seculum est speculum: The crea|tion
of the world is a glasse, wherein (saithRom. 1. 20. S. Paul) wee
may behold Gods eternall power and Maiestie: which the
diuineDu Batas vbi sp. fol. 6. 7. 58. Poet paraphrastically:
The world is a schoole, where in a generall storie,
God alwaies reades dumbe lectures of his glorie.
In Tim o. Plato called it Gods epistle: the renowned HermiteTripar. hist. lib. 8. cap. 1. An|tonius,
a booke, wherein euery simple man who cannot reade,
may notwithstanding spell that there is a God. It is the
Shepheards Kalender, and the Ploughmans Alphabet.
This appertaineth essentially, and generally to the whole
Trinitie: for the Father is not onely Creator, and Almigh|tie,
but the Sonne, and holy Ghost.
The creation in the masse of the matter, is attributed to
God the Father: in the disposition of the forme, to God the
Sonne: in the preseruation of both, to God the holy Ghost.

It is said of God personally:

Father.
Sonne.
Holy Ghost.


The Father is the first, not in any prioritie of nature, or
honour, or time, butPerkins vpon the Creed. order: or (as thePater est priu|cipium, non de principio: filius principium  princip. Thom. 1 parti sum. quaest. 33. art. 4. schoole) Prioritate
originis: according to that of Athanasius in his Creed, The
Father is of none, the Sonne is of the Father alone, the holy Ghost
of both. I will send (saithIoh. 15. 26. Christ) from the Father, euen the
Spirit of truth. Ego mittam  Patre spiritum,Augustin. de Trinit. lib. 4. cap. 20. Ostendens qud
pater est totius diuinitatis, vel si mlius dicitur deitatis princi|pium.
Adore simply, rather then explore subtilly, this inef|fable
mysterie. Scrutari temeritas est, credere pietas est, nosse
vitaest, Bernard, de considerat, ad Eugenium, lib. 5.

HeDurandus ra|tionali diuino|rm, lib. 4. cap. 48. . 2. is father of

Christ by nature, singulariter.
Good men, by adoption, specialiter.
All men, and allOmnipater, vt Prudentius. Hym de Eula|lia Virgine. things, by creation,
generaliter; as y^ worke is appropria|ted
vnto him in regard of his power.



And in Iesus Christ his onely Sonne our Lord.
That which concerneth the second person is more large|ly
set downe then all the rest, teaching vs hereby, that as we
should respect other doctrine, so this in more speciall sort,
as being the center of all the Creed and Scriptures circum|ference:
1. Cor. 2. 2.

This person is described by his

Titles:

1. Iesus.
2. Christ.
3. His onely Sonne.
4. Our Lord.

Estate of

Humiliation,

Incarnation,
Passion.

Exaltation.



1. Iesus is hisTertull. lib. aduers. Prax.  Thom. 2. part. quaest. 37. art. 2. proper name, giuen him by theLuke 1. 31. Angell.
Other, if any haue theConsule Pet. Galatin. de Ar|canis lib. 3. cap. 20. Iansen. concord. cap. 7. Pagnin. interp. nom. Hebraic. very name, were typicall Sauiours
only. Iesus Naue, the figure of Christ as a King: Iesus Sy|dracke,
the figure of Christ as a Prophet: Iesus Iosedecke, the
figure of Christ as a Priest.Contra Fau|stum. lib. 12. cap. 36. Augustine,Lib. 1. de de|monstration. Euang. cap. 29. Eusebius, and gene|rally
all expositors vpon the 3. of Zucharie.
This sweet name containes in it a thousand treasuries of
good things, in delight whereof S. Paul vseth it fiue hun|dred
times in his Epistles, as Genebrardus obserueth.
2. Christ] His appellatiueCaietan.  Aretius in 1. Matth. Calu. Catecbis. title of office and dignitie.
Concerning these two titles, Iesus and Christ, see the Gos|pell
Dom. 1. post Natiuit.

3. His only Sonne; which
implieth that he is

God: Iohn 1. 1.
A distinct person from the Fa|ther:
Mat. 28. 19.


God, because he is a son, not as other by fauor, butRuffin. in Symbol. by na|ture:
whatsoeuer the Son receiueth of y^e Father, he receiueth
it by nature, not by grace,  he receiueth not as other, apart,
but all that the Father hath, sauing the personall proprietie.
Only sonne] Called theMat. 1. 25. first begotten, in respect of his
mother and humane nature:Iohn 3. 16. onely begotten in respect of
his Father, and diuine nature. For the holy Spirit is not be|gotten,
but proceeds (as the Scripture doth distinguish)
Mlancthon exposit Symbol. Nicen. om. 1. fol. 403. Nasci est  potentia intelligente, quia filius cogitatione nasci|tur,

 est mago patris: at procedere est  voluntate, quia spi|ritus
sanctus est amor, c. I belieue: Lord helpe mine vn|beliefe.
The coniunction, And, prooueth that the Sonne is equall
with the Father, as concerning his Godhead: and yet a di|stinct
person.August. de  lib. 11. cap. 10.  Lombard. 1. sent. dist. 25. Alius personaliter, nowaliud essentialiter. I be|leeue
in God the Father, And in Iesus Christ.

Our Lord, as our

Creator.
Redeemer.
Gouernor, as head of the Church: Eph. 4. 5.


In vita cius. Suetonius obserueth that Augustus refused the name of
Lord.Lib. 6. cap. 22. vli Platina iu vita Christi. Orosius notes that it was at that time when Christ
was borne, that all Lordship might be giuen vnto him. See
Epistle Dom. 17. post Trinit.
Christs incarnation is IsraelsLuke 2. 25. consolation:Incarnat. for all sound
comfort stands in happinesse, all happinesse in fellowship
with God, all fellowship with God is by Christ: who for this
cause being very God, became very man, that he might re|concile
God to man, and man to God: he becameTertull. lib. 2. contra Marc. little,
that we might be great; the Sonne of man, that we might
be theCyp. ser. de E|lmosyna. sonnes of God.

His incarnation hath two parts:

Conception.
Birth.


Conceiued by the holy Ghost.] Works of power are attribu|ted
to the Father, of wisdome to the Sonne, of loue to the
holy Ghost. WhereforeMaldonat. in 1. Mat.  Au|gust. Enchirid. cap. 37. because this was a worke of high|est
loue in God toward mankind, it is ascribed especially to
the holy Spirit: Luke 1. 35. The holy Ghost shall come vpon
thee, and the power of the most high shall ouershadow theeCaluin. in loc.. Sig|nifying
hereby that this mystery cannot be seene cleerely,
therefore not to be examined curiously. S.Fides matris, non libido con|ceperat. Enchi|rid. cap. 34. Augustine calles
it a sweet coniunction, where speech is husband, and eare wife.
Meaning, that as soone as the blessed Virgin assented to the
Angels message, she conceiued.
Birth] I make Christs incarnation a part of his humiliation,
because there can be no greater abasement, then that hee,
who thundred in the cloudes, should cry in the cradle;
Bernard. ser. 1. in . Dom. swadled in a few ragges, whom the heauen of heauens

could not containe; that the eternall Word should become
anAugust. ser. 5. de temp. Lam|bit vbera re|gens siaera a|cet, vt verbum est. Idem de sym. lib. 4. cap. 4. infant; that he who was the father of Mary, should be
now the sonne of Mary.
The Scripture tels vs, how man comes foureIdem. ser. 20. de temp. waies into
the world.
1. By the helpe of man and woman, as all are vsuallie
borne.
2. Without any man or woman, and so the first man was
created.
3. Of a man without a woman, and so was Eua made.
4. Of a woman without a man, and so was Christ borne.

Of the Virgin Mary.] Where the
mother of Christ is described by her

Name, Mary.
SurnameBaronius an|nal. tom. 1. fol. 45.  Epipba|nius Haeres. 78., Virgin.


The new Iesuits, and old Friers, haue many wonderfull
extrauagant conceits of thisLexicon Theo|log. verb. Maria. name: let it suffice that it is
added in the Gospell, and Creed, to shew that Christ came
of the linage of Dauid: and that therefore he was the true
Messias, as God had promised and prophecied by the
mouthes of all his holy seruants.

Virgin] APerkins re|for. Catholic. Tit. traditio,  Reza con|sess. cap. 3. art. 23. perpetuall Virgin

Before
In
After
Christs birth.



Before his birth against

1. Iewes.
2. Gentiles.
3. Cerinthians.


Vnto the first we say withCyril. Hiero|sol. Cat. 12. Au|gustin. lib. 3. de Symbol. cap. 4. Cyril: Pariet Aaronis virga
sine semine,  non pariet virgo sine semine? aut vtrum negate
aut vtrum concedite.

Against the se|cond,
we haue

Ficta:Ruffin.  Cy|ril. vbi supra. Qui enim  Iouis cerebro Miner|uam,
 ex eiusdem femore Bacchum,
fals prognatum esse fabulamini: quo|modo
ex vtero virginali Christum nasci
dicitis impossibile?
Facta: Quoniam animalia multaLactant. instit. lib. 4. cap. 12. Augustin. de mirabil script. lib. 3. cap. 2. Ambros, Hex|am. l. 5. cap. 20. sine
commistione generantur. And Plutarch
in the life of Numa, spake like anLuke. 1. 35. Angell: Incredibilo non
est, vt spiritus Dei cum muliere coeat, ei sobolis quaedam prin|cipia
ingoneret.



3. TheIrenaeus lib. 1. cap. 25. Cerinthians,Clmens Rom. instit. lib. 6. cap. 6. Ebionits, andIremaeus lib. 1. cap. 24. Carpocratian Here|tikes
held that Christ was the naturall sonne of Ioseph: 
verus.  merus hm. Contrary to text, Mat. 1. 25. Luk. 3. 23.
See the Gospell Dom. 1. post Epiphan.

In his birth against

Augustin. de Haeresib. cap. 82.  contra Iu|lian.
lib. 1. cap. 2. Iouinian.
Swarz tom. 2. in 3. Thom. disput. 5. sect. 2. Durandus.


Vnto these that of Esay 7 is opposed: Ecce ,
 pariet filium. The which words are to be construed in cen|su
composito, non diuiso: scilicet integra permane  concep|tura,
 paritura: nam quale signum vel prodigium esset vt quae
fuit virgo conciperet,  corrupta pareretAugust. epist. 3.? Hic si ratio quae|ritur,
non erit mirabile. Si poscitur exemplum, non erit singu|lare.
Demus Deum aliquid posse, quod nos fateamur inuestigare
non posse.Idem pist. 146  Enchirid. cap. 34. Si vl per nasccutem corrumperetur eius integritas, non iam ille de virgine nasce|retur, vti tota confitetur Ec|clisia. Fides adsit,  nulla quaestio remanebit. See the Gos|pell
of the purification.

After his birth against the

OldHieron. lib. adues. Heluid.  Augustin. ae|res. 84. Heluidians.
New Antidicomarianits, hol|ding
it a point of zeale to disgrace this holy Virgin: where|as
it is our dutieMaster Per|kins vpon this article. rather highly to reuerence her, as being
the Mother of our Lord; a Prophetesse on earth, a Saint in
heauen, (as theAugust. ser. 15 de temp. Fulgent. ser. de lauib. Mariae. Fathers vsually) the window of heauen,
through which it pleased the light of the world, to illumi|nate
such as fit in darknesse, and in the shadow of death. Of
such estimation in the Church, that whereas theNicen. first ge|nerall
Councell was assembled against Arrius, to maintaine
the honour of the Sonne, and so by consequence of the Fa|ther:
TheConstantino|politan. second against Macedonius, to maintaine the
honour of the holy Ghost: TheEphesi. third was assembled a|gainst
Nestorius, toSwarz praes. disp, tm . in 3. Thom. Magdeburg. cet. 5. col. 889. maintaine the dignitie of the blessed
Virgin. And therefore let not vs giue her too little, though
the Papists haue giuen her too much. See Gospell on the
Annunciation.




Passion.

Christs passion is set downe

First summarily,

Suffered vnder Pontius Pilat.

Then particularly,

Crucified,
Dead,
Buried.




All which our Sauiour did not endure for himselfe, but
for vs. HeEsay 53 5. was wounded for our transgressions, and broken for
our iniquities. InAmbros. de fide ad Gration. lib. 2. cap. 3. me,  pro me doluit, qui pro se nihil habuit
quod doleret. O Domine Iesu doles non tua, sed vlaera mea.
He1. Pet. 2. 21. suffered for vs, leauing vs an example,August. ser. 8. de temp. that his pas|sion
might deliuer vs from sinne, and his actions direct vs to
vertue; teaching patience, humilitie, obedience, charitie.
Greater patience cannot bee found, then for the author of
life, to suffer an ignominious death iniustly; no greater hu|militie,
then for the Lord of all Lords to submit himselfe to
be crucified among theeues; nor greater obedience, then
to be willing rather to die, then not to fulfill the comman|dement
of his Father; nor greater charitie, then to lose his
life, to saue his enemies. For loue is more shewed in deedes,
then in words, and more in suffering then in doing. See
Gospell on Sunday before Easter, and Epistle 2. Sunday af|ter
Easter.
Augustin. de doctrin. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 14. Nos immortalitate mal vsi sumus, vt moreremur:
Christus mortalitate bene vsus, vt viueremus.


Exaltation.
Note the Creeds order answerable to the Scripture. For
ChristLuke 24. 26. first suffered, and then entred into glorie. Teaching
vs hereby, that we must first beare with him the Crosse, be|fore
wee can weare with him the Crowne. Christianus, as
Loc. Com. tit. calamit. Luther said, is Crucianus. As a lilie among the thornes: so
is my loue among the daughters: Cant. 2. 2.

Christs exaltation
hath foure parts: his

1. Triumph in hell.
2. Resurrection.
3. Ascension.
4. Session.


I make Christs descending into hell a part of his aduance|ment,
rather then abasement, because this generall Creed,
of the whole Church, and the particular confession of our
Art. 3. Church, make it a distinct article following Christs Suffe|ring,
Death, Buriall: and therfore cannot aptly be construed
of his agonie in the garden before his death, nor of his tor|tures
on the Crosse at his death, nor yet of his buriall after

his death: Ergo, Credendum est Christum ad inferos in ge|nere:
credibile ad inferos damnatorum in specie, triumphandi
gratia secundm animans realiter,  localiter descendisse. That
as hee did ouercome the world on earth, and death in the
graue: so likewise he did triumph ouer Satan in the courts
of hell his owne kingdome. For my owne part, I rest my self
in the iudgement of the Church wherein I liue, and hold it
enough to beleeue that Christ did so much, and suffered so
much, as was sufficient for all: efficient for me: praying with
the Greeke Fathers in their Liturgie; By thine vnknowne
sorrowes and sufferings felt by thee: but not distinctly manifest
to vs: haue mercie on vs, and saue vs. OBonauent. diaeta salutis, cap. 26. gracelesse peeuish|nes,
we scantly follow Christ to heauen: albeit wee beleeue
that he went for vs into hell.
Christs resurrection is theChurch Hom. for Easter day. locke and key of all our Christian
religion and faith: on which all other articles hang. See the
Gospell on S. Thomas and Easter day.

In Christs ascension
3. points obseruable:

Place: Mount Oliuet.
Time: When hee had taught his Di|sciples,
and while they beheld him.
Manner: A cloud tooke him vp out
of their sight: Act 1. 9. See the
Epistle for Ascension day.



Christs Session is
set foorth by the

Place: Heauen: that is,Ephes. 4. 10. Acts 7. 56. Heauen of
heauen.
Effect: Comming to Iudgement.



ToAugust. in En|chirid. cap. 55. iudge the
quick  the dead

Spiritually: The good which liue with
the spirituall life of grace. The bad,
which are spiritually dead in sinne.
Corporally: Because at that day most shall
be dead, and many shall be found aliue, who in the twinck|ling
of an eye shall suddenly be changed, as S.1. Cor. 15. 51. 52. Paul tels vs.
Origen thinketh that the Priest had bels in the lower part
of his roabe, to put vs in minde of the end of the world. Our
good God hath prepared such1. Cor. 2. 9. things for vs, as eye hath
not seene, neither eare hath heard, neither came into
mans heart.August. de Symb. ad Cate. lib. 3. cap. 11. Si in cor hominis non ascendit, cor hominis illuc
ascendat. Seeing the Iudge shall come from heauen, let vs

before send thither our hearts to meete him: and in the
meane while thence to looke for him, Philip. 3. 20. He hath
said it, who is truth it selfe: Surely I come quickly, Amen,
euen so come Lord Iesus.


I beleeue in the holy Ghost.] TheRamus de Religion. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 19. Godhead of the Father
is especially manifested in the Law, the Godhead of the
Sonne especially manifested in the Gospell, the Godhead
of the holy Ghost especially manifested in the Creed: inti|mating
so much in foure words as the whole Bible con|taines
of this argument; namely, first, that the holy Ghost
isActs 5. 3. 4. God, otherwise we might not beleeue in him. Second|ly,
that hee is aMatth. 28. 19. distinct person from the Father, and the
Sonne: I beleeue in the Father: in the Sonne: in the holy Ghost.
And thirdly, that he proceedeth from theIohn 15. 26. Father, and the
Sonne, infolded in the Title, holy Ghost. For albeit the Fa|ther
is holie, the Sonne holie, the Father a Spirit, and the
Sonne a Spirit, in respect of their nature: yet only the third
person is the holy Spirit, in regard of his office. The holy, be|cause
beside the holinesse of nature, his speciall office is to
make the Church holy. The Father sanctifieth by the Sonne
and by the holy Ghost: the Sonne sanctifieth from the Fa|ther
by the holie Ghost: the holie Ghost sanctifieth from
the Father and the Sonne by himselfe immediatly. As wee
beleeue that the Father is our Creator, the Sonne our Re|deemer;
so likewise that the holie Ghost is our Sanctifier.
Againe, the third person is termed the Spirit, not onely in
regard of his nature, which is spirituall, but because hee is
spired, or breathed from the Father and the Sonne: in that he
proceeds from them both. How, I cannot say, you need not
search, only beleeue. For as theEsay 53. 6. Prophet said of the Sonne,
Who shall declare his generation? so the most iudicious Do|ctor
Cont. Maxim. lib. 3. cap. 14. om. 6. ol. 507. Augustine, of the holie Ghost, Who shall declare his pro|cession?
Inter illam generationem,  hanc processionem distin|guere
nescio, non valeo, non sufficio. Quia  illa,  ista est inef|fabilis.
And therefore as theConfess. lib. 12. cap. 5. same Father in the like case:
Dum sibi haec dicit humana cogitatio, conetur eam vel nosse ig|norando,
vel ignorare noscendo. See the Gospell Dom. post
Ascension.

The holy Catholike Church.] The second part of the Creed
concernes the Church: for asEnchirid. c. 56 Augustine obserueth, the
right order of a Confession did require, that after the Trini|tie,
should be ioyned the Church, as the house for the owner,
and citie for the founder.Idem lib. 4. desymbol. ad Catech. cap. 10. Againe, the Creede doth end
with the Church, as it did begin with God; to put vs in
minde that except we haue the Church for our mother, we
neuer shall haue God for our father.
The Church is described heere by properties, and prero|gatiues.

Her properties are three:

1. Holy.
2. Catholike.
3. Knit in a communion.



Her prerogatiues
are likewise three:

1. In the soule, remission of sinnes.
2. In the body, resurrection of the flesh.
3. Both in bodie and soule, life euerla|lasting.


The word, Credo, must be repeated in this article: but the
prepositionRuffi.  Thomas 22. quaest. 1. . 9. (In) omitted, by which the Creator is distin|guished
from the creatures, and things pertaining to God
from things pertaining to men. It is said, I beleue in God, in
the Sonne, in the holie Ghost: but in all the rest, where the
speech is not of the Godhead, (In) is not added. I beleeue
there is an holy Church, as a companie gathered to God, not
in the Church as God. So the best copies and theCatchis. Con|cil. Trident. Bellarm. ledis|ma. worst
too, reade.

Church is v|sed in a sense

Ciuill, for an ordinarie assemblie: Acts 19. 32. 39.
Ecclesiasti|call, for

Holy places, 1. Cor. 14. 34. 
Holy per|sons,

Seuera; for eue|ry
faithful perso~
is the Church of
God, 1. Cor. 3. 16
loyntly, gathered
together.





In

One house: Rom. 16. 5.
One eitie or countrie: the Church of Sardi, Ephesus:
Apocal. 3.
The whole world; as in this article. 



For all men and Angels elected to life euerlasting, and
made one in Christ.
It hath the name both in Greeke and Latine ofEcclesia Au|gustin. exposit. epist. ad Rom. om. 4. fol. 833. calling
out and seuering from other, as being indeed a1. Pet. 2. 9. chosen and
peculiar people:Bucanus loc. cem. tit. eccles.  Melchior. Cans loc. om. lib. 4. cap. 2., quas: .
Not Churches, but Church. Because all the congregations
of the faithfull in the whole world make butCant. 6. 8. one onely
Church. For as a kingdome diuided into many shires, and
more townes, is called one, because it hath one and the same
King, one and the same law: so the Church is one,Ephes. 4. 5. because
it liueth by one and the same spirit, and is ruled by one and
the same Lord, and professeth one and the same faith: not
one as tied vnto one place, much lesse vnto one person; as
the Papists iniuriously confine it: for as all of them make the
Catholike Church to be nothing else but the Roman Church;
so some of them haue made the Roman Church nothing else
but the Pope. Papa virtualiter est tota ecclesia. saithB. Iewel. 6. part. defence of apolog. fol. 610. Haruaeus
in lib. de potestate Papae, cap. 23. As the tumultuous Ana|baptists
had framed a Church likeLib. 7. cap. 2. Na. hist. Plinies Acephali, all body
and no head: so the Romish parasites haue built a Church like
thePlautus in Triuum act. 4. sc. 2. Toadestoole, all head and no body. See Epistle Dom. 17.
post Trinit.
Holy.] There are many wicked in the Church, and the
best men haue some faults; how then is it holy?Loc. com. tit. ecclesia. Luther
answereth in a word: If I looke vpon my selfe, or my neigh|bour,
I cannot perceiue that the Church is holy: but if I
loooke vpon Christ, who tooke away the sins of the world,
then I see it all holy. It is said well, I beleeue: for we cannot
see this holinesse ouershadowed with manifold infirmities
outwardly, though the KingsPsal. 45. 14. daughter is all glorious in|wardly.
Ephes. 5. 26. Sanctified by the washing of water through the word,
that is, made cleane from all sinne by the precious bloud of
Christ, which is daily presented vnto vs both in the Word
and in the Sacraments.


The Church then
is holie three waies
in respect:

1. Of herRom. 1. 5. Ephes. 1. 23. head: which is most holie;
like as one that hath a faire face is
said to be a faire man, albeit hee
haue some crooked finger, or gou|tie
toe.
2. Of her faith: which is holy, forma|liter
 effectiue: anPsal. 19. 7. vndefiled law
conuerting the soule, in it selfe ho|ly:
which forbids nothing but that
which is euill, and doth not inioine
any thing but that which is good,
and making other holy: being the
Rom. 1. 16. power of God vnto saluation.
3. In regard of her life: which is holy,
Caluin. Cate|chis. free from sin1. Epist. Iohn 3. 9. Reelus non facit pec|catum, quia pa|titur potius, vti Bernard. raigning and con|demning:
euen in this world made
holy by sanctification partially: by
imputation of righteousnesse per|fectly.


This must be construed of the Church inuisible, the tri|umphant
part whereof is most holy, the militant more ho|lie,
then Infidels, Iewes, Turkes, Heretikes, and other out of
the Church, who cannot inioy the gift of sanctification: I
say more holy, because in this life we receiue (saithRom. 8 23. Paul)
but the first fruits of the spirit, not the tenths of the spirit, saith
Vbi supra. Luther: and thereforeIdem ibidem tit. de profectu in Christia|nismo. Christianus non est in facto, sed in
fieri; notChurch of Sect. in exposit. of the Creed. so perfect, but that hee neede to stoope vnder
mercie.
Now for the Church visible: that is a field wherein are
Tares as well as wheate, and both must grow together vn|till
the great haruest, Matth. 13. compared to the Moone,
Reuel. 12. 1. sometime decreasing, sometime increasing: but
when it is in the full, it hath some spots: and therefore Brow|nists
and Anabaptists obtrude more perfection vpon the
Church then God requires.
Heauen hath none but good, Hell none but bad, Earth
both good and bad.Caluin. aduer|sus Anabaptist. art. 2. Cum subspecie sudij perfectionis, im|perfectionem
nullam tolerare possamus, aut in corpore, aut in

membris ecclesiae; tun di ibolum nos tumefacere superbia, 
poerisi seducere moneamur.
Catholike.] This word is vsed some for Orthodoxall;
in which senseBaronius an|nal. tom. 1. fol. 310. Pacianus said, Christian is my name, Catho|like
my surname. So Rome was, England is, a Catholike Church.
But it properly signifieth vniuersall, as here: becauseChrysest. in 4. ad Ephes. ex|tended
to all places, and all times, and all persons, not only
those who are now liuing, but also those who haue been
from the beginning, and shall be to the end of the world.
So that to say the Roman Catholike Church, is like the by|word
of Kent and Christendome: all one as to say, the parti|cular,
or the speciall generall Church.
From this naturall acception ariseth that other borowed,
as in the Creed of Athanasius: Haec est fides Catholica: that is,
Vincentius winenis con|tra haeres. cap. 3. quod vbique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est. The
Catholike faith is that which is taughtMelchior Canus loc. com. lib. 4. cap. vlt. all men: Matth.
28. 19. Mark. 16. 15. in all places, Rom. 10. 18. at all times,
2. Cor. 1. 19. And Psal. 119. Thy word O Lord indureth for
euer, and thy truth also from generation to generation.
August. tract. 40. in Iohan. Fides est vides in vs quae non vides, anHeb. 11. 1. euidence of things
not euident. So that the Church we must beleeue is Ca|tholike;
not sensible, subiect to view: but inuisible, an object
of faith.
Communion of Saints.] The Churches third propertie
whichErasmus in Symb. expoundeth the two former: I beleeue the Catholike
ChurchChurch of Scot. expos. of the Creed., to wit, the communion of Saints. If a communion,
then Catholike; if Saints, then holy.

This commu|nion
hath two
parts: fellowship

Of the members with the head, because eue|ry
Christian hath interest in all the be|nefits
of Christ, who is not a garden
flower priuate for a few, butCant. 2. 1. the Rose
of the field common to all: and there|fore
S. Iude calles his grace, the Com|mon saluation.
Of the me~bers one with ano|ther:
and it is either of the

Liuing with
the liuing.
Dead, with
the liuing.




As in the naturall body: so in the Church, Christs mysti|call
body, there is a pepetuall sympathie betwen ethe parts,
1. Cor. 12. if one member suffer, all suffer with it; if one be had in ho|nour,
all reioice with it.
Martin Luther said well and witty,Loc. com. tit. de Christiano. that a Christian
is a freeman, and bound vnto none. And againe, that he is a di|ligent
seruant and vassall vnto all. Vere vir omnium hrarum,
omnium operum, omnium personarura: becoming all things
vnto all men, that he may winne them vnto Christ. As that
Antichristian in stile, so the Christian is in deed: Serus ser|uorum
Dei.
There is a knot of fellowship also betweene the dead
Saints and the liuing. They pray to God for our good in
Apocal. 6. 10. generall: and we praise God for their good in particular.
I say we praise God in hisLaudate deum in sanctis. Psal. 150. 1. vt Au|gustin. Hieron. c. Saints particularly, for giuing
Mary, Peter, Paul, such eminent graces on earth: and now
such vnspeakable glory in heauen. In affection and heart
wePhil. 3. 20. The Churches first preroga|tiue. conuerse with them, alway desiring to be dissolued,
and to be with Christ.
Remission of sinnes] All of vs are borne in sinne, orius dam|nati,
quam nati, (saith Bernard) and after increasing we grow
from euill to worse, vntill our sinnes are remitted by Gods
grace, conueied vnto vs in the Church by his holy word and
Sacraments: it is a remission, not a satisfaction; a worke not
of our merit, but of Gods mercy, who beholding vs in
Christ, reputes our sinnes as no sinnes. IEsay 44 22. haue put away thy
transgressio~s as a cloud,  thy sins as a mist, so remitted as if they
neuer were committed. Agaus Di qui tollit peccata mundi,Lomb. sent. lib. 4. dist. 18. di|mittendo
quae facta sunt,  adiuuando ne fiant,  perducendo
ad vitam vbi emnino fieri non possunt.
Sinnes in the plurall, be they neuer so many for quantitie:
neuer so grieuous for qualitie. Say not with CaieGen. 4. 15., My sinne
is greater then can be pardoned; but withRom. 8. 28. Paul, All things
worke for the best vnto them who loue God. Remember
(saithLoc. com. tit. de ubieribus conscien. Luther) the speech of God to Rebecca: Maior ser|uiet
minori: The greater shall serue the lesser. Our spirituall
enemies are stronger, and our sinnes are greater then we;
yet they shall serue for our good: the greater shall serue

the lesser, I beleeue the rmission of sinnes. A very great be|nefit,
because this pardon is our soules life.

Where the
Rom. 6. 23. wages of sin is
death of

Rom. . 12. Bodie, which is the temporall
T. 5. 6. Soule, which is the rituall
Ezeh. 33. 11. Body  soule, which is eternall
death.


See the Epistle Dom. 7. post Trinit.
Resurrection of the bodie.] The whole Creed in grosse, and
euery parcell argueth a resurection: asIn symbol. Erasmus aptly.
This one article is the Basis of all the rest:Athnagoras lib. de reur.  The second pre|rogatiue. for if there be
a God almightie, then hee is iust; and if iust, then another
reckoning in another world, where good men shall be re|warded,
and euill condignely punished. If a Iesus Christ
who is our Sauiour, then hee must1. Ioh. epist. 3. 8. dissolue the workes of
Satan, which are sinne and death: if an holy Ghost, then all
his hallowed temples, who did glorifie him heere, shall bee
glorified of him hereafter. If a Church which is holy, then a
remission of sinnes, a resurrection of the bodie, a life euer|lasting,
that all such as haue been subiects in his kingdome
of grace, may likewise bee Saints in his kingdome of glory:
Io. Combis compend. Theo|log. lib. 4. cap. 1. The third pre|rogatiue. for as God is principium effectiuum in creatione, refectiuum
in redemptione: so, perfectiuum in retributione.
Life euerlasting.] The chiefe good, and last end which
we gaine by being in the Church. All men on earth haue
life, but not euerlasting; the damned in hell endure that
which is euerlasting, yet not a life, but an eternall death, as
being perpetually tied vnto torments, enforced euer to suf|fer
that they would not, neither can they doe any thing
that they would: only the Church elected by the Father,
redeemed by the Sonne, sanctified by the holy Ghost, shall
enioy life euerlasting; not by purchase or inheritance, but
byLuke 12. 32. donation and franke almaine. The spirituall hand
which apprehends this deede of gift is faith: and therefore
begin well with I beleeue in God, and continue well in be|ing
a member of his Holy Catholike Church, and thou shalt
be sure to end well with euerlasting life.
Amen.] Our assent to the Creed, signifying hereby that
all which we haue said is2. Cor. 1. 20. true and certaine.
O Lord increase our faith.



Ruth 2. 4.
THe Nouelists haue censured this, and other like Suffra|ges,
asT. C. lib. 1. pag. 138  lib. 3. pag. 210. short cuts or shreddings, rather wishes, then pray|ers.
A rude speech, which sauoureth of the shop, more then
of the schoole: for our Church imitated herein the meeke
Luke 18. 13. Publicane, O God be mercifull to me a sinner: and the good
woma~ ofMatth. 15. 22 Cannan, Haue mercie on me O Lord: and deuout
Mark. 10. 48. Bartius; O sonne of Dauid take pitie on me. These short
shreddings and lists are of more value then their Northren
broad cloath: the which (as wee see) shrinkes in the wet|ting:
whereas our ancient custome hath continued in the
Church aboue 1200 yeeres: for Augustine writes,Cap. 10. cius|dem. epist.
121, that the Christia~s of Egypt vsed in their Liturgy many
prayers, euery one of the~ being very short, raptim quodam|modo
Huiusmodi quid Bernar|dus etiam ser. 16. in Psalm. Qui habitat. eaculatas, as if they were darts throwne out with a
kind of sudden quicknes, lest y^ vigilant and erect attention
of minde, which in deuotion is very requisite, should be wa|sted
and dulled through continuance, if their prayers were
few, and long. Nam plerum hoc negotium plus gemitibus
qum sermonibus agitur, plus fletu qum afflatu, saith the same
Father in the same place. Peruse that learned epistle, for it
is a sufficient apologie both for the length of our whole
seruice, as also for the shortnes of our seuerall prayers. If
Augustine now liued, and were made vmpire betweene
the Nouelists and vs, he would rather approue many short
praiers in England, then those two long praiers, one before,
and the other after sermon, in Scotland and Geneua.
For this particular Dominus vobiscum, it is taken out of
the second chapter of Ruth: an vsuall salutation among
Gods people: Iudg. 6. 12. Luke 1. 28.
And therefore the like among vs, as God saue you: God
blesse you: God speed, c. are not idle complements, or taking
Gods holy name in vaine: but Christian and commendable
duties. See Gospell Dom. 6. post Trinit. and Gospell on the
Annunciation.
This and the like salutations or benedictions in the time of
diuine seruice betweene the Priest and people, are of great

antiquitie, and good vse. For in the Liturgies of S. Iames,
Basil, Chrysostome, and that of theBibliothec. pat. tom. 4. col. 111. Aethiopians, I finde that
the Priest was wont to say, Pax vobis: and the people re|plied,
Et cum spiritus tuo. In that old Liturgie of Spaine, cal|led
Ibid. col. 108. Mozarabe, because the Christians were mingled with
Arabians, it is enioyned that the Priest should say, Dominus
vobiscum, as in our booke; and the people, as ours, answered,
Et cum spiritu tuo. Againe, Adiuuate me fratres in orationibus
vestris, and the whole companie replied, Adiuuet te Pater,
filius, spiritus sanctus. It is reported byLib. 2. de Mis|sa, cap. 16. Bellarmine andLib. de scrip|tor. Ecclesiast. fol. 51. Tri|tenhemius,
that one Petrus Damianus hath written an whole
booke of this argument, intituled, Dominus vobiscum: in
which (as it should seeme) sundrie needlesse questions are
discussed; hee liued in the daies of William the Conquerour,
therefore thought probable that it was vsed in the Latine
Church euer since their Liturgie was composed by Dama|sus,
about the yeere 376: deduced out of the Greeke Chur|ches
into the Romane, asAnnot. in Ter|tull. de Corona militis. Beatus Rhenanus, and Master
Acts and Mo|numents, fol. 1274. 1275. Fox coniecture.


Cum spiritu tuo.
THe peoples answere, Cum spiritu tuo, is taken out of the
secondCap. 4. ver. 22. Epistle of Paul to Timothie: The Lord Iesus
Christ be with thy spirit. It answereth the reapers answere to
Boaz; The Lord blesse thee. These mutuall salutationsDurandus ra|tional. diuin. lib. 4. cap. 14. . 5 insi|nuate
sweete agreement and loue betweene the Pastor and
parishioners: it is the Ministers office to begin, and the peo|ples
dutie to correspond in good affection and kindnes: for
loue is the adamant of loue. When the Minister is a Paul,
the people must be Galatians, if it wereGalat. 4. 15. possible, willing to
pull out their eyes, and to giue them for his good:Caluin. in loc. ad Galat. not only to
reuerence his place, but also to loue his person.
A Pastor cannot vse to the people a better wish then,
The Lord be with you. ForRom. 8. 31. if God be with them, who can
be against them? and the people cannot make a fitter reply,
then, with thy spirit. For (as Plato diuinely said) euery mans
soule is himselfe.
Againe, forasmuch as God is a spiritIob. 4. 24., and ought to bee

worshipped in spirit; it is meete we should performe this spi|rituall
seruice with all carnest contention and intention of
spirit. See Magnificat.
Christ promised, Matth. 18. to bee with vs in our deuo|tion,
in the middest of vs, when wee meete to pray. But,Ser. de eo, vbi duo aut tres. as
Eusebius Emissenus obserueth, how shall God be in the mid|dest
of thee, when as thou art not in the middest of thy selfe?
Quomodo erit deus in medio ti, si tecum ipse non fueris? If the
aduocate sleepe, how shall the Iudge awake? No maruell if
thou lose thy suite, when as in praying thou losest thy selfe.
Prayer is the Christians gunshot (saithLoc. com. tit. inuocat. Luther) Oratio,
bombardae Christianorum. As then a bullet out of a gun: so
prayers out of our mouth, can goe no further then the spirit
doth carrie them: if they beBernard. ser. 4. de Ieiunio  orat. Timidae, they cannot flie far:
if Tumidae, not pearce much; only feruent and humble de|uotion
hitteth the marke; penetrating the walles of heauen,
albeit they were brasse, and the gates iron.
The Church hath placed these mutuall responsories at
the very beginning of our prayers after the Lessons and
Confession of saith: becauseIohn 15. 5. Christ said, Without me ye can
doe nothing. Wherefore the Church, as I haue shewed, be|gins
her prayers at the first with, O Lord open thou our lips:
and here praying afresh, The Lord be with you; begins, I say,
with, The Lord bee with you, and ends with, through Iesus
Christ our Lord. Signifying hereby that Christ isApocal. 1. 8. Alpha
and Omega, the first and the last, without whom we can nei|ther
begin well, nor end well. And this is the reason why
the Church after this interchangeable salutation, enioynes
vs to pray, Lord haue mercie vpon vs: Christ haue mercie vpon
vs: Lord c. vsing an earnest repetition (as I coniecture)
rather to presse this one point, then (asBelethus lib. de Diuinis offi|cij, cap. 36. other write) to no|tifie
the three diuine persons.
And it is worth obseruing, that we conclude these short
Suffrages, as we began: for as in the first we desire the Lord
to be with vs and our spirit; so likewise in the last, that hee
would not take his holie spirit from vs, but accompanie the
whole Church vnto the end and in the end.
I am occasioned in this place iustly to defend the peoples

answering the Minister aloud in the Church. The begin|ning
of which interlocutorie passages, is ascribed byIn vita Da|masi. Pla|tina
to Damasus Bishop of Rome; byLib. 2. hist. cap. 24. Magde|burg. cent. 4. col. 897. Theodoret to Diodo|rus
Bishop of Antioch; byLib. de rebus Eccles. cap. 25. alludens forsi|tan ad Hexam. Amoros. lib. 3. cap. 5. Walafridus Strabo to S. Am|brose
Bishop of Millane: all which liued 1100 yeeres before
the Church was acquainted with any French fashions: and
yet Basil, epist. 63. alleageth that the Churches of Egypt, Li|bya,
Thebes, Palestina, Phoenicians, Syrians, Mesopotamia~s,
vsed it long before.Ecclesiast. hist. lib. 6. cap. 8. Socrates andVbi supra. Strabo write, that Ig|naetius,
a scholler vntoHieron. cata|log. script. Eccl. in vita Ignat. Muscul. in Mat. 26. 30. thinkes that Christ and his Apostles v|sed it. Christs owne schollers, is thought
to be the first author hereof. If any shall expect greater an|tiquitie
and authoritie, wee can fetch this order euen from
the quier of heauen: I saw the Lord (saidCap 6. 3. Esay) set on an
high Throne, the Seraphims stood vpon it, and one cried to ano|ther
saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hostes, all the world is
full of his glorie.
Blessed spirits in praising God answere one another in|terchangeably:
though vnhappie scornefull spirits vnman|nerly
terme this custome,T. C. lib. 1. pag. 203. Tossing of seruice. But it may be
said of them, asLib. contra Heluidium in initio. Herome wrote of Heluidius: Existimant
loquacitatem esse facundiam,  maledicere omnibus bonae con|scientiae
signum arbitrtur.


The Magnificat.
LVKE 1. 46. My soule doth magnifie the Lord.
THis Hymne is nothing else, but a grace, for grace: great
thankes, for great things receiued of the Lord. Where|in
obserue theModus  causa, Gorran. in locum. manner and matter of the Virgins exulta|tion:
or a thanksgiuing in the two former verses: and a
reason in the rest, For he hath regarded c.
I purpose to ift euery word of the former part seuerally:
and because there is (asCom. in 1. Ga|lat. vers. 4. My. Luther saith) great Diuinitie in
pronounes, I will first examine the pronoune My: my soule,
my spirit, my Sauiour. It is not enough y^t other pray for vs,
except our selues praise God for our selues. He that goeth
to Church by an attorney, shal go to heaue~ also by a proxie.

There is an oldMensa philo|sophica sab. de mercator. Legend of a Merchant, who neuer
would go to Masse: but euer when he heard the Saints bell,
he said to his wife, Pray thou for thee and me. Vpon a time
hee dreamed that hee and his wife were dead, and that they
knocked at heauen gate for entrance: S. Peter the porter
(for so goeth the tale) suffered his wife to enter in, but thrust
him out, saying, Illa intrauit pro se  te: as thy wife went to
Church for thee, so likewise she must goe to heauen for
thee. The morall is good, howsoeuer the storie be bad: in|sinuating
that euery one must haue both a personalitie of
faith, my Sauiour: and a personalitie of deuotion, my soule,
my spirit.Ambros. lib. 1. de officijs, cap. 8. Officium is efficium, it is not enough that the ma|ster
enioyne his familie to pray, or the father heare his child
pray, or the Teacher exhort his people to pray: but as eue|ry
one hath tasted of Gods bountie, so euery one must per|forme
this dutie, hauing oyle of hisMatth. 25. 4. owne in his owne
lampe, saying and praying with the blessed Virgin, My
soule, my spirit.
Soule.Soule.] As if she should thus speake, Thy benefits O Lord
are so good, so great, so manifest, so manifold,Bda in loc. that I can
not accord them with my tongue, but only record them in
my heart. It is truly said, he loues but little, who tels how
much he loues: and so surely hee praiseth God but little,
who makes it a tongue-toile and a lip-labor only. Mark. 7. 6.
This people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is farre
from me. God who gaue all, will haue all, and yet aboue all
requireth the soule.Prou. 23. 26. Sonne giue me thy heart: for that a|lone
commands all other members, as theMatth. 8. 9. Centurion did
his souldiers. It saith to the foote, goe, and it goeth; vnto
the hand, come, and it commeth; vnto the rest, doe this, and
they doe it. It doth bend the knees, and ioyne the hands,
and lift vp the eye, composeth the countenance, disposeth of
the whole man: and therefore as that otherLuke 10. 42. Mary chose
the better part, so this Mary bestowed vpon God her best
part, her soule did magnifie, her spirit reioyced.
Some Diuines expound these words ioyntly, some seue|rally.
The word spirit is vsed in the holie Scripture some|time
for the whole soule. 1. Cor. 7. 34. The woman vnma|ried

careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy
both in body and in spirit, that is,Ambros. com. in loc. in soule.
So S. Augustine thinks that these two words here signifie
the same, because the latter phrase, my spirit reioiceth in God
my Sauiour, is nothing else but an exegesis of the former, my
soule doth magnifie the Lord: insinuating by this repetition,
my soule, my spirit, that her deuotion was not hypocriticall,
but cordiall and vnfained. It is obserued in nature, that the
Fox doth nip the necke, the Mastiue the throat, the Ferret
the liuer, but God especially careth for the heart: being (as
Ambrose speakes excellently) Non corticis, sed cordis deus.
And therefore Mary was not content to praise the Lord
from the rine of her lips only, but also from the roote of her
heart. SoPsal. 103. 1. Dauid did pray, Praise the Lord O my soule, and
all that is within mee praise his holy name. SoColess. 3. 16. Paul would
haue vs pray: Sing to the Lord with a grace in your hearts.
And so the Church doth desire that the Priest (who is the
mouth of the people) should pray, The Lord be with you, saith
the Minister, and the whole congregation answereth, And
with thy spirit.Caroliu mag|nus fragment. de ritibus eccl. veteris, Cassan|der Liturgica, cap. 21. Heereby signifying, that this holy busi|nesse
ought to be performed with all attention and inten|tion
of spirit.
Diuines interpreting these two seuerally, distinguish be|tweene
soule and spirit: and so doth the Scripture, 1. Cor.
15. 45. The first man Adam was made a liuing soule; the last
Adam a quickening spirit. Soule is that by which we liue na|turally:
spirit is that, by which we liue through grace super|naturally.
Or (Calu. in loc. as other) soule signifieth the will, and spirit
the vnderstanding: as Heb. 4. 12. The word of God is liuely and
mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword, and
entreth thorow, euen vnto the diuiding asunder of the soule and
spirit: that is,Beza in loc. of the will and vnderstanding.
So that Mary saying here, my soule and my spirit, doth
intimate that she did praise the Lord with attention in her
vnderstanding, and deuotion in her affection. They praise
God with halfe an heart, who either hauing deuotion,
want vnderstanding: or else indued with vnderstanding,
want deuotion: and so while men pray with the soule with|out

a spirit, or with the spirit, without a soule, their heart is
diuided (as the ProphetOse 10. cap. 2. Ose: Diuisum est cor eorum:) and
God hath but one part, happily the least peece.
The line then to be drawne from this example is, first that
we pray with our heart: secondly, with our whole heart,
with all our soule, with all our spirit.
Doth]Doth. In the present. For as a gift to man, so glory to
God, is most acceptable when as it is seasonable: not defer|red,
but conferred in time.Ausnius epi|gram. 84. Gratia quae tarda est, ingrata est
gratia.Seneca lib. 2. de beneficijs cap. 5. Proprium est libenter facientis, cit facere.
Magnifie]Magnifie. The word signifieth highly to commend, and
extoll: Magnum facere, to make great. Now God is opti|mus
maximus, already most great, and therefore cannot be
made more great in regard of himselfe: but all our vilifying
and magnifying the Lord, is in respect of others onely.
When wee blasheme the most holy name of God, as
much as in vs lieth, we lessn his greatnes: when we blesse
his name, so much as in vs is, we magnifie his glory, making
that which is great in it selfe, to be reputed great of other.
AsLexie. Theol. verb. magnifi|cati. one fitly, Magnificare nihil aliud est nisi magnum sig|nificare.
This magnifying consists in our conuersation especially.
Noli (saithIn Psal. 133. Augustine) gloriari quia lingua benediis, si vita
maledicis.1. Pet, 2. 12. Haue your conuersation honest among the
Gentiles, that they which speake euill of you, may by your
good works, which they shall see, glorifie God in the day of
the visitation.
God is magnified of vs (asCom. in Luc. lib. 2. cap. 1. Ambrose and Origen note)
when as his image is repaired in vs.Gen. 1. 26. He created man ac|cording
to his likenes: that is, asEphes. 4. 24. Paul doth interpret it, in
righteousnes  holinesse. So that the more grace we, the more
gloy God: he doth appeare greater in vs, albeit he cannot
be made greater by vs. He doth not increase, but we grow
from grace to grace, from vertue to vertue: the which
ought principally to stirre vs vp vnto this dutie, for that our
selues are magnified, in magnifying him: as Mary sheweth
here, My soule doth magnifie the Lord, vers. 46. And, The
Lord hath magnified me, vers. 49.August. in Psal. 66. Qui maledicit domino, ipse

minuitur, qui benedicit, angetur: prior est in nobis benedictio
domini,  consequens est, vt  nos benedicamus domino: illa
pluuia, iste fructus.
The Lord.The Lord.] Lord is a name1. Cor. 8. 6. of might, Sauiour of mercie.
Mary then (as Augustine andMaldonat. in loc. other obserue) praiseth him
alone, who is able to helpe, because the Lord; and willing,
because a Sauiour.
And my spiritSpirit.]Caluin.  Marlorat. i loc. Such as distinguish betweene soule and
spirit, make this a reason of the former verse: My spirit hath
reioiced in God my Sauiour, and therefore my soule doth mag|nifie
the Lord: according to that of S.Iames 5. 13. Iames; Is any merry?
let him sing. So that this exultation of Mary, caused her ex|altation
of God.
Inward reoicing in spirit, is a great signe of a good con|science,
Prou. 15. 15. which is a continuall feast. The wicked are oftn
merry, sometime mad merrie: but all is but from the teth
outward. For (asProu. 14. 13. Salomon speakes) euen in laughing the heart
is sorrowfull, and the end of mirth is heauinesse. But the good
man (as the Virgin here) reioiceth in spirit: all worldly meri|ments
are more talked of then felt, but inward spirituall re|ioicing
is more felt then vttered.
It is (as theZach. 9. 9. Scripture calles it) a Iubilation, an exceeding
great ioy, which a man can neither suppresse, nor expresse
sufficiently.Anonymus in Psal. 46. Nec reticere, nec recitare: for howsoeuer in
the Court of Conscience there be some pleading euery day;
yet the godly make it Hilary Terme all the yeere. See Gospell
Dom. 1. Aduent.  Dom. 9. post. Trinit.
In God]In God. Happily the spirit of the most wicked at sometime
doth reioice, yet not in God, nor in good: but in villanie,
and vanitie. Prou. 2. 14. They reioice in doing euill, and delight
in frowardnesse: whereas in the good man the ioies obiect
is alway good, goodnesse it selfe, God himselfe. Dauid de|lights
in the Lord, Mary reioiceth in God. And this is so good
a ioy, thatPhil. 4. 4. Paul saith, Reioice in the Lord alwaies, and againe
I say reioice. We may reioice in our friends, in our health,
in our preferment, in our honest recreation, in many other
things, praeter Deum, beside God: yet in all, propter Deum,
for God, so farre foorth as they shall increase our spirituall

reioicing in the Lord. God forbid (saithGalat. 6. 14. Paul) that I should
reioice in any thing but in the crosse of Christ. In any thing in
comparison of this, in any thing which might hinder this,
and yet in all things for this. See the Epistle Dom. 4. Aduent.
Sauiour]Sauiour. To consider God as a seuere Iudge, would make
our heart to tremble: but to consider him in Christ, in whom
he is well pleased, is of all ghostly comfort the greatest. And
therefore if we desire to reioice in spirit, let vs not behold
God in the glasse of the Law, which makes him a dreadfull
Iudge: but in the glasse of the Gospell, which shewes him a
mercifull Sauiour.
In euery Christian there are two contrary natures; the
flesh, and the spirit: and that hee may bee a perfit man in
Christ, he must subdue the one, and strengthen the other:
the Law is the ministry of death, and serueth fitly for the
taming of our rebellious flesh: the Gospell is the power of
God vnto life, containing the bountifull promises of God
in Christ, and serueth fitly for the strengthening of the
spirit. It isLuke 10 34. The Law as wine to search, the Gospell as oyle to supple. oyle to powre into our wounds, and water of
life to quench our thirsty soules. As in name, so in nature,
the Goodspell, or the Ghosts spell, that is, the word and ioy for
the spirit. Mary then had good cause toCaluin. in loc. adde this epi|thete
Sauiour, vnto God: My spirit reioiceth in God my Sa|uiour.
My Sauiour] We note two conclusions out of this pro|noune:
the first against some Papists; the second against all
Papists.Swarez tom. 2. in tertia~ Thom. disput. 3.  4. Some Popish writers affirme, that Mary was con|ceiued
and borne without originall sinne, and that she li|ued
and died without actuall sinne: contrary to the scrip|ture,
Rom. 3. 9. Gal. 3. 22. SoD. Fulk an|not. in Mat. 1. that in honouring the feast of
her conception and natiuitie, with the singular priuiledge
of Christ, they worship an Idoll, and not her. For an Idoll
(as1. Cor. 8. 4. Paul disputes) is nothing in the world: and so is that man
or woman conceiued without sinne, except Christ, who was
conceiued by the holy Ghost: as none other euer was, or
shall be.
Lombard. 3. sent. dist. 3. Bellar. de amis|sione gratiae, lib. 4. cap. 15. They ground this assertion vpon a place of Augu|stine:

De nat.  gratia, contra Pelagianos, cap. 36. tom. 7. fol. 506. Excepta sanctae virgine Maria, de qua propter hono|rem
domini, nullam prorsus cum de peccatis agitur, habere volo
quaestionem. Answere is made, that Augustine elsewhere
concludes all vnder sinne (though he did in that place for|beare
to rip vp the faults of the mother in honour of her
sonne) for in lib. 5.Tom. 7. fol. 742. cap. 9. against Iulian the Pelagian, he
doth intimate that Maries bodie was sinfull flesh, conclu|ding
peremptorily;fol. 743. Nullus est hominum praeter Christum,
qui peccatum non habuerit gra~dioris aetatis accessu: quia nullus
est hominum praeter Christum, qui peccatum non habuerit in|fantilis
aetatis exortu. So likewise,Tom. 6. fol. 561 lib. de sancta Virginitate,
cap. 3. Beatior Maria percipiendo idem Christi, qum conci|piendo
carnem Christi: nihil enim ei materna propinquitas pro|fuisset, nisi foelicis Christum corde, qum carne gestasset. And
in hisTom. 3. fol. 164 Treatise, De fide ad Petrum (for the Papists admit
that booke) Firmissime crede,  nullatenus dubites, omnem
hominem qui per concubitum viri  muleris concipitur, cum
peccato originali nasci,  ob hoc natura filium irae. Thus Au|gustine
expounds, and answers Augustine.
Now for holy Scriptures, if there were no more texts in
the Bible, this one is omnisufficient, to accuse Marie of
some faults, and the Papists of much follie: My spirit reioy|ceth
in God my Sauiour. He that hath no sinne, wants not a
Sauiour: but Marie reioyced in a Sauiour, therefore she
was sorrie for her sinne. The whole neede not a Physitio, saith
Matth. 9. 12. Christ: but Marie calles for a salue, therefore surely she
had some sore: and if any sin, then she cannot be our Me|diatrix,
or Aduocae. Si peccatrix, non deprecatrix.1. Epist. Iohn 2. cap. Our Ad|uocate
is our propitiation for sinne:2. Cor. 5. 21. but the propitiation for
sinne, knew no sinne. Ergo, quae egebat, non agebat aduocatum.
And therefore Mry, who needed a Sauiour her selfe, could
not be a sauiour of other.
Againe, we gather out of this pronoune my, Maries par|ticular
apprehension and application of Christs merits a|gainst
all Papists; whoBellarm. lib. 1. de Iustific. cap. 7 teah that a generall confused im|plicite
faith, is enough without any further examination of
Scriptures, or distinct beleefe. Contrarie to the practise of
Christ, who prayed in our nature and name.

Matth. 27. 46. Deus meus, Deus meus. OfPsal. 118. 28. Dauid, Thou art my God: of
Thomas.Ioh. 20. 28. My Lord: of Mary, My Sauiour.
The second part of this Hymne containeth a reason why
she did magnifie the Lord, namely for his goodnes.

Toward

Her selfe. He hath regarded the lowlines of his
handmaid; he hath magnified me. From hence|forth
all generations shall call me blessed.
Other.



Regarded.]Regarded. God is said in Scripture
to regard three waies, (as Augustine
notes vpon this place) secundum

Cognitionem,
Gratiam,
Iudiciu.


1. His eye of knowledge regardeth all things. Heb. 4. 13
There is not any creature, which is not manifest in his sight, but
all things are naked and open vnto him.
2. His fauourable countenance and gratious eye is vp|on
themPsal. 33. 18. who feare him, and vpon them who trust in his
mercie.
3. God in iudgement will only regard his elect. For he
will say to the reprobate,Matth. 25. 12. Verily I know ye not. God regar|ded
here Mary with his gratious eie, vouchsafeing to make
her both his childe, and his mother. The one is a benefit
obtained of veryMatth. 7. 14. few: the other denied vnto all. It was
only granted to Mary to be the mother of Christ,Hugo Lincol|niensi vti Su|rius in eius vita. whereas it
was denied vnto all men, to be the father of Christ.
This was so great a grace to Mary, that as in this Hymne
her selfe doth prophecie: From hencefoorth all generations
shall account her blessed.
An Angell of heauen said that she wasLuke 1. 28. full of grace:
Gratia plena in se, non se; in her selfe, but not of her selfe.
And therefore her soule did magnifie the Lord, and her
spirit reioyced in God her Sauiour; not in regard of her
owne greatnes, but in respect of his goodnesse. For so she
saith, He hath regarded.
The lolinesse]Lowlinesse.Marlor. in loc. God cannot looke aboue himselfe, be|cause
he hath no superiour: nor about himselfe, for that he
hath no equall: he regards only such as are below him; and
therefore the lower a man is, the neerer vnto God, the
more exposed to his sight who lookes from aboue.Psal. 113. 5, 6. Who is

like vnto the Lord our God that hath his dwelling so high, and
yet humbleth himselfe to behold the things in heauen and earth?
He taketh vp the simple out of the dust, and lifteth the poore out
of the mire. And Psal. 138. vers. 6. Though the Lord be high, yet
hath he respect vnto the lowly: but as for the proud, he beholdeth
them a far off. The most high then hath especiall respect to
such as are most low.

Now lowlinesse in holy
Scripture is vsed both

Actiuely, for humilitie.
Passiuely, for humiliation, base|nesse
and affliction.


Origen, Beda, Bernard construe this of Maries humilitie:
but I thinke with the most, and best, that she meant by low|linesse,
her base degree:Maldonat. in locum. For, Humilitas dum produr, perdi|tur.
He that brags of his humilitie, loseth it. It is (saithCom. in cap. 1. Abdiam. Hie|rome)
the Christians Iewell.
Now, saithHom. 27. Macarius, he is a foolish begger who when
he findes a Iewell, instantly proclaimes it, Inueni, inueni: for
by this meanes he that hath lost it, will demand it againe:
so likewise when we boast of any good gift, the Lord who
lent, will resume it.
It is improbable then that Mary spake this of her humi|litie:
for (as somIansenius, Beauxamis, Maldonat. in locum. Popish writers obserue) she did in this
song ascribe all her happinesse to Gods mercy, and nothing
to her owne merit.
It is true, that as death is the last1 Cor. 15. 26. enemie: so pride the last
sinne that shall be destroied in vs.Innocentius de contemptu mundi, lib. 2. cap. 31. Inter omnia vitia tu sem|per
es prima, semper es vltima: nam omne peccatum te acce|dente
commuttitur:  te recidente dimittitur.Epist. 56. Augustine told
Dioscorus, Vitia caetera in peccatis, superbia ver etiam in bene|factis
timenda. When other sinnes die, secret pride gets
strength in vs: exPet. Chryso|log. ser. 7. remedijs generat morbos, euen vertue is
the matter of this vice: in such sort, that a man will be proud,
because he is not proud. But this was not Maries mind to
boast, in that she did not boast: but, as the word and cohe|rnce
more then insinuate, she did vnderstand by lowlinesse,
her meane estate and ualitie.
Iuuencus, lib. 1. Euang. hist. Quod me dignatus in altum,
erigere ex humili, celsam.

So doth her selfe construe the word, vers. 52. He hath put
downe the mightie from their seat, and hath exalted the humble
and meeke: where humble is opposite to mightie, as in this
verse the lowlinesse of Mary to Gods highnesse. I presse this
point, because some Papists (asAnnot. in loc. Erasmus affirmes) haue ga|thered
out of this place, that Mary through her modest
carriage, worthily deserued to bee the mother of Christ.
Whereas (besides the reasons alleaged) the words of this
verse, and the drift of the whole song, confute them abun|dantly.
For , vsed by Luke, signifieth properly basenesse:
whereas humilitie is called : and albeit the vul|gar
Latine reade, respexit humilitatem, yet , is aspexit,
as in our English Bibles, hee looked on the poore degree of his
handmaid. And this is not only the criticall Annotation of
Erasmus, but their owne Iansenius, and Maldonatus obserue
the same: for her intent was not to magnifie her selfe, but
to magnifie the Lord.
Heere then wee may behold Maries exceeding great
miserie, and Gods exceeding great mercy: the good La|dies
infelicitie, who descended of a noble house, yea a royall
blood, was notwithstanding a distressed sillie maiden, so
poore, that, as we reade Luke 2. 24. she was not able to buy
a young lambe for an offering. See the Gospell on the Pu|rification.
LetIerem. 9. 23. not the wiseman glory in his wisdome, nor the
strong man glory in his strength, neither the rich man glory
in his riches, nor the Nobleman of his parentage, for one
generation passeth, and another commeth: and1. Sam. 2. 7. as we haue
heard, so haue we seen, some who came from the scepter, to
hold the plough; and other who came from the plough, to
manage the scepter. And the reason is re~dred in this Hymne;
The Lord hath put downe the mightie from their seate, and ex|alted
the humble and meeke: hee hath filled the hungry with
good things, and the rich he hath sent emptie away. This was his
exceeding great goodnesse toward Mary, to raise her out
of the dust, so to magnifie her, as that all generations ac|count
her blessed.

From henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.] In the
verse before Magnificat, Elizabeth called her blessed: now
the Virgin opposeth all men to Elizabeth, and all times to
the present, saying; (asIn loc. Theophylact doth note) that not
Elizabeth only, but all men, and women, as at this time, so
for euer also shall account me blessed. All generations, that
is, all men in all generations (as the Schoole doth vsuallie
distinguish) genera singulorum, albeit not singuligenerum,
(or asIn loc. Euthymius) all people who beleeue aright in the
Sonne, shall blesse the Mother; not all liuing, but all belee|uing:
for Iewes, and Gentiles, and Heretickes, in stead of this
honour, reuile her.Lib. de haere|sibus 56. haeres. Augustine mentioneth Antidicomaria|nites,
Heluidius in Hieromes age was (asLib. contra Lutherum, fol. 8 in margine. Roffensis termes
him) a Mariaemastix; and in our time some are content to
giue her lesse, because the Papists haue giuen her more then
is due. Let vs not make the Spirit of truth a lier, which saith,
All generations shall call her blessed. This shall, is officij, not ne|cessitatis: all ought, howsoeuer all doe not blesse this bles|sed
Virgin.
For hee that is mightie hath magnified me.] Magna mihi fe|cit,
hath done maruellous things in me. For it is wonder|fully
singular, and singularly wonderfull, that Mary should
be both a virgin, and a mother: of such a sonne a mother,
as was her father: hee that is mightie, and none but the
Almightie could thus magnfie Mary: shee was blessed
in bearing theRom. 9. 5. most blessed, in whomGen. 12. 3. all nations of the
earth are blessed. Vnto this purposeHom. 3. super Missus est an|gelus Gabriel. Bernard excellent|ly,
Non quia tu benedicta, ideo benedictus fructus ventris tui:
sed quia ille te praeuenit in benedictionibus dulcedinis, ideo tu
benedicta.
Hitherto concerning the goodnesse of God toward
her selfe: now shee remembreth his mercie toward o|ther.


His mercie is on the~ that feare him, c.

Generally,

1. In helping and comforting the~: He exalteth the humbl and meeke, filling them with all good things.
2. In scattering and confoun|ding their enemies: He hath scattered the proud, put don the mightie from their seate, and sent the rich empty away.

More specially,

1. In promising.
2. In performing his gra|tious promise touch|ing



the Messias of the world: Remembring his mercy hath hol|pen
his seruant Israel, as he promised to our forefathers Abra|ham,
and his seed for euer. These points areCant. 2. 5. flagons of wine
to comfort the distressed soule. For if God, who promised
in the beginning that theGen. 3. 15. seed of the woman should bruse
the Serpents head, deferred his promise almost 4000. yeers,
and yet at length accomplished the same to the very full:
then no doubt, God hauing promised the resurrection of
the dead, and euerlasting life, will in his good time bring
them to passe. That which is past, may confirme our hope
touching things to come: For he remembreth his mercie to|wards
his seruant Israel, and it is on them that feare him
throughout all generations.


Cantate Domino. Psalm. 98.
THe Church hath done well in ioyning to the Magni|ficat,
Psalme 98: for the one is a perfect eccho to the
other (allAugust. Hie|ron. Euthym. Caluin. Gene|brard. in loc. Interpreters agreeing) that Dauids mystery, and
Maries historie, are all one. Whatsoeuer is obscurely fore|told
in his Psalme, is plainly told in her Song: as he prophe|cied,
O sing vnto the Lord a new song; shew your selues ioyfull
So she practised: My soule doth magnifie the Lord, and my
spirit reioiceth in God my Sauiour. And this (Iohn 4. 23. as Christ
teacheth) is a new song: The houre commeth, and now is when
the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth.
The voice doth say, Magna fecit, Hee hath done maruellous

things: and the Eccho: Magna mihi fecit He hath magni|fied,
or done maruellous things in me. For it is an exceeding
wonder (as1. Tim. 3. 16. Paul speaks) a great mysterie, that God should
be manifested in the flesh, that the father of all, should bee
the sonne of Mary. Voice: With his owne right hand, and
with his holy arme hath he gotten himselfe the victorie. Eccho:
He hath shewed strength with his arme, he hath scattered
the proud in the imagination of their hearts. Voice: The
Lord declared his saluation, his righteousnesse hath hee openly
shewed in the sight of the Heathen. Eccho: His mercie is on
them that feare him, throughout all generations: he hath
filled the hungrie with good things, and the rich hee hath
sent emptie away. Gentiles esurientes, Iudaeos diuites, as Theo|phylact
expounds it.
Voice: Hee hath remembred his mercie and truth towards
the house of Israel. Eccho: He remembring his mercie, hath
holpen his seruant Israel.

In the whole Psalme fiue circumstances
are to be considered especially:

Who.
What.
Whereto.
Wherefore.
Wherewith.


1. Who must sing: All men, all things For the Prophet in the
latter end of the Psalme doth incite sensible men, by dire|cting
his speech vnto insensible creatures: Let the sea make
a noise, let the floods clap their hands, and let the hils be ioyfull.
All which sing Psalmes and Hymnes in their kinde: onely
man, for whom all these were made, is vnkind.Esay 1. 3. The oxe
knoweth his owner and the dull ae his masters crib: but Israel
hath not knowne, my people hath not vnderstood.
2. What: Sing a new song. This is mans end, to seeke God
in this life, to see God in the next: to bee a subiect in the
kingdome of grace, and Saint in the kingdome of glorie.
Whatsoeuer in this world befalleth vs, wee must sing: be
thankfull for weale, for woe; songs ought alwaies to be in
our mouth and sometimes a new song: for so Dauid heere,
sing a new song: that is,August. in loc. let vs put off the old man, and be|come
new men,2. Cor. 5. 17. new creatures in Christ: for the old man

sings old songs: onely the new man sings a new song, hee
speaketh with aMark. 16. 17. new tongue, and walkes inMatth. 2. 12. new waies:
and therefore doth new things, and sings new songs: his
language is not of Babylon, or Egypt, but of Canaan: his
communication doth edifie men, his song glorifie God.
Or a new song, that is, a fresh song,Hieron. in loc. noua res, nouum can|ticum;
new for a new benefit. Ephes. 5. 20. Giue thanks al|way
for all things. It is very grosse to thanke God only in
grosse, and not in parcell. Hast thou been sicke and now
made whole? praise God with the Leper, Luke 17, sing a
new song, for this new salue.
Doest thou hunger and thirst after righteousnes; where|as
heretofore thou couldest not endure the words of exhor|tation
and doctrine? sing a new song for this new grace.
Doth almightie God giue thee a true sense of thy sinne;
whereas heretofore thou diddest draw iniquitie with cords
of vanitie, and sinne as it were with cartropes, and wast gi|uen
ouer to worke all vncleannes, euen with greedinesse?
O sing, sing, sing a new song for this new mercie.
Or new, that is,Caluin. in loc. no common or ordinarie song, but as
Gods mercie toward vs is exceeding maruellous and extra|ordinarie,
so our thankes ought to bee most exquisite, and
more then ordinarie: not new in regard of the matter; for
we may not pray to God, or praise God, otherwise then he
hath prescribed in his word, which is the old way, but new
in respect of the manner and making, that as occasion is of|fered,
wee may beate our wits after the best fashion to bee
thankfull.
Or, because this Psalme is propheticall, a new song, that
is,Augustin.  Turrerema|tensis in loc. the song of the glorious Angels at Christs birth,
Luke 2. 14. Glorie to God on high, peace in earth, towards men good will;
a song which the world neuer heard before: that the seede
of the woman should bruse the Serpents head is an old
song, the first that euer was sung: but this was no plaine
song; till Christ did manifest himselfe in the flesh. In the
old Testament there were many old songs, but in the new
Testament a new song.
That vnto vs is borne a Sauiour, which is Christ the

Lord, in many respects a new song: for whereas Christ was
but shadowed in the Law, he is shewed in the Gospell: and
new, because sung of new me~, of all men.Rom. 10. 18. For the sound of
the Gospell is gone through all the earth, vnto the ends of
the world: whereas in old time Gods old songs were sung
in Iury, his name great in Israel, at Salem his Tabernacle, and
dwelling in Sion: Psal. 76.
3. Whereto] To the Lord. See before Psalme 95.
4. Wherefore] For he hath done maruellous things: he hath
opened his greatnes and goodnesse to the whole world, in
his creation, and preseruation, in his redemption especially,
being a worke of greater might and mercie then all the
rest: for in the creation he made man like himselfe; but in
the redemption he made himselfe like man.Granatensis con. 2. Dom. 1. aduent. Illic participes
nos fecit bonorum suorum: hc particeps est factus malorum
nostrorum. In making the world, hee spake the word onely
and it was done: but to redeeme the world, dixit multa, 
fecit mira, saith the text: Passus est dura verba, duriora ver|bera.
The creation of the world was a worke as it were of
his fingers: Psal. 8. 3. When I consider the heauen, euen the work
of thy fingers. But the redemption (as it is here called) is the
worke of his arme: With his owne right hand, and with his holy
arme hath he gotten himselfe the victorie.
So that if the Iewes obserued a Sabbath in honour of the
worlds creation; how many festiuals ought we to keepe in
thankfull remembrance of our redemption? As Diogenes
said, euery day was an holy day to a good man, so euery day
should be a Sunday to the Christian man.
Aquinas excellently: Bonum gratiae vnius, maius est qum
bonum naturae totius vniuersi: The sauing of one soule is a
greater work, then the making of a whole world: 12. quaest.
113. art. 9.

5. Wherewith: in a literall sense
with all kinde ofAugustin. in Psalmum vlt. musicke,

Vocall: Sing to the Lord.
Chordall: Praise him vp|on
the Harpe.
Pneumatical: With trum|pets, c.


In an allegoricall exposition (asIn locum. Euthymius interpretes it)

we must praise God in our actions, and praise him in our
contemplation: praise him in our words, praise him in our
workes: praise him in our life, praise him at our death: be|ing
not only temples (as1. Cor. 3 16. Paul) but (asIn Protreptico. Clemens Alexan|drinus
calles vs) Timbrels also of the holy Ghost.
Nunc dimittis, or the song of Simeon.



Luke 2. 29.
Lord now lettest thou thy seruant depart in peace.

Ouid epist. Hero. 7. epist. Sic vbi fta vocant, vdis abiectus in herbis,
Ad vada Maeandri conciit albus olor.
As the Swanue, so Simeon in his old age, readie o leaue
the world, did sing more sweetly then euer he did before,
Lord now lettest c.
The which Hymne is a thanksgiuing to God, for giuing
his Sonne to redeeme his seruants.

And it hath two principall parts: in the

1. He reioyceth in regard of his owne par|ticular:
vers. 29. 30.
2. In regard of the generall good our Sa|uiour
Christ brought to y^e whole world:
vers. 31. 32.



In the first note 2. things especially:

1. His willingnes to die: Lord now let|test
thou thy seruant depart in peace.
2. The reason of this willingnes: For
mine eyes haue seene thy saluation.


Lord] The Papists often in their life,Lord. specially at their
death, vse to commend themselues and their soules vnto the
protection of the blessed Virgin: Maria mater gratiae, tu
nos ab hoste protege,  horamortis suscpe. This is their do|ctrine,
Lib. de beati|tudine Sancto|rum, cap. 17. Bellarmine auoweth it: this is their practise; Father
Garnet at his execution vsed this forme of praier twice pub|liquely.
But old Simeon heere forgetting our Lady, though
she were present, commends his soule to the Lord, who re|demed
it, Lord now lettest thou c.
Now] Simeon assuredly was not afraid to die before: but
because aLuke 2. 26. reuelation was giuen vnto him from the holie

Ghost that he should not see death, vntill he saw the Mes|sias,
he was exceeding desirous to liue, that he might see the
word of the Lord fulfilled.Caluin. in loc. And therefore men abuse this
example, saying they will be contented to die, when such
and such things come to passe, when all their daughters be
well married, and all their sonnes well placed. Old Simeon
had a reuelation for that he did, whereas we haue no warra~t
from God, for many things we fondly desire; so that whe|ther
God grant them, or not, we must submit our selues vnto
his good pleasure, Now and euer ready to depart in peace,
when he doth call: taking vnto vs the resolution of Iob; The
Lord giueth,  the Lord taketh, blessed be the name of the Lord.
Lettest thou] We may not our selues loose our soules,Lettest thou. but
let God let them out of prison. We must seeke to mortifie
the flesh, and to cast the world out
of vs: but to cast our selues out of
the world, is anThomas 22 ae. quaest. 64. at 5. offence against

God.
Our neighbour.
Our selues.

Against God: who saith, Thou shalt not kill: if not ano|ther,
much lesse thy selfe.Luke 10. 27. For thou must loue thy neighbor as
thy selfe: first thy selfe, then thy neighbour as thy selfe. The
neerer, the deerer. IDeut. 32. 39. kill, and giue life, saith the Lord: we are
not masters of our life, but only stewards: and therefore may
not spend it, or end it, as we please: but as God, who be|stowed
it, will.
Aginst our neighbours: because men are not borne for
themselues alone, but for other also: being all members of
one common-weale and politike body: so that (as1. Cor. 12. 26. Paul
saith) if one member suffer, all suffer with it.Arist. Ethic. lib. 5. cap. vlt. Homo quilibet
est pars communitatis: Euery particular person is part of the
whole State. This is the true reason, why the King doth
take so precise an account of the death euen of his basest
subiect, because himselfe, and the whole kingdome had in|terest
in him.
Against our selues: Because by naturall instinct euerie
creature labours to preserue it selfe; the fire striueth with
the water, the water fighteth with the fire, the most sillie
worme doth contend with the most strong man to preserue
it selfe: and therefore we may not butcher our selues, but

expect Gods leasure and pleasute to let vs depart in peace.
Thy seruant] It is not a seruile seruice,Thy seruant. but a perfect free|dome
to serue the Lord. And therefore as the good Empe|tour
Theodosius held it more noble to be membrum Ecclesis,
qcaput Imperij: so may we resolue that it is better to be
a seruant of God, then Lord of all the world. For while we
serue him, all other creatures on earth and in heauen too
serue vs: Heb. 1. 14.
In chusing a master, euery man will shun
principally three sorts of men: his

Enemie.
Fellow.
Seruant.

He serueth his greatest enemie, who serueth the Diuell:
his fellow, who serueth the lust of his flesh: his seruant, who
serueth the world. It is a base seruice to serue the world:
for that is to become a vassall vnto our seruant. It is an vn|certaine
seruice to serue the flesh: this master is so chole|ricke,
so weake, so sickly, so fickle, that we may looke euery
day to be turned out of his doores: and that which is worst
of all, he is least contented, when he is most satisfied. Like to
the Spaard, a bad seruant, but a worse master. It is an vn|thriftie
seruice to serue the Diuell, all his wages is death:
the more seruice we doe him, the worse is our estate. But he
that serues God, hath the greatest Lord, who is most able;
and the best Lord, who is most willing to prefer his follow|ers:
and therefore let vs say with Simeon, and boast with
Psal. 116. 14. Dauid: O Lord I am thy seruant, I am thy seruant. See the
Epistle on Simons and Iudes day.
Depart]Depart. Here first note the soules immortalitie: Death is
notCyprian serm. de mortalitate. exitus, but transitus; not obitus, but abitus; not a dy|ing,
but a departing, a transmigration and exodus out of
our earthly pilgrimage, vnto our heauenly home.Ibidem  August. epist. 6. Fratres
mortui, non sunt amissi, sed praemissi:Tertull. lib. de patientia. profectio est, quam ptas
mortem: A passage from the valley of death, vnto the land of
the liuing.
2. Sam. 12. 23. Dauid said of his dead child, I shall goe to him, but he shall
not returne to mee.Matth. 22. 32. Christ confirmes this: Haue you not
read what is spoken of God, saying, I am the God of Abra|ham,
and the God of Isack, and the God of Iacob? Now God,

saith Christ, is not the God of the dead, but of the liuing.
Abraham then is aliue, Isack aliue, Iacob aliue; they cannot
be said truly dead: but (as Simeon here) departed.
The two receptacles of all soules after this life, Hell and
Heauen, infallibly demonstrate this point.Luke 16. 22. Lazarus dieth,
and his soule is presently conueied by blessed Angels vnto
the bosome of Abraham: vnhappy Diues dieth and his soule
is setcht and snatcht away by foule fiends vnto the bottom|lesse
pit of hell.
As Gods eternall decrees haue an end without a begin|ning:
so the soules of men haue a beginning without an end.
The soule and body part for a time, but they shall meete a|gaine
to receiue an irruocable doome, either of, Come yee
blessed, or, Goe ye cursed.
Secondly, note that dying is theTheophylact. loosing of our soule
from her bonds and fetters: our flesh is a sinke of sinne, the
prison of the mind,Plato in cra|tylo.  quasi .Petrarcha de remedys, lib. 1. dialog. 5. Qui gloriatur in viribus
corporis, gloriatur in viribus carceris. And therefore when
PlatoFicinus in vita Platonis. saw one of his schoole was a little too curious in
pampering his body, said wittily: What do you meane to make
your prison so strong?
So that a soule departed is set at libertie: like a bird that
is escaped out of a cage.
The world is so full of euils, as that to write them all,
would require another world so great as it selfe.Petrarcha praefat. in lib. de remedijs vtri|usque fortunae. Initium
vitae caecitas  obliuio possidet, progressum labor, dolor exitum,
error omnia: Childhood is a foolish simplicitie, youth a
rash heate, manhood a carking carefulnesse, old age a noi|some
languishing. DiuHieron. epist. Paulino, tom. 1. pag. 102. viuendo portant funera sua,  quasi
sepulchra dealbata plena sunt ossibus mortuorum. It may bee
said of an old man, asPlato in Axi|oco. Bias of the Marriner: Nec inter vi|uos,
nec inter mortuos: (and as Plutarch of Sardanapalus, and
S.1. Tim. 5. 6. Paul of a widow liuing in pleasure) that he is dead and
buried euen while hee liueth: and so passing from age to age,
we passe from euill to euill; it is but one waue driuing ano|ther,
vntill we arriue at the hauen of death.Altercatio cum Hadriano Im|perat. Epictetus spake
more like a Diuine then a Philosopher: Homo calamitatis
fabula, infoelicitatis tabula. Though a King by warre or wile

should conquer all the proud earth, yet hee gets but a nee|dles
point, a mote, a mite, a nit, a nothing. So that while we
striue for things of this world, wee fight as it were like chil|dren,
for pins and points. And thereforePhil. 1. 23. Paul desired to be
loosed, and to be with Christ and  (as some Dines ob|serue)
praieth here to be dismissed, (asCom. in Lucam lib. 2. cap. 2. Ambrose doth read)
Dimitte: Lord let loose.Ser. de mort. Cyprian andHom. 15. in Lucam. Origen, dimtes, in
the future: as if he should say, Now Lord I hope thou wil suf|fer
me to depart. Howsoeuer the word in the present, imports
that death is aBeauxamis in locum. goale-deliuery: Nunc dimiisseruum: Now
Lord thou settest free thy seruant: as  is vsed, Act. 16. 35.
Luke 23. 17.
Mantuan. in 1. partenic. Marian. In peace. Nam quid longa dies nobis, nis longa dolorum
Colluuies? longs patientia carceris aets.

In peace]Lexicon Theo|log. verb. pax. There are
three kinds of peace:

Externall
Internall
Etrnall
Peace of

World.
Mind.
God.




Or more plainly, peace between

Man and man.
God and man.
Man and himselfe.


The last kind is meant here, though assuredly Simeon had
all three: for our peace with God, and so farre as is possible
loue toward all men, breedes in vs a third peace, the which
is the contentation of our minde and peace of conscience:
for which euery man ought to labour all his life; but at his
death especially, that comfortably departing he may sing
with old Simeon: Lord now lettest c.
I know many men haue died discontent and rauing,
without any sentiment of this comfortable peace, to mans
imagination, and yet notwithstanding were doubtlesse
Gods elect children. For, asDe doctrina Christiana, lib. 1. cap. 14. Augustine, many works of
God concerning our saluation are done in, and by their
contraries. In the creation, all things were made, not of
something, but of nothing, cleane contrary to the course of
nature. In the worke of redemption, he doth giue life, not
by life, but by death, and that a most accursed death. Opti|mum
fecit instrumentum vitae, quod erat pessimum mortis ge|nus.
In our effectuall vocation, he calles vs by the Gospell,

1. Cor. 2. 23. vnto the Iewes a stumbling block, vnto the world meere
foolishnes, in reason more likely to driue men from God,
then to winne and wooe men to God. And when it is his
pleasure that any should depend vpon his goodnesse and
prouidence, he makes them feele his anger, and to be no|thing
in themselues, that they may relie altogether vpon
him. And thus happily the child of God, throughActs. 14. 22. many
tribulations, and, to our thinking, through the gulfe of de|speration,
enters into the kingdome of heauen. The loue of
God is like a Sea, into which when a man is cast, he neither
seeth banke, nor feeleth bottome.

For there is a two-fold pre|sence
of God in his children:

1. Felt and perceiued.
2. Secret and vnknowne.


Sometime God is not only present with his elect, but al|so
makes them sensibly perceiue it, as Simeon here did: and
therefore his mourning was turned into mirth, and his sobs
into songs.
Againe, sometime God is present, but not felt: and this
secret presence sustaines vs in all our troubles and tempta|tations:
it intertaineth life in our soules, whe~ as to our iudg|ment
we are altogether dead, as there is life in trees when
they haue cast their leaues. And therefore let no man bee
dismaied, howsoeuer dismaied: for God doth neuer leaue
those, whom he doth loue: but his comfortable spirit is a
secret friend, and often doth vs most good, when wee least
perceiue it: Esay 41. 10 c. 43. 2.
According to thy word.]According to thy word.] If God promise, we may presume,
Numb. 23. 19. for he is not like man, that he should lie: neither as the sonne
of man, that he should repent. This should teach vs to be ho|iie,
Leuit. 19. 2. as God our Father is holy,Ephes. 5. 1. being followers of him
as deare children. As he doth euer keepe his word with vs;
so let vs euer keepe our othes and promises one with ano|ther.
It is well obserued, that aequinocation and lying is a kind
of vnchastitie: for the mouth and minde are coupled toge|ther
in holie mariage: Matth. 12. 34. Out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaketh. And therefore when the
tongue doth speake that which the heart neuer thought,
our speech is conceiued in adulterie, and hee that breedes

such bastard children, offends not only against charity, but
also against chastitie.
Men say they must lie sometime for aduantage, but it is
a good conclusion both in religion, and common experi|ence,
that honestie is the best policie, and truth the only dura|ble
armour of proofe. The shortest way commonly, the
foulest, the fairer way not much about.Psal. 15. Lord who shall dwell
in thy tabernacle? or who shall rest vpon thine holy hill? euen he
that speaketh the truth from his heart, he that vseth no deceit
in his tongue, hee that sweareth vnto his neighbour, and disap|pointeth
him not.
For mine eyes haue seene thy saluation] I haue seene the
Messias,The reason why Simeon was wil|ling to die. in whom, and by whom thy saluation is wrought
and brought vnto vs. As Simeon saw Christs humanitie
with the eies of his body: so he saw Christs Diuinity long
before with the pearcing eies of faith. He knew that the
little babe which he lulled in his armes, was the great God,
whom the heauen of heauens could not containe: and
therefore beleeuing in the Lord of life, hee was not afraid
of death: but instantly breakes forth into this sweete song,
Lord now lettest thou thy seruant depart in peace, for mine eyes
haue c.
Death is vnwelcome to carnall men, asArist. Ethic. lib. 3. cap. 9. Aristotle said,
Of all Terribles the most Terrible.Philip Mor|ney Treat. of life and death. They crie out vpon the
miseries of life, and yet when death commeth, they doe as
little children, who all the day complaine, but when the
medicine is brought them, are nothing sicke: as they who
all the weeke runne vp and downe the house with paine of
the teeth, and seeing the Barbor come to pull them out,
feele no more torment: as tender bodies in a pricking plu|risie
call, and cannot stay for a Surgeon, and yet when they
see him whetting his lancet to cut the throte of the disease,
pull in their armes and hide them in the bed. And the true
reason hereof is want of faith, because they doe not vnfai|nedly
beleeue that Christ IesusEphes. 4 8. hath led captiuitie captiue,
1. Cor. 15. 54. that he hath swallowed vp death in victorie by his death, and
opened vnto vs the gates of eternall life.Luke 23. 42. The blessed theefe
vpon the Crosse died ioyfully, because hee saw Christ, and

beleeued also that he should passe from a place of paine to
a paradise of pleasure.Acts 7. 56. S. Stephen died ioyfully, because he
saw the heauens open, and Christ standing at the right hand of
the Father. Here Smeon departed ioyfully, because his eyes
saw the saluation of the Lord.
As there are two degrees of faith, so two sorts of Chri|stians;
one weake, another strong. The weake Christian is
willing to liue, and patient to die: but the strong patient to
liue, and willing to die.
That a man may depart in peace, two things are requisit:

1. Preparation before death.
2. A right disposition at death.

Both which are procured onely by faith in Christ. If a
man were to fight hand to hand with a mightie Dragon, in
such wise that either he must kill or be killed, his best course
were to bereaue him of his poison and sting. Death is a Ser|pent,
and the sting, wherewith he woundeth vs, is sinne: so
saith1. Cor. 15. 56. S. Paul, The sting of death is sinne. Now the true be|leeuer
vnderstands and knowes assuredly that Christ Iesus
hath satisfied the law, and then if no law, no sinne: and if no
sinne, death hath no sting: well may death hisse, but it can|not
hurt:Psal. 32. 1. when our vnrighteousnes is forgiuen, and sinne
couered, Christ both in life and death is aduantage: Phi|lip. 1. 21.
Faith also procureth a right disposition and behauiour at
death: for euen as when the children of Israel in the wil|dernes
were stung with fierie Serpents, and lay at the point
of death,Numb. 21. 9. they looked vp to the Brasen Serpent, erected by
Moses according to Gods appointment, and were present|ly
cured: so when any feele death draw neere with his fiery
sting, to pearce the heart, they must fixe the eye of a true
faith vpon Christ exalted on the Crosse, beholding death
not in the glasse of the Law, which giueth death an vglie
face: but in the Gospels glasse, setting foorth death, not as
death, but as a1. Cor. 11. 30. sleepe only. Faith is the speare which kil|leth
our last enemie: for when a man is sure that hisIob 19. 25. re|deemer
liueth, and that this1. Cor. 15. 54. corruptible shall put on incorrup|tion,
and this mortall immortalitie; well may he sing with old

Simeon, Lord now lettest thou thy seruant depart in peace: and
triumph ouer y^e graue with Paul; O death where is thy sting!
O hell where is thy victory! The sting of death is sin, the strength
of sin is the law: but thanks be giuen vnto God, which giueth vs
victorie through our Lord Iesus Christ. And thus much of the
reason, why Simeon was not afraid of death: namely, for that
he did hold in his armes, and behold with his eyes, the Lord
Christ,Iohn 11. 25. who is the resurrection and the life: he could say
with a true heart vnto God,Psal 31. 16. thou art my God: and his soule
did heare God saying vnto him by his word,Psal. 35. 3. I am thy sal|uation.
Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people.] The
second part of this Hymne, concerning the generall good
our Sauiour brought to the whole world.

Wherein two points are
to be noted especially:

1. What are his benefits.
2. To whom they belong.


The benefits are saluation, light, and glorie. So that the
world without Christ, lieth in damnation, darknesse, and
shame. Iesus is a Sauiour,Acts 4. 12. neither is there saluation in any
other: he is theIohn 1. 9.  8. 12. light of the world, and sunne of righteousnes,
without whom all men sit in darknesse, and in the shadow of
death, as Zacharias in his song: hee is our glorie, without
whom nothing belongs vnto vs butBaruch. 1. 15. confusion and shame.
These benefits are so great, that they ought to bee had in a
Psal. 111. 4. perpetuall remembrance. Christ himselfe commanded his
last supper to be reiterated often, and the Church inioyneth
this Hymne to bee sung dailie, in a thankfull memoriall
hereof.
But vnto whom appertaine these benefits? Vnto all. So
saith the text, which thou hast prepared before the face of all
people.Esay. 52. 10. The Lord hath made bare his holie arme in the sight of
all the Gentiles, and all the ends of the earth shall see the salua|tion
of our God. Christ is set vp as aEsay 11. 10. signe to the people, and
happily for this cause, among other, hee was borne in a
Luke 2. 7. common Inne, frequented by men of all sorts: and the
first newes of the Gospell was preached in open fields,
Luk. 2. as prepared before the face of all people.
But here we must obserue, that albeit saluation pertaines

to all, yet all pertaine not to it: none pertaine to it, but such
as take benefit by it: and none take benefit by it, no more
then by the brasen Serpent, but they who fix their eies on it.
If we desire saluation, light, and glory, we must (as old Si|meon)
imbrace Christ ioyiully, and hold him in our armes of
faith stedfastly.
To be a light to lighten the Gentiles.] If any shall demand
why Simeon here calles Christ the light of the Gentiles, and
glory of the Iewes, rather then the glory of Gentiles, and
light of the Iewes: answer is made
that there is a two-fold darknes:

Sinne.
Ignorance.

Sinne is called in holy Scriptures a worke of darknes for
diuers respects:
1. Because it is committed against God,1. Epist. Iohn 1. 5. who is light,
through the suggestion of Satan,Ephes. 6. 12. who is the prince of dark|nesse.
2. Because sinne for the most part is committed in the
darke:1. Thes. 5. 7. They that sleepe, sleepe in the night, and they that are
drunken, are drunken in the night.
3. Because sinne deserueth eternall darknesse:Matth. 25. 30. Cast that
vnprofitable seruant into vtter darknes.
4. Because sinne is committed especially through the
darknesse of vnderstanding: for Satan vsually blindeth our
eies of reason, and religion, and makes sinne appeare not in
it owne name and nature, but vnder the name and habit of
vertue.
Now in regard of this kind of darknes, Christ was a light
to the Iewes, as well as to the Gentiles: Esay 60. 1. Arise O
Ierusalem, be bright, for thy light is come. Iohn 1. 9. Christ doth
lighten euery man that commeth into the world.
The second kind of darknesse is ignorance: the light of
the body is the eye, so the eye of the soule is the vnderstan|ding:
and therefore as Christ saith, if the light that is in thee
be darknes, how great is that darknes? The Iewes in this re|spect
were not in such darknesse as the Gentiles; hauing the
Law, the Prophets, the sacrifices and exercises of holy reli|gion:
In Iurie was God knowne, his name great in Israel, at Sa|lem
was his Tabernacle, his dwelling in Sion: whereas the

Ephes. 2. 12. Gentiles were strangers and aliens from the couenants of pro|mise,
without hope, without God in the world: but now Christ
Esay 42. 6. the light of the Gentiles, yea of the whole world, hath
broken downe the partition wall, and made ofEphes. 2. 14. Both, one;
all people, Gods people. For as theMatth. 5. 45. naturall Sunne shineth
indifferently vpon the good and euill: so theMal. 4. 2. Sunne of
righteousnes sheweth his glorious sauing light before the
face of all people; to lighten and open our eies, that we may
turne from darknesse to light, from the power of Satan vnto
God: Acts 26. 18.
Howsoeuer Christ be the light of all people, yet (as it fol|loweth)
he is The glory of his people Israel, vnto whom pertai|ned
theRom. 9. 4. adoption, and the glory, and the couenants. He was
promised vnto them, borne of them, bred vp them, he
liued, preached, acted his great wonders among them: in all
which respects, he may be fitly called Israels glory.
Hence we may learne, first, that the Gospel is the greatest
honour of a State.
Secondly, that all our glory depends on Christ our head,
who is the King of glory.
Thirdly, that a good man, especially a good Preacher, is
a great ornament to the Country wherein the liueth: Atha|naius
isNazianzen ad Herenem. called the eye of his time;Baronius An|nal. tom. 9. fol. 338. Albinus, Englands Li|brary;
Bucanus prae|fat. loc. com. Melancthon, the Phenix of Germany; Christ, the
glory of Israel.


Deus Misereatur.
THe parallel of Nunc dimittis is the 67. Psalme, being a
Augustin. Hieron. Hilar. Euthym. c. propecie of Christ, who is theHieron. Eu|thym. Interli|nearis gloss. countenance of
God: Heb. 1. 3. Coloss. 1. 15. For,Bellarm. Cat. cap. 3. euen as when one lookes
in a glasse, presently he produceth an image of himselfe, so
like, as no difference can be found, in so much as it is not
only like in shape, but in mouing also, yet made without
instruments in a moment with one looke only: so God the
Father beholding himselfe in the glasse of his Diuinitie,
doth produce a countenance most like himselfe. And be|cause
hee hath giuen vnto this image all his owne being,
(which we cannot in beholding our selues in a glasse) there|fore

that image is the true Sonne of God, very God of very
God: whereas the Psalmist therefore: Shew the light of thy
countenance. Simeon; Mine eies haue seene thy saluation. The
Psalmist, That thy waies may be knowne vpon earth, thy sauing
health among all nations. Simeon; Thou hast prepared salua|tion
before the face of all people. The Psalmist: Let the peo|ple
praise thee, that is, theEuthymius in locum. Iewes, let all the people, that is, the
Genttiles: O let the nations reioice and be glad, c. Simeon: A
light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of thy
people Israel.

In the whole Psalme two points are specially regardable:

Affectus: A request of the Church
in the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. verses:
Effectus: A grant of God in the
6. 7. verses.



In the for|mer obserue

Petitions for

Our selues, in the 1.

Generally: God bee merciful  blesse vs.
Specially: Shew vs the light of thy countenance.

Other, in the 2. 3. 4.

Repetitions: God be mercifull vnto vs. And a|gaine: Be mercifull vnto vs: let the people c. And againe: Let the people, let all the people praise thee.


God be mercifull.] He is the2. Cor. 1. 3. father of mercies: Ergo, we
must flie to him for mercy. Deus meus misericordia mea, saith
Dauid in the 59. Psalme.August. in Psal. 58. Si dicas salus mea, intelligo quia
dat salutem: si dicas refugium meum, intelligo quia confugis ad
eum: si dicas fortitudo mea, intelligo quia dat fortitudinem. Mi|sericordia
mea: quid est? totum quicquid sum, de misericordia
tua est. And therefore seeing Gods mercie is the fountaine
of all goodnesse, weHilar.  Fe|linus in loc. must first desire him to be mercifull,
and then to blesse vs, he that hath enough mercie, shall ne|uer
want any blessing.Musculus in locum. The word originall signifieth ra|ther
fauour, then pitie; because pitie is shewed onely in ad|uersitie,
not in prosperitie: whereas fauour in both: and
therefore the vulgar Latine, Deus misereatur, happily not so

sufficient, as Deus faueat: Be fauorable O Lord, and so mer|cifull
as to blesse vs: that is, not only to deliuer vs from euill,
but also to giue whatsoeuer is good. In more particular,
Shew vs the light of thy countenance.]Augustin. in locum. Euery man doth desire
blessing, but the good man only this blessing:Gloss. ordinar. in locum. all other are
blessings of the left hand, common to the wicked with the
godly; but this a blessing of the right hand, which only be|longs
vnto Gods elect.
God lookes on the reprobate like an angry Iudge with
a cloudie countenance: but beholds all his adopted chil|dren
in Christ as a mercifull father, with a gratious aspect.
Shew vs thy countenance, that is, indue vs with true know|ledge
of thy word, and a liuely faith in thy Sonne, which is
thine owne image and countenance, where we may learne to
confesse withPhil. 2. 8. Paul, that all other things are but losse, in
comparison of the superexcellent knowledge of Christ Ie|sus:
Iohn 17. 3. for it is eternall life to know God, and whom he hath sent
Iesus Christ.
That thy way may be knowne.] As light, so the participation
of Gods light is communicatiue: we must not pray for our
selues alone, but for all other, that Gods way may be known
vpon earth, and his sauing health among all nations. Thy
way, that is, thy will, thy word, thy works.Hieron. in locum. Gods will must
be knowne on earth, that it may be done on earth, as it is in
heauen. Except we know our Masters will, how shall we do
it? Ergo, first pray with Dauid here: Let thy way be knowne
vpon earth: and then let all the people praise thee. Gods will
is reuealed in his word, and his word is hisDeut. 5. 32. 33 way wherein
we must walke, turning neither to the right hand, nor to
the left: or thy wayFelinus in locum., that is, thy works, as Dauid elsewhere,
Psalm. 25. 9. All the waies of the Lord are mercie and truth.
Aug. Hieron. Hilar. Or as other most fitly, Thy way, that is, thy Christ, Thy sa|uing
health, that is, thy Iesus: for I am the way, saith our Sa|uiour:
Iohn 14. 6. No man commeth to the Father but by
me: wherefore let thy sonne be knowne vpon earth, thy Iesus a|mong
all nations.
At this time God was knowne in Iurie: but (saith Hie|rome)
Gods way was vnknowne, his sonne was not as yet

manifested in the flesh: this (as1. Cor. 2. 7. Paul speakes) was his wise|dome:
but now reuealed, as S. Iohn in his firstCap. 1. vers. 1. epistle, Wee
haue heard, wee haue seene with our eyes, and our hads haue
handled of the word of life. Blessed eyes, happie eares: forLuke 10. 24. I
tell you many Proph and Kings haue desired to see the things
which you see, and haue not seene them, and to heare the things
which you heare, and haue not heard them.
Let the people praise thee.]Musculus in locum. Marke the sweete order of
the blessed Spiit: first mercie, then knowledge: last of all,
praising of God. We cannot see his countenance, except he
be mercifull vnto vs: and wee cannot praise him, except his
way be knowne vpon earth: his mercie breeds knowledge,
his knowledge praise. Wee must praise God, alway for all
things, Ephes. 5. 20. but especially for his sauing health
among all nations. And this is the true reason why the Church
in her Liturgie doth vse so many Hymnes,The reason why the Church doth vse so many E|uangelicall Hymnes in our Lturgie. and giue so much
thanks vnto God for the redemption of the world. Where|in
assuredly she did imitate the blessed Apostles in compo|sing
the Creed: the greatest part whereof (as hath been no|ted)
is spent in the doctrine which concerneth our Sauiour
Christ.
Let all the people] Some mislike the Letanie, for that it
hath a petition for all men, and all people: yet wee haue
both a precept, and a precedent out of Gods owne booke:
the Commandement is, 1. Tim. 2. I exhort that first of all, sup|plications,
prayers, intercessions, and giuing of thankes be made
for all men. The practise of Gods Church is apparent in this
place: let the people, let all the people, which the Psalmo|grapher
vttered from the spirit of God, as the mouth of
God: and therefore let men construe the Church, as the
Scripture, when as the Church doth speake Scripture, lest
they wipe out of the Bible many good lessons, (asLib. 5. aduers. Marcion. Sinon spongia, lingua tamen  per|uersa interpre|tatione. Ter|tulli
in said of Marcion) if not with a spunge, yet with a
peeuish and ouerthwart interpretation. And heere let the
Nouelist also remember, that both ourBooke of the forme of Com|mon prayer, im|printed at Md|dchurg. 1586. English reformers,
and the Churches of Scotland, vse the same petition for all
men, in their prayers after the Sermon.
O let the nations reioyce and be glad.]Calum. in loc. It is obserued to

good purpose, that this clause is inserted fitly between that
doubled exclamation, Let the people praise thee: because none
can praise God well, except they doe it heartily with ioy
and gladnesse. For as the Lord loues a2. Cor. 9. 7. cheerefull giuer,
so likewise a cheerefullPsal. 81. 1. thanksgiuer.Musculus in locum. God is terrible to
the wicked, but a God of gladnesse to such as haue seene
the light of his countenance: for being reconciled vnto
God, they haue such inward ioy and peace,Philip. 4. 7. that it passeth
all vnderstanding.
For thou shalt iudge the folke righteously.] The Psalmist
here may seeme to contradict himselfe: for if mercie make
men reioyce, then iudgement occasioneth men to tremble.
Answere is made, that all such as haue knowne the waies of
the Lord, and reioyce in the strength of his saluation, all
such as haue the pardon of their sinnes assured, and sealed,
feare not that dreadfull assise, because they know the Iudge
is their aduocate. Or, (as Hierome) let all nations reioyce,
because God doth iudge righteously, being the God of the
Gentiles, as well as of the Iewes, Acts 10. 34.Hieron. Calu. Felinus. Or, let all
nations reioyce, because God doth gouerne all nations; that
whereasActs 14. 16. heretofore they wandred in the fond imagina|tions
of their owne hearts, in wrie waies, in by-waies; now
they are directed by the spirit of truth to walke in Gods
high way which leades vnto the celestiall Ierusalem: now
they shall know Christ the way, the truth, and the life. For
iudging, is vsed often for ruling: 1. Sam. 7. 15. 2. Cor. 1. 10.
So Dauid here doth expound himselfe: Thou shalt iudge:
that is, thou shalt gouerne the nations.
Vpon earth.] Not excluding things aboue, but openly
meeting with their impietie, who think God careth not
for the things below: forCicero de na|tur deorum lib. . Epicurus in old time so taught,
 Epicures in our time so liue, as if almightie God did not
marke what were done well or ill vpon earth.Psal. 94. 8. O yee fooles
when will ye vnderstand? He that planted the eare, shall he not
heare? or he that made the eye, shall he not see?August. ep. 111 Totus oculus
est, quia omnia videt: totus manus est, quia omnia operatur: to|tus
pes est, quia vbique est: asEpist. 41. Lucilio. Seneca like a Diuine: Prope 
te est Deus, tecum est, intus est. Ita dico Lucili, sacer intra nos

spiritus sedet, malorum bonorumque obseruator  custos.
Let the people.] This, and other manifest repetitions in
this Psalme, may serue for a warrant to iustifie the repeti|tions
in our Liturgie: but I will answere the Nouelist in the
words of Paul, Rom. 2. In that thou blamest another, thou
condemnest thy selfe, for thou that iudgest, doest the same thing.
The reformers in one of their prayers after the Sermon,
vse repetition, and that of the Lords prayer, and in such sort,
that within a very narrow roome it is first expounded para|phrastically,
then againe reiterated euery word particularly.
So likewise the Scotish Church in the ministration of Bap|tisme
doth enioyne that the Creed be repeated twice. First
the father, or in his absence the Godfather propounds it,
and then instantly the Minister expounds it. Wherfore that
worthieMaster Per|kins Treat, how to applie Gods word: sect. 10. Diuine most truly, there is in England a schisma|ticall
and vndiscreete companie, that would seeme to crie out
for discipline, their whole talke is of it, and yet they neither know
it, nor will be reformed by it.
Then shall the earth.] Literally the earth which was cursed
for mans sinne, shall, through Gods blessing, giue her in|crease.
Psal. 56. 14. The valleyes shall stand thick with corne, and ourPsal. 144. 13. gar|ners
shall be full with all manner of store. So that if theIoel 1. 12. vine
be dried vp, or the figge tree decaied, if our corne bee bla|sted,
or graine so thinne, that thePsal. 129. 7. mower cannot fill his
hands, nor he that bindeth vp the sheaues his bosome: we must
remember it is for our vnthankfulnes and sin. For if all the
people praise the Lord, then shall the earth bring forth her
increase. See the two first Chapters of Ioel.
In a mysticall sense: MaryEuthymius  Genebrard. in locum. shall bring foorth Christ:
Augustin. in locum. or, the blessed Apostles by preaching in all corners of the
world shall bring foorth increase to God, a great haruest.
This prophecie was fulfilled, Acts 2. when S. Peter in one
sermon conuerted about three thousand soules:Musculus in locum. or earth,
that is, all men on earth shall bring foorth fruite vnto God,
when as they shall know him, and praise him. Let the peo|ple
c. let all the people praise, then shall the earth bring
foorth increase.
God, euen our owne God.] Out of this sentence theHieron. Eu|thymius c. Fathers,

and Tittel|man, c. other Interpretors obserue generally the Trinitie and
vnitie of God: the Trinitie in the three-fold repetition of
the word God vnitie in the pronoune him, all the ends of
the world shall feare him: in the singular, not them, in the
plurall. It is very remarkable that Christ the second per|son
is called our God: God euen our God, as being ours in
many respects, as hauing taken vpon him our flesh, liuing
among vs, and at length also dying for vs. Immanuel God
with vs, Esay 7. 14. Matth. 1. 23. Hee bareEsay 53. 4. our infirmities,
and answered for our1. Pet. 2. 24. iniquities, our1. Ep. Ih. . 2. reconciliuion, and our
Ephes. 2. 14. peace, through whom and in whom God is ours, and we
are his: Can. 6. 2.
All the ends of the world shall feare him.] In the 4 verse
Dauid desired earnestly that all nations might be glad, and
reioyce: now that they may feare: teaching vs hereby to
serue the Lord in feare, and to reioyce vnto him with reuerence:
Psal. 2. 11. So to feare him, as to serue him withPsal. 100. 1. gladnesse:
and so to reioyce in him, as to workePhilip. 2. 12. out our saluation in
feare and trembling: without ioy wee shall despaire, with|out
feare presume.
The feare of God (as Salomon speakes) is the beginning of
wisedome, not only principium, but praecipium; not only pri|mum,
but primarium: and therefore as it is called the be|ginning
of wisedome, Prou. 1. 7; so likewise the end of all:
Ecclesiastes 12. 13. et vs heare the end of all, feare God, and
keepe his commandements.
This feare is not slauish, a distractiue and destructiue
feare, which ouerthroweth our assurance of saith, and spi|rituall
comfort: for such a feare God forbids, Esay 35 4.
Luke 12. 32. but it is a filiall and awfull regarding feare,
Terrens  malo, tenens in bono: being an inseparable compa|nion
of a liuely faith, and therefore commanded in Gods
word, and commended in his seruants: oldLuke 2. 25. Simeon a iust
man, and one that feared God:Acts 10. 2. Cornelius a deuout man,
and one that feared God:Iob. 1. 1. Iob a iust man,  one that feared
God: and here God is said to blesse the Church, in that all
the ends of the world shall feare him.



Quicun vult.
THe learned Athanasian Creed consists of two speciall
parts, vnfolding fully the two chiefe secrets of holy be|liefe:
namely,

The

Vnitie and Trinitie of God.
Incarnation and passion of Christ.


The which are called the principal mysteries of our faith,
because in the former is contained the first beginning and
last end of man: in the second, the only and most effectuall
meane to know the first beginning, and how to attaine vnto
the last end. So that Athanasius hath comprehended in a
very narrow roome both the beginning and middle and
end of all our felicitie. For this happily called, the worlds eye,
because he did see so much, and pierce so far into these vn|searchable
and ineffable mysteries.
And as this excellent Confession is a key of beleefe;Letanie. so the
Letanie following, is as a common treasure house of all good
deuotion. It may be said of the Church in composing that ex|quisite
praier, as it was of Origen, writing vpon the Canti|cles:
In caeteris alios omnes vicit, in hoc seipsam. In other
parts of our Liturgie shee surpasseth all other: but in this
her selfe.
These points (I confesse) come not now within the com|passe
of my walke: but I purpose pro Nosse  posse to iustifie
them, and all other portions of our Communion booke in
my larger expositions vpon the Gospels and Epistles, as the
text shall occasion me iustly. The next eminent Scripture
to bee considered in this Tract is the Decalogue, recorded
Exod. 20. 1.


The Decalogue.
Then God spake all these words and said, I am the Lord
thy God, c.
THe Law was imprinted at the first in mansRom. 2. 15. heart: the
which is acknowledged euen by prophane Poets, as
well as diuine Prophets in generall.

Iuuenal. Sa|tyr. 13. Exemplo quodcun malo committitur, ipsi
displicet authori: prima est haec vltio, quod se
Iudice, nemo nocens absoluitur, improba quamuis
gratia fallacis praetoris vicerit vrnam.
AndEpist. 97. Seneca notably: Prima  maxima peccantium poe|na
peccasse: Sinne is the greatest punishment of sinne in
particular (asLoc. com. tit. de leg. naturae, tom. 1. fol. 186. Melancthon obserues). Heathen authors
haue a paterne for euery precept, according to that of Paul,
Rom. 2. 14. The Gentiles hauing not the law, are a law vnto
themselues.
But when theAlbinus quaest in Gene|sin.  Thom. 12 ae. quaest, 94. art. 5. light of it through custome of sinne be|gan
to weare away, it was openly proclaimed vnto the
world, ingrauen in stone, written in a booke, kept for re|cord
in the Church, as a perfect abridgement of all law,
setting downe the duties of all men, in all things, for all
times.

In it obserue

Prefa|ces:

One, of the Law writer: God spake all these words, c.
Another, of the Law-giuer: I am the Lord thy God, c.

Precepts of the

First table, co~cerning our loue to God.
Second, touching our loue to man.




In the former preface note: the

Matter, all these words.
Manner,

When.
Who.



The matter is: these words, that is, these sentences and all
these: for Almightie God spake not the first Commande|ment
only, nor the second, or third, and left there; but hee
spake them all: and therefore the Pope proues himselfe An|tigod
in leauing out one, and dispensing with many. God
gaue so strict a charge to keepe euery one, as any one: but
the Vicar of God abounding with vnlimitted authoritie,
doth first publish what he list, and then expound them as he
list. To leaue them, who thus leaue God, is our dutie, be|cause
God spake them all, to beg of him obedience, and

make conscience to keepe them all, as one wittily, Totus,
Tota, Totum: The whole man, The whole law, The whole
time of his life.
In the manner, I note first the circumstance of time, when
God spake: namely, when all the people were gathered together,
aud sanctified: as appeareth in the former Chapter, then God
spake. Whereupon it is well obserued that all men ought to
take notice of the law, whether they be Commoners, or
Commanders, high or low, none so mighty that is greater,
or so meane that is lesse, then a subiect to God and his ordi|nances:
and thereforeLoc. com. tit. Antinomoi. Martin Luther hath worthily repre|hended
Antinomian preachers, who teach that the Law need
not be taught in the time of the Gospell. Indeed Christ is
theRom. 10. 4. end of the Law but, asContra aduer|sar. legis lib. 2. cap. 7. Augustine construes it, finis per|ficiens,
non interficiens: an end not consuming, but consum|mating:
for, as himselfe said,Matth. 5. 17. I came not to destroy the law, but
to teach it, and doe it.
Secondly, we may learne by this circumstance, due pre|paration
when wee come before God either to speake or
heare his word. Auenzoar vsed to say, that hee neuer gaue
purgation, but his heart did shake many daies before. Let
the Physition of the soule then tremble, to thinke what
hurt bad physicke may doe, when it is administred abrupt|ly,
corruptly, without either paines in reading, or reuerence
in speaking. Vnto thePsal. 50. 16. vngodly said God; Why doest thou
preach my lawes, and takest my couenant in thy mouth, when as
thou hatest to be reformed, and hast cast my words behind thee?
If hearers of the Law, much more Preachers of the Gospell
ought to be throughly sanctified. In the Millers hand wee
lose but our meale: in the Farriors hand but our mule: in
the Lawyers hands but our goods: in the Physitians hand
but our life; but in the hands of a bad Diuine wee may lose
that which surpasseth all, our soule.
Hearers also being of vncircumcisedActs 7. 51. hearts and eares,
ought to fit and prepare themselues, asExod. 3. 5. Moses andIosua 5. 15. Iosua
were commanded, in disburdening their mind, when they
come to Gods house to heare God speake, not only from
vnlawfull, but also from all lawfull worldly busines; pre|senting

themselues and their soules in the righteousnes of
Christ, aRom. 12. 1. liuing, holy, acceptable sacrifice to God: and it
is the dutie both of speaker and hearer to desire the Lord
that he would forgiue ourChron. 2. 30. 18. 19. want of preparation, and so to
assist vs with his holy spirit in handling of his holy word, as
that the whole businesse may be transacted for our good,
and his glory.
The second circumstance noted in the manner is the per|son,
and that is God: Then God spake these words, in his owne
person, attended vpon with millions ofActs 7. 53. Gal. 3. 9. glorious Angels,
inExod. 19. 18. a flame of fire: so that there is neuer an idle word, but
all full of wonderful wisdome: so perfect a law, that it proues
it selfe to be Gods law. For the lawes of men, albeit they fill
many large volumes, are imperfect; some statutes are added
daily which were not thought vpon before; many repea|led,
which after experience taught not to be so profitable:
but this law continueth the same for euer, comprehending
in a few words all perfection of dutie to God and man, in|ioyning
whatsoeuer is good, and forbidding whatsoeuer
is euill.
God is author of all holy Scripture, but the ten Com|mandements
are his, after a more peculiar sort: first, because
himselfe spake them, and said in a sound of words, and a di|stinct
voice,Deut. 5. 24. that the people both heard, and vnderstood
them: in which snse S.Acts 7. 38. Stephen happily calleth them ora|cula
vina, liuely oracles: not that they did giue life, for2. Cor. 3. 7. Paul
sheweth that the Law was the ministration of death; but
liuely words, as vttered by liuely voice, not of men or An|gels,
as other Scripture, but immediatly thundred out by
God himselfe.
Secondly, because God himselfe wrote them after a more
speciall maner: hee did vse men, and meanes in penning
the Gospels and Epistles and other parts of sacred writ:
1. Pet. 1. 21. for holy men of God wrote as they were moued by the spirit of
God: (as theTheodoret praefat in Psal.  Greg. praefat. in Iob. Fathers obserue) they were the pennes of
Gods owne finger: but in setting downe the Decalogue,
Gods owne finger was the pen: hee made the tables also
wherein they were first written, that there might be no|thing

in them but only Gods immediate worke. Since then
God had such speciall regard in deliuering the Law, wee
must hence learne with all humble reuerence to receiue the
same. If King EglonIudges 3. 20. a barbarous tyrant respected Ehud a
man of meane qualitie, when he brought a message from
the Lord; how much more should we with awfull respect
embrace the Decalogue, which God in his owne person vt|tered?
and it should make vs exceeding zealous also (not|withstanding
the scoffes of Atheists and carelesse world|lings)
in obseruing and maintaining the same. For what
need any feare to defend that which God himselfe spake:
and whereofMark. 8. 38. Christ said, He that is ashamed of me, and my
words in this world, I will be ashamed of him before my father in
the world to come. As a liuely faith is the best glosse vpon
the Gospell: so dutifull obedience is the best Commen|tarie
vpon the Law. To conclude with Augustine: Faciemus
iubente imperatore,  non facimus iubente creatore?1. Sam. 3. 10. Yes
Lord, speak: for thy seruants herare.
Thus much concerning the first preface. The second is of
the Law-giuer: I am the Lord, c. Containing two sorts of
arguments, to proue that hee may giue a law; and that his
people are bound to keepe it. The first kind of reason is ta|ken
from his essence and greatnes in himselfe: I am Iehoua.
The second from his effects and goodnes towards Israel.

In

Generall: Thy God.
More speciall: Which haue brought thee out of the
land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.


Now whatsoeuer is said vnto them, is said vnto all. Al|mightie
God isHeb. 13. 8. euer the same,Apocal. 1. 4. which is, which was, and
which is to come: who being Iehoua the Lord, made vs of
nothing: and therefore wee being his creatures, owe obe|dience
to his commands in euery thing; especially seeing
he doth not only presse vs with his greatnes,Calu. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 8.  14 but allure vs
also with his goodnes: being our God by couenant in ho|lie
baptisme, wherein hee tooke vs for his adopted chil|dren,
and we tooke him for our heauenly father: he tooke
vs for his spouse, wee tooke him for our husband: he tooke
vs for his people, wee tooke him for our God:Malac. 1. 6. A some

therefore must honour his father, and a seruant his master. If
he be ours, and we his, as he doth prouoke vs in bountie: so
we must answere him in dutie.
In more speciall, as God brought the children of Israel
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage: so
hath he deliuered vs from the seruitude of Satan, and sinne,
Caluin. vbi supra, . 15. prefigured by that bondage of Egypt and Pharao: that be|ing
deliuered out of the hands of all our enemies, we might serue
him in holinesse and righteousnesse all the daies of our life.
Ezech. 20. 7. Egypt was a countrie giuen exceedingly to supersti|tion
and Idolatrie, worshipping the most base creatures, as
Rats, Onyons, and Garlike: so that to live in such a place
was very dangerous to the soule, and bondage to natures
ingenuous, is an estate of all other most grieuous to the bo|die.
Deliuerance then out of both, as benefits in their owne
nature very great, and in memorie most fresh, were good
motiues vnto regardfull obedience.
The Lord hath done so, and more then so for vs, he hath
freed vs from the Romish Egypt, and Spanish bondage, with lesse
difficultie and more ease: for we are translated out of Babel
and Egypt, without any trauell or iourney. Rome is swept
away from England, and Ierusalem is brought home to our
doores. If arguments drawne either from Gods infinite
might or mercie ought to preuaile; let England shew the
greatest obedience: for England hath had the greatest deli|uerance.


The Precepts.
LOueRom. 13. 10. is the complement of the Law.Mat. 2. 37. 39. Christ therefore
reduced all the ten Commandements vnto these two:
Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God with all thy heart: and thy
neighbour as thy selfe. The which (asLib. 5. contra Marciou. Tertullian obserues) is
not dispendium, but compendium legis: not a curtalling, but
a full abridgement of the whole law. Yet I finde three sun|drie
partitions of the seuerals.
Antiquit lib. 3. cap. 6. Iosephus andLib. de Deca|logo. Philo part them equally, making fiue
Commandements in each table: the curious and learned

may peruse Sextus Senensis Bibliothec. sanct. lib. 2. pag. 59. 
Gallasius annot. in Irenaei, lib. 2. cap. 42.
Lombard out ofQuaest. 71. in Exod.  epist. 119. cap. 11. Augustine, and generally the schoole
men out ofLib. 3. sent. dist. 37. Lombard, in honour of the Trinitie, diuide the
first table into three Commandements, and the second into
seuen.
But all our new writers, and most of the old Doctors,
ascribe foure to the first, sixe to the second: among the He|brewes,
Ramus de re|ligion. lib. 2. c. 3. Aben Esra: the Greekes,In Synopsi. Athanasius,Hom. 8. in Exod. Origen,
Hom. 49. in Matth. Chrysostome: the Latines, Hierome, Ambrose in epist. ad E|phesios,
cap. 6.
Wherefore being compassed about with such a cloud of
witnesses, I follow the Churches order, assigning foure con|cerning
our dutie to God, and sixe touching our dutie to
man.
The first table then is a lanthorne to guide vs in the wor|ship
of God; asIo. de Combis compend. lib. 5. cap. 59. some write, The two first commandements
concerne God the Father as our Creator: the third, God
the Sonne as our redeemer: the fourth, God the holy Ghost
as our sanctifier. Yet so that we worship the Trinitie in vni|tie,
and vnitie in trinitie, neither confounding the persons,
nor diuiding the substance.
Or asHerma. Co|lon. Archiepis. explicat. deca|log. other: the two first Commandements intimate
how we must worship God in our heart: the third, how we
must worship God in our tongue: the fourth, how we must
worship God with both, in sanctifying the Sabbath.

Or the first table doth set down two points especially:

1. The hauing of the true God for our
God, in the first, Thou shalt haue no
other gods but me.
2. The worshipping of this one God,
in the other three.



The first Commandement is obserued in ex|ercising
the three theologicall vertues,

Faith,
Hope,
Charitie.


He that vnfainedly beleeueth in God, hath God for his
God: because he taketh God for the chiefe veritie: and in
this vnbeleeuers and misbeleeuers offend. Hee that hopeth
in God, hath God for his God, in that hee takes him for

most faithfull, most pitifull, and also most potent: as being
assuredly perswaded that hee can, and will helpe him in all
his necessitie. And in this they sinne who despaire of the
mercies of God, or doe trust more in men, then in God: or
so much in men, as in God. He that loueth God aboue all
things, hath God for his God, in holding him for the chiefe
good: and in this they trespasse who loue any creature more
then God, or equall with God, and much more they that
hate God: for it is a sound conclusion in Diuinitie; that is
our God which we loue best, and esteeme most.

Concerning the wor|ship
of God, note the

Manner: in the 2. Commande|ment.
End: in the 3. Commandement.
Time and place: in the 4. Com.


The second doth describe the manner of his worship:
Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen image, c. forbid|ding
all strange worship, and inioyning pure worship ac|cording
to his word:Hilarius. for to deuise phantasies of God, is as
horrible as to say there is no God. And therefore though wee
should grant, that Images and pictures of God are as it
were the Laymans Alphabet, and the peoples Almanacke: yet
forasmuch as these bookes are not imprinted Cum priuile|gio,
but on the contrarie prohibited; it is vnlawfull to learne
what God is by them, or to worship God in, or vnder them.
And lest any should presume, God hath fensed in this com|mandement
with a very strong reason, I am the Lord, and
therefore can punish: a iealos God, and therefore will pu|nish
grieuously such, as giue that honour to another which
only belongs vnto me.
The end of Gods worship is his glorie, prouided for in
the third Commandement: Thou shalt not take the name of
the Lord thy God in vaine.

The which is done two waies, in our

Workes.
Words.


In our conuersation: when as our leaud life doth occa|sion
enemies of religion to reuile the Gospell, andRom. 2. 24. blas|pheme
God. It is to take Christs name in vaine, when wee
play the Gentiles vnder the name of Christians; as Paul to

1. Titus 16. Titus: professing God in word, but denying him in our works.
Saluianus de gubernatione. dei, lib. 4. Hoc ipso Christiani deteriores qu meliores esse deberent:
2. Tim. 2. 19. He that calles on the name of Christ, must depart from
iniquitie.
Secondly, wee take Gods name in vaine by speech; and
that without an oath, or with an oath: without an oath,
when we talke of himselfe, his essence, titles, attributes, ho|lie
word, wonderfull workes irreuerently and vnworthilie
without any deuotion, or awfull regard of his excellent
Maiestie.

We blaspheme God with
an oath, by swearing either

Idlely.
Falsly,



Idlely out of

Weaknesse: when in our ordinary talke,
through aBasilicon Do|ron, lib. 1. pag. 17 custome in sinne, wee fill
vp our periods withMatth. 5. 37. vnnecessarie
oathes.
Wickednesse: as when a wretch in his dis|contented
humor shall binde himselfe with an oath to doe
some notable mischiefe. So certaine Iewes, Acts 23. sware
that they would neither eate nor drinke till they had killed
Paul: or when he shall despitefully sweare to vex the good
spirit of God, and to trample the bloud of Christ vnder his
feet: if cardes, or bowles, or dice, runne against him, he will
make his tongue to runne so fast against God: or when he
doth sweare by heauen, or earth, or any other creature,Deut. 6. 13. Matth. 5. 34. in
stead of the Creator. An oath is an inuocating of God: he
therefore that sweares by the light, makes light his God:
hee that sweares by the Masse, doth make that Idoll his
God.



A man may forsweare
himselfe three waies, as
Lib. 3. sent. dist. 39. Lombard out ofDe verb Apo|stoli, serm. 28. tom. 10. fol. 264. Augu|stine:
whe~ he doth sweare

1. That which is false, and hee
knowes it false.
2. That which is true, but hee
thought it false.
3. That which is false, but hee
held it true.


The two first kinds are abominable: namely, when a man
sweares either that hee knowes to be false, or thinks to be
false: but the third in the Court of Conscience is no sinne;

because it is with forswearing as with lying: Periurie is no|thing
else but a lie bound with an oath.Aulus Gel|lius, lib. 11. cap. 11.  Augu|stin. de men|dat. ad Consent. cap. 11. As then a man may
tell an vntruth, and yet not lie: so likewise sweare that which
is false, and yet not sweare falsly.Ierem 4. 2. Thou shalt sweare in truth,
that is, as thou shalt in thy conscience and science thinke to
be true:August. epis. 154. for doubtlesse it is a lesser offence to sweare by a
false god truly, then to sweare by the true God falsly: it is a
sinne to lie, but a double sinne to sweare and lie.


The 4. Commandement.
THe fourth Commandement doth set downe the time
and place of Gods holy worship: the time expresly,
Remember thou keepe holy the Sabbath day: the which insi|nuates
also the place; for God was publikely worshipped
in his Sanctuarie, in his Tabernacle, in his Temple. Leuiti|cus
19. 30. Yee shall keepe my Sabbaths, and reuerence my San|ctuarie.
The Sabbath (asRamus de re|lig. lib. 2. cap. 6. one calles it) is Gods schooleday:
the Preachers are his Vshers, and the Church is his open schoole|house.
This Commandement is hedged in on euery side, lest we
should breake out from obseruing it: with a caueat before,
Remember: and two reasons after, one drawne from the
equitie of the law: Six daies shalt thou labour: As if God
should speake thus: If I permit thee sixe whole daies to
follow thine owne businesse, thou maiest well affoord one
onely for my seruice: but sixe daies shalt thou labour and
doe all thine owne worke: therefore hallow the seuenth
in doing my worke. Six daies shalt thou labour.B. Babington  Caluin. Cat. A permis|sion,
or a remission of Gods right, who might challenge
all, rather then an absolute commandement:Perkins au|rea Cat. cap. 23. for the
Church vpon iust occasion may separate some weeke daies
also, to the seruice of the Lord and rest from labour. Ioel 2.
15. Blow the trumpet in Sion, sanctifie a fast, call a solemne as|semblie.
Daies of publique fasting, for some great iudge|ment:
daies of publique reioicing, for some great benefit,
are not vnlawfull, but exceeding commendable, yea neces|sarie.
Yet this permission is aPerkins treat. of callings. commission against idlenesse,

because euery man must liue by theGen. 3. 19. sweat of his browes,
or sweat of his braines: hauing some profession or occupa|tion
or1. Cor. 7. 20. vocation, wherein he must labour faithfully.
Another argument is taken from the Law-giuers ex|ample:
For in six daies the Lord made heauen and earth, and
rested the seuenth day. God requires no more then himselfe
performed, his owne practise is a Commentarie vpon his
law. This may teach all Magistrates, all masters, all superi|ors
who prescribe lawes vnto other, to become first an vn|printed
law themselues. If the Prince will haue his Court
religious, himselfe must be forward in deuotion: if the fa|ther
will haue his children possesse their1. Sam. 21. 5. vessels in chastity,
then himselfe must notIer. 5. 8. neigh after his neighbours wife.
When Sabbath breakers are rebuked, all their answere is,
other, and that the most doe so. If they will follow fashion
and example, let them follow the best: Fashion not your selues
like theRom. 12. 2. world: but be ye followers ofEphes. 5. 1. God: who framed the
whole world in six daies, and rested the seuenth: he rested
from creating, not gouerning; from making of new kinds
of creatures, not singuler things: he is not (as Epicurus ima|gined)
idle, but alway working: Iohn 5. 17. My father wor|keth
hitherto, and I worke.

The Comman|dement
it selfe is

First, propounded briefly: Keepe holy the
Sabbath day.
Then expounded
more largely:
shewing

1. What is the Sab|bath
day, namely,
the seuenth.
2. How it must bee
sanctified: In it thou
shalt doe no manner
of worke.



Keepe holy.] This day hath no more holinesse in it selfe
then other times: only God hath appointed it to holy vses
aboue other: and therefore wee must keepe it more holy
then other.

The Sabbath.] There is sabbathum

Pectoris, of the mind.
Temporis, of time.




The sabbath of the mindTho. 12, quaest. 100. art. 5. is double:

Internall, peace of conscience in the
kingdome of grace.
Eternall, rest of body and soule in
the kingdome of glory.


When asApocal. 14. 13. we shall rest from our labors,Apoc. 7. 17. all teares shall
be wiped from our eies, and cares from our heart.

Among the Iewes the sabbath of time was of

Daies.
Yeeres.



Daies

Lesser: euery seuenth day.
Iohn 19. 31. Greater: as when the Passeouer fell on the Sab|bath:
as it did when Christ suffered.



Leuit. 25. Yeeres:

Euery seuenth yeere, a Sabbath of rest to the
land.
Euery seuen-times seuen yeere: which was 49.
and then followed in the 50. yeere the Iubile.


This Sabbath is of daies, expressely, kept holie the se|uenth
day.

There is

A naturall day, which is the space of 24 houres:
a night and a day: Gen. 1. 5.
An artificiall day: the space of 12. houres: as
Christ: Iohn 11. 9. from the Sunne rising to the Sunne set|ting;
of which I thinke this Commandement is vnderstood.
For albeit the Iewes counted the Sabbath from euening to
euening, yet it was but as they reckoned other daies; not
to sit vp and watch all night: but to spend in Gods seruice
so much of the naturall day, as may be spared without hur|ting
the body.


The seuenth is the Sabbath.] It is the iudgement of the
most and best Interpreters, that the Sabbath isMlancthon tom. 1. fol. 6.  tom. 2. sol. 362. morale quoad
genus, but ceremoniale quoad speciem: Ceremoniall for the
Church hm. concerning the time and place of praier. manner, albeit morall for the matter. I say ceremoniall it.
regard of the particular:B. Babington. as the strict obseruation of the
same day and same rest: precisely to keepe the Saturday,
and strictly to cease from all labour, as the Iewes did, was a
shadow: therefore abrogated by the comming of the body,
Christ.
The blessed Apostles herein led by the spirit of truth,
and (as some thinke) by Christs owneIob. 20. 19. 28. example,Acts 20. 7. 1. Cor. 16. 2. Apocal. 1. 10. altered,

and so by consequence abrogated the particular day. Con|sentaneum
est Apostolos hanc ipsam ob causam mutassediem, vt
oftenderent exemplum abrogationis legum ceremonialium in
die septimo: Melanct. tom. 2. fol. 363.
Whereas therefore the Iewes obserued their Sabbath on
the seuenth day, wee celebrate the eighth. They gaue God
the last day of the weeke: but Christians better honour him
with the first: they keepe their Sabbath in honour of the
worlds creation; but Christians in memoriall of the worlds
redemption, a worke of greater might and mercie: and
therefore good reason the greater worke should carrie a|way
the credit of the day. See the Gospell on Saint Thomas
day.
The particular rest of the Iewes isCaluins Cat. Perkins aurea Caten. cap. 23. Ram. ereli|gione, lib. 2. c. 6. ceremoniall also: for
it is a type of our inward resting from sin in this life: Exod.
31. 13. Ezek. 20. 12. and a figure of ourCaluins Instit. lib. 2. cap. 8. . 31. eternall Sabbath
in the next: as S.D. Fulk vpon Heb. 4. 4. Master Deering lect. 19. vpon Heb. Paul disputes, Heb. 4.
Yet this Commandement is morall in the generall. As
for example, wee must keepe one day in the seuen holie to
the Lord: wherein we must doe no manner of work, which
may let the ministerie of Gods word, and other exercises of
pietie. We must leaue to doe our worke, that the Lord may
bring foorth in vs his worke.

The duties then required on the
Lords day be principally two:

Rest.
And a sanctification of
this rest.


A double Sabbath; rest from labour, and rest from sinne:
for asVbi supra. our Church doth de|termine,
two sorts of people
transgresse this Commande|ment
especially:

1. Such as will not rest fro~ their
ordinary labour, but driue 
carry, row  ferry on Su~day.
2. Such as will rest in vngodli|nes,
idlely spending this holy day in pampering, pointing, painting
themselues. So that God is more dishonoured, and the Di|uell
better serued vpon Sunday, then on all the daies of the
weeke beside.

Thou shalt do no manner of worke.] That is, no seruile work
of thine ordinarie calling; which may be done the day be|fore,
or left well vndone till the day after. But some workes

are lawfull: namely, such as appertaine to the publike wor|ship
of God: as painfull preaching of the sacred word, rea|ding
of diuine prayers, administring of the blessed Sacra|ments,
and euery worke subordinate to these: as ringing of
bels, and trauelling to Church, Acts 1. 12. 2. Kings 4. 23.

And workes of mercie toward

Our selues: as prouision of meate and
drinke, Matth. 12. 1.
Other

Men: our Sauiour healed the
man with the died hand on
the Sabbath, Mark. 3. 5.
Beasts: in watering cattell, and
helping them out of pound
and pit: Luk. 14. 5.



Workes of present necessitie:Perkins vbi supra. Physitions on the Lords
day may visit their patients; Midwiues helpe women with
child, Shepheards attend their flock, Mariners their voiage,
1. Mac. 2. 41. Souldiers may fight, andEsday n the 4. Commande|ment. messengers ride post for the
great good of the Common-wealth.
Works of honest recreations also, so farre as they may ra|ther
helpe then hinder our cheerefull seruing of the Lord:
and the reason of all this is giuen by Christ; Mar. 2. 27. The
Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath.
Thou.] Thy wife is not named, because she is presumed
to be thy selfe: that whatsoeuer is forbidden thy selfe, must
also be knowne to be forbidden thy second selfe.
Thy sonne and thy daughter.] Euery man is aEster 1. 21. gouernour
in his owne house; and therefore must take charge of such
as are vnder him:Augustine. Adduc eos ad domum dei tecum, qui sunt
in domo tua tecum: mater Ecclesia aliquos  te petit, aliquos
repetit; petit eos quos apud te inuenit, repetit quos per te perdidit.

Thy man seruant.] This is for

Thy good.
Their good.
The common good.


Thy good: For hee that on Sunday shall learne his dutie,
will be more fit all the weeke to doe his dutie: such as o|bey
God with a good conscience, will serue their master
with an vpright heart, asGen. 30. 27. Iacob serued Laban, andGen. 39. 5. Ioseph
Pharaoh.

Againe, it is for thy good often toDeut. 5. 15. remember with thank|fulnesse,
that God hath made thee master, and him seruant:
whereas hee might haue made thee seruant, and him ma|ster.
For their good: that they mayIohn 17. 3. know God, and whom he hath
sent Christ Iesus,Iohn 14. 6. the way, the truth, and the life. Thy seruants
are men of the same mold with thee:Macrob. sa|turnal. lib. 1. cap. 11.  Am|bros. serm. 33. Iisdem  constant 
ntriuntur elementis, eundem spiritum ab eodem principio car|punt,
eodem fruun. ur coelo, aequa viuunt, aeque moriuntur, serui,
sunt, imo conserui. That is, in the words of scripture,Gal. 3. 28. Thy
seruants are all one with thee in Christ: made of the same God,
redeemed with the same price, subiect to the same law, be|longing
to the same master: Ephes. 6. 9. Pitie then and pietie
require that thou see them obserue the Lords day, for the
good as well of their bodies as soules.
For the common good:Caluin. Cat. For euery man hath iust cause to
be ready willingly to labour all the weeke, when as he is as|sured
he shall rest on Sunday.
Thy cattell.] Hence we may gather much comfort: for if
God in his mercy prouide for the welfare euen of our brute
beasts, of which he hath made vs Lords; he will assuredly
much more respect vs his seruants and children: he cannot
be carelesse for men, who is so carefull for oxen.
The Commandements are so well knowne, and often
expounded, that asTract. 50. in Iobannem. Augustine speakes in the like case:
Desiderant auditorem magis qum expositorem. I passe there|fore
from the first table, containing all dutie to God, vnto
the second, teaching all dutie to man: I say to man as the
proper immediat object of them. Otherwise these Com|mandements
are done vnto God also: for he that clotheth
the naked, and visiteth the sicke, doth it vnto Christ:
Matth. 25. 40.

The law then concerning
our neighbour is partly

Affirmatiue, teaching vs to do
him all good: Honour thy
father and mother, c.
Negatiue, teaching vs to doe
him no hurt: Thou shalt not
kill, c.



This table begins with honour of our father:Herman. ex|plicat. decalog. First, be|cause
next vnto God we must honour those who are in the
place of God.
Secondly, because the neglect of this one Commande|ment
occasioneth all disorder against the rest: for if supe|riours
gouerne well, and inferiours obey well; how can any
man be wronged in word or deed?
Bellarm. Cat. Thirdly, because of all neighbours our parents are most
neere to vs, as being most bound to them, of whom we haue
receiued our life. Thy parent is Gods instrument for thy na|turall
being: thy Prince Gods instrument for thy ciuill be|ing:
thy Pastor Gods instrument for thy spirituall being.
Wherefore as thou art a man thou must honour thy naturall
father; as a citizen honour thy ciuill father; as a Christian
honour thy ecclesiasticall father.

Honour imports especially 3. things:

Obedience.
Reuerence.
Maintenance.


Obedience. Children obey your parents in all things: Co|loss.
3. 20: that is, as Paul doth interpret himselfe, Ephes. 6. 1
in the Lord. In all things agreeable to the will of God: o|therwise
for Christs loue wee must hate father and mother,
Luke 14. 26.De vita Ere|mit. ad Heliodo|rum, tom. 1 fol. 1. Hierome notably: Lict sparso crine  scissis
vestibus vbera quibus te nutrier at mter oftendat, lict in lim|ne
pater iaceat, per calcatum perge patre~, siccis oculis ad vexil|lum
crucis euola. The most eminent paternes of obedience
to father and mother are theIerem. 35. Rechabits,Gen. 22. Isaac,Luke 2. 51. Christ:
Hieron, pist. de vitando sus|pecto conber|nio, tom. 1. fol. 224. Venerabatur matrem, cuius ipse erat pater, colebat nutritium
quem nutriuerat.
Reuerence: Bearing them respect in words, and outward
behauiour, though they be neuer so meane, and wee neuer
so mightie. Prouerbs 23. 22. Honour thy father that begat
thee, and thy mother that bare thee. As if hee should say, Be
dutifull vnto thy parents: not because they be rich and in
great place, but because they be thy parents, how base soe|uer
they bee.Hieron. vbi supra. Matris angustam domum Iudicas, cuius tibi
non fuit venter angustus:Sencade be|neficijs, lib. 3. cap. 1. parentes non amare impietas est, non
agnoscere insania est. Examples of this vertue, recorded in

holy Scriptures areGen. 26. 27. 28. cap. Ioseph and1. King. 2. 19. Salomon: and in our Eng|lish
Chronicles, SirStapleton in eius vita, cap. 1. Thomas More, who being Lord Chan|cellor
of England, vsually did aske his father blessing in
Westminster Hall publikely: the which custome of our na|tion
is good and godly.
Maintenance. If the parent be blind, the child must be his
Iob 29. 15. eye: if lame, the child must be his foote: if in any want, the
Tobit 5. 17. staffe of his decaied age. SoIohn 19. 27. Christ tooke care for his mo|ther
at his death:Arist. Ethic. lib. 9. cap. 2. for it is great reason that children ha|uing
receiued life of their father and mother, should pro|cure
to preserue vnto them the same life. Nature doth reade
this lesson.Lib. 5. cap. 4. Valerius Maximus hath a memorable historie
of a young woman who gaue sucke to her mother in pri|son,
and so kept her aliue, who otherwise was adiudged to
be famished. A pious office, so well accepted of the Iudge,
that he did both pardon the mother, and prefer the daugh|ter.
Aristophanes in uibus. Aristophanes affirmes also, that the young Stroke doth
feed the old.
There is a dutie required of the parent toward the child,
as well as of the child toward the parent: yet the law spea|keth
expresly to the one, and not to the other. That the fa|ther
being in order of nature  in wisdome superior, might
suspect his duty to be written in himselfe: father and mother
areHieron. vbi supra. nominapietatis, officiorum vocabula, naturae vincula. The
dutie then of superiours is infolded in the word father: a
Minister is a father, a Master a father, a Magistrate a father:
teaching them to be so well affected to their inferiors, as pa|rents
are to their children.
Againe: the loue of parents towards their children is so
naturall and ordinary, that there is lesse need to put pa|rents
in mind of their dutie. But contrariwise children are
not vsually so dutifull to their parents (as theThom. 12 ae. quaest. 26. art. 12.  Aristot. Ethic. lib. 9. c. 7. Schoole
speakes): Amor descendit, non ascendit: benefactor plus dli|git
quam beneficitus: and therefore it was necessary to ad|monish
them of their loue: neither is God content with a
bare precept, but hath adioined a promise, That thy daies
may bee long: for there is no reason hee should inioy long
life, who dishonoureth those of whom hee receiued life:

but if God shorten the daies of dutifull children, and in
stead of long life giue them euerlasting life; hee doth not
breake but keepe his promise: for hee doth promise long
life, not absolutely, but so farre forth as it is a blessing; that
it may be well with thee: and that thou maiest liue long on earth.
Ephes. 6. 3.


The 6. Commandement.
THe negatiue part forbiddeth all euill, and that is com|mitted
against our neighbour threelo. Combis lib. . cap. 59. Aqinas in 13. ad Rom. lect. 2. waies:

In

Thought.
Word.
Deed.


But because bad deeds are worse then bad words: and
bad words worse then bad thoughts, it pleased the God of
order first to forbid bad deeds: Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt
not commit adulterie, Thou shalt not steale. Then bad words:
Thou shalt not beare false witnesse. Last of all, bad thoughts:
Thou shalt not couet thy neighbors house, c.

All our bad deeds against our neighbors concerne his

Life: Thou shalt not kill.
Honour: Thou shalt not com|mit
adultery.
Goods: Thou shalt not steale.


Thou shalt not kill.] To wit, a man: for to kill other liuing
things is not forbidden: and the reason is plaine; because
they were created for man, and so man is master of their
life. But one man was not created for another man, but for
God: and therefore not man, but only God is master of our
life: for a magistrate doth not put malefactors to death as
master of their life, but as aRom. 13. 4. minister of God: and so by
consequence not murther, but an act of iustice:Mat. 26. 52. Such as
strike with the sword shall perish with the sword:August. cont. Faustum, lib. 22. cap. 70. that is, such
as take the sword vpon their owne authoritie: Dominus
iusserat, vt ferrum discipuli ferrent, non vt ferirent. But if God
put a sword into their hand, then they may, then they must
strike. In a word, killing is vniust when either it is done
without authoritie, or by publike authoritie vpon priuate

grudge; non amore istitiae, sed libidine vindictae, Concerning
inward rancour and outward disdaine, in deed, word or ge|sture,
see the Gospell Dom. 6. post Trin.


The 7. Commandement.
IN this Commandement are forbiddenLombard. 3. sent. dist. 37. Church hom. against adulte|rie, part. 1. all vnchast lusts,
aswell burningMat. 5. 28. 1. Cor. 7. 9. within, as breaking forth.

Into

Allurements,

Ribald talke: Ephes. 4. 29.
Wanton lookes: Gen. 6. 2. 39. 7.
Lasciuious attire: Esay 3. 16.

Acts of vncleannesse.



Acts of vnclean|nesse vnnaturall: as

Committing fil|thinesse with

A man of the same sex: Rom. 1. 27.
Abeast: Leu. 18. 23.
Paracelsus, iucubi, succubi. A Diuell: as wit|ches doe by their owne confession.




Naturall,

Adulterie: when both, or one of the parties are married: Deut. 22. 22.
Fornication between single persons: as

Deflouring of virgins: Deut. 22. 28.
Hunting of common whores: 1. Cor. 10. 8.

Incest: with such as be within the degrees of consanguinitie or affinitie prohibited in law: Leuit. 18. 6.


Sinne in this kind is more dangerous, then in another,
because a man can hardly repent heartily for it. The mur|therer,
and swearer, and theese become many times excee|ding
sorrowfull after the fact: but the wanton (asEpist. Amando om. 3 fol. 135. Hierome
notes) euen in the middest of his repentance sinneth afresh:
the very conceit of his old pleasure doth occasion a new
fault: so that when his deuotion ends, he presently begins
to repent that he did repent. Example hereof Augustine:
who being in the heat of his youth (as himselfeConfess. lib. 8. cap. 7. writes of
himselfe) begged of God earnestly the gift of continencie:
but, saith he, to tell the truth, I was afraid lest hee should

heare me too soone: Malebam enim explers concupiscentiam
qum extingu. See the Gospell Dom. 15. post. Trin.


The 8. Commandement.
THis ouerthrowethMelancthon Catechis. tom. 1. fol. 17.  tom. 2. fol. 369. Anabaptisticall and Platonicall com|munitie:
for if all things ought to be common, and no|thing
proper in possession, how can one man steale from
another? All lawes of giuing, buying, selling, leaseing, let|ting,
lending are vaine, si teneant omnes omnia, nemo suum.

A man may transgresse this Commandement in being a theefe.

To himselfe, in spending

Too much.
Too little.

To other.



Too much

Wasting more then he should in gameing,
diet, brauery; such are arrant cutpurses
vnto themselves.
Getting lesse then they should: Ignaui 
prodigi sunt fures, saithTom. 1. fol. 185 Melancthon.


As a spend-all, so a get-nothing is a theefe to his estate:
Pouertie comes vpon him as an armed man: Prouerbs 24. 34.
An idle person is pouerties prisoner: if he liue without a cal|ling,
pouerty hath a calling to arrest him.
Hee that spends too little on himselfe, as the couetous
wretch, is a robber of himselfe also,Innocentius de vilit. condit. Human. lib. 2. cap. 13. Corpus extenuat, vt lu|crum
extendat: He keepes his belly thin, that his purse may
be full: heAmbros. lib. de Naboth. c. 4. cannot afford himselfe so much as an egge, lest
he should kill a chicke: whereas a poore man doth want ma|nie
things, a rich miser wants euery thing: like Tantalus vp
to the chin in water, and yet thirstie. The which (as Salomon
calles it) is an euill sicknesse: Eccles. 6. 2.

To other

Openly: which is plaine robbery: so little pra|ctised,
or so much punished in KingLamberts Perambulation of Ket, pag. 27. Al|freds
raigne, that if a man had let fall his
purse in the high way, he might with great
leisure, and good assurance haue come
backe and taken it vp againe.
Secretlie: which is properlie called stea|ling.
And this offence is manifold: for

there is not onely theft of the hand, but of the heart, and
tongue. Couetous greedines is theft in heart: for howsoe|uer
it be a maxime in our law,Meteranus hist. Belgic. lib. 13. pag. 420. Voluntas non reputabitur pro
facto, nisi in causa prodtionis: sed exitus in maleficijs spectatur,
 non voluntas duntaxat: yet it is a breach of this law, co|uetously
to desire that which is not ours: albeit wee seeke
not to get it wrongfully. Their hearts, saith2. Pet. 2. 14. Peter, are ex|ercised
in couetousnes: andIn 1 Thess. cap 5. hom. 10. Chrysostom plainly; The coue|tous
man is a very theefe: fur  latro. TheTemes of the Law, pag. 97. fathers of the
law write that theeues are called felones, of our ancie~t word
fell or fierce; because they commit this sinne with a cruell,
fell, and mischieuous minde: teaching vs hereby that a fe|lonious
intent is a principall in theeuerie.


There is also theft of the tongue, byB. Balington. lying, flatterie,
smoothing, c. So we reade that2. Sam. 15. 6. Absolon stole the hearts of
the men of Israel: and so false2. Sam. 16. Ziba stole the goods of his
master Mephibosheth.
So flatterers and parasites are great theeues in Court and
Countrie: not only dominorum suorum arrisores; sed etiam
arrosores: and therefore let a flatterer bee in your Pater
noster, but not in your Creed: pray for him, but trust him
no more then a theefe.
Fraudes in buying and selling are reduced to stealing;
because hee that vseth such deceits, secretly taketh of his
neighbour more then his due: but oppressions and vniust
extortions are reduced by Diuines vnto robberie; because
the cruell tyrant exacteth more then his owne manifestly:
not to pay debts, is reduced vnto both: vnto robbery, when
a man to the great hindrance of his neighbour can and will
not: vnto stealing, when hee partly will and cannot: I say
will partly: for if he desire wholly with all his heart to pay
the vtmost farthing, God assuredly will accept of votall re|stitution,
aswell as of actuall: and it is not a sinne though it
be a sore.


The 9. Commandement.
NExt the prohibition of iniuries in deede, follow the
wrongs against our neighbour in word: Thou shalt

not beare false witnesse: and that fitly, becauseHerman ex|plicat. huius pracept. lying is cosen
germane to stealing:Erasmus com. de lingua. Da mihi mendacem,  ego ostendam
tibi furem: If thou wilt shew mee a liar, I will shew thee a
theefe.
This precept condemnes all manner of lying: for albeit
one is worse then another,Augustin. in Psal. 5. yet all are naught: The mouth
that speaketh lies slaieth the soule: Wid. 1. 11. And Psal. 5. 6.
Thou shalt destroy them that speake leasing. See Gospell Dom. 15. post Trinit.

Beside lies: euery thing whereby the
credit of our neighbour is impaired:
especially those three sins of the tongue:

Contumely.
Detractation.
Cursing.


A contumely is an iniurious word, spoken with an iniu|rious
mind, to the dishonour of our neighbour: I say with
an iniurious intent; otherwise when it is vttered by way
of aduice to direct or correct, as a father sometime spea|keth
to his childe, or a master to his scholler, or a Pastor to
his people, as Paul:Gal. 3. 1. Ye foolish Galathians: out of some heat,
but yet not out of any hate, then it is no contumelie or
sinne.
Or in merriment, not in malice: There is a time toEccles. 3. 4. laugh:
and so by consequence a time to iest: when a wittie con|ceit
may profit and administer grace to the hearer. He that
said the Duke of Guise was the greatest vsurer in France, be|cause
he turned all his estate into obligations, hereby gaue
this honest aduice, that if he should leaue himselfe nothing,
but only haue many followers bound to him for his large
gifts, in conclusion he should finde a number of bad deb|tors.
He that called his friend theefe, because he had stollen
away his loue, did not wrong, but commend him.
It is lawfull also to iest at the vanities of irreligious men,
enemies to God and his Gospell: as1. King. 18. 27. Elia did at the soppish
idolatry of Baals Priests. A friend of mine said of an vpstart
gallant in Court with a gingling spur, that he had a Church
on his backe, and the bels on his heeles.
Euery lay Papist must beleeue as the Church beleeues,
albeit he know not what the Church beleeueth: he must
also worship the consecrated bread, and yet knoweth not

whether it be consecrated or no:Co. Trident, sess. 7. can 11. Bellarmn. de sacramentis in genere, cap. 17. for to the consecration of
the host, the Priests intention is required, which no ma~ knowes
but God, and himselfe. So that if a man tell his popish ac|quaintance
that he is a blinde buffe, to worship and beleeue
he knowes not what, it were no contumelie; because it did
proceed out of zeale to God, and loue to him; only to recti|fie
his error, and not to vilifie his person.
The second fault reduced to false witnes is detractation,
in speaking euill of our neighbour: and it is done by repor|ting
that which is false, and sometime by telling that which
is true, but secret: whereby the credit of our neighbour is
lessened with those, to whom his sinne was not knowne be|fore:
for as a man may flatter in absence, namely, when ei|ther
the vertue is absent, or the occasion, and so the praise is
not kinde but forced either in truth, or in time: so likewise
a man may slander his neighbour in speaking the truth vn|seasonably,
without discretion out of time and place. A tale
tossed from mouth to mouth in creaseth as a snowbal, which
being little at the first, groweth to a great quantitie.
Now the backbiter is bound in reason and religion to
restore the good name of his neighbour, which hee by de|traction hath taken away; and that is exceeding hard: for
a mans honest fame is like the Merchants wealth got in ma|ny
yeeres, and lost in an houre. Wherefore speake well of all
men alwaies, if it may bee done with truth: and when it
cannot, then bee silent: or else interrupt euill detractation
with other meere and merrie communication, asIudges 14. 12. Sampson
at his mariage feast propounded a riddle to his friends,
Ab os. epist. lib. 9. epist. 70. hereby to stop the mouthes of backbiters, and to occupie
their wits another way. Bernard excellently: The tale bearer
hath the diuell in his tongue: the receiuer in his eare.
The theefe doth send one only to the diuell, the adulte|rer
two: but the slanderer hurteth three; himselfe, the par|tie
to whom, and the partie of whom hee telleth the tale.
Ter homicide (saithLo. com. tit. singua. Luther) vno ictu tres occidit:Bernard ser. 24. in Cant. vus est
qui loquitur,  vnum tantum verbam profert,  tamen illud
vnum verbum, vno in momento, mulitudinis audientium dum
aures inficit, animas interficit.

The third fault is malediction: a grieuousColoss. 3. 8. offence
when it is spoken with hatred and a desire that such euill
come vpon our neighbour: but when it is vttered vpon
some sudden disdaine, without regard to that we speake, it
is lesse euill, yet for all that alwaies euill: because from the
mouth of a Christian, who is the childe of God by adop|tion,
nothing ought to passe but1. Pet. 2. 1. benediction.


The 10. Commandement.
THe former precepts intend thoughts and desires, aswel
as act and practise: for the Lawgiuer is a spirit, and
therefore must be worshipped in spirit: yet lest wee should
pretend ignorance, God in this Commandement giueth
especiall order for them. Or asMelancthon,  Caluin. Cat. other: The former pre|cepts
did condemne the setled thought to doe mischiefe:
but this euen the first inclination and motion to sinne,
though a man neuer consent, but snub it in the beginning:
Rom. 7. 7. Thou shalt not lust or desire.

Now we sin
three waies in
this kinde:

1. By coueting
y^e goods of our
neighbour,

Immoueable: as his land
and house.
Moueable: as his oxe
and asse, c.

2. By coueting his wife.
3. By plotting treason, and murther.


To couet his goods is against his profit, which is deare
to him: to couet his wife is against his honor, which ought
to bee more deare: to couet his bloud is against his life,
which of all wordly things is most deare.
Whereas it is obiected that desire of murther is not for|bidden
in particular, as the desire of theft and adulterie: for
the Commandement saith, Thou shalt not couet thy neigh|bours
house, thou shalt not couet thy neighbours wife: but it is
not said, Thou shalt not couet thy neighbours bloud: Answere
is made, that a man doth not desire any thing principallie
but that which bringeth him someArist. Ethic. lib. 1. cap. 1. good, at least in appea|rance.
And so he desireth adulterie, because it bringeth de|light:
hee desireth theft for that it bringeth profit: but

murther bringeth no good at all: and therefore it is not de|sired
for it selfe, but only to attaine to theft, or adultery, or
some such designement.
So that God hauinge~ forbidd expresly the disordinate de|sires
of delectation and gaine, comequently forbad desires
of murther, which is not coueted bt for vnlawfull profit or
pleasure. Thus perfect righteousnesse is fulfilled when we
wrong not our neighbour either in deed, or in word, or de|sire:
but contrariwise, doe good vnto all, speake well, and
thinke charitably of all.
Now the reason why the Church appoints the Decalogue to
be read at the Communion, is euident: namely, because the
law is aGal. 3. 24. schoolemaster vnto Christ; teaching vs toRom. 3. 20. know
sinne, and by knowing of sinne to know our selues, and
knowing our selues to renounce our selues, as of our selues
vnable to doe anyIohn 16. 5. thing, and so come to Christ: who doth
strengthen vs to doe allPhil. 4. 13. things. Almighty God (saithTom. 1. fol. 1. Lu|ther)
hath written his law not so much to forbid offences
to come, as to make men acknowledge their sinnes already
past, and now present: that beholing themselues in the
lawes glasse, they may discerne their owne imperfections,
and so flie to Christ: who hath fulfilled the law, and taken
away the sinnes of the whole world. For (as theCom. Prayer bookes, tit. Lords Supper. reformed
Churches of Scotland and Geneua speake) the end of our
comming to the Lords table, is not to make protestation
that wee are iust, and vpright in our liues: but contrariwise
we come to seeke our life and perfection in Iesus Christ: be|ing
assuredly perswaded that the Lord requireth on our
part no other worthinesse, but vnfainedly to confesse our
vnworthinesse. So that (our enemies being Iudges) it is well
ordered that the Commandements are rehearsed in the mi|nistration
of this holy Sacrament. Let the Nouelists here
blush, whoFor it is inser|ted elsewhere both in the com|mon Catechis. and in the BB. Bible: Exodus 20. 1. Deut. 5. 6. calumniously censure our Church for omit|ting
in theMinisters of Deuon. and Cornwall rea|sons, part. 1. cap. 26. proeme of the Decalogue one halfe line: when
as themselues in their owne Communion bookes haue left
out all the whole law. This indeed occasioned me to re|member
an obseruation ofLib. 1. cap. 4. Cominaeus vpon the battell of
Montlehery, that some lost their offices for running away,

which were bestowed vpon other that fled ten leagues fur|ther.
Hypocrite first cast out the beame out of thine owne eye;
and then shalt thou see cleerely to cast out the mote out of thy
brothers eye.



Matth. 5. 16.
Let your light so shine before men, c.

THe Lords Supper is called a sacrifice by the learned an|cient
Doctors in foure respects:
First, because it is a representation  memoriall of Christs
sacrifice on the crosse: 1. Cor. 11. 26. As often as yee shall eate
this bread, and drinke this cup, ye shew the Lords death vntill he
coe. SoLib. 2. de Virgin. S. Ambrose: Christ is daily sacrificed in the mindes
of beleeuers, as vpon an altar: Semel in cruce, quotidie in sa|cramento. saithLib. 4. sent. dist. 12. Lombard.
Secondly, because in this action we offer praise  thanks|giuing
vnto God, for the redemption of the world: and this
is the sacrifice of our lips: Heb. 13. 15.
Thirdly, because euery Communicant doth offer and
present himselfe body and soule, a liuing, holy, acceptable
sacrifice to the Lord: Rom. 12. 1. The which excels the sa|crifices
of the Priests in old time: for they did offer dead
sacrifices, but we present our selues a1. Collect after the receiuing of the bread and wine. liuely sacrifice to
God.
Fourthly, because it was aIustin Martyr Apolog. 2. custome in the Primitiue
Church at the receiuing of this blessed Sacrament to giue
large contribution vnto the poore, a sacrifice well accepted
of God: Heb. 13. 16. Now the Church allowing and fol|lowing
this good old custome, stirres vp the people to giue
cheerfully by repeating some one or two choice sentences
of scripture best fitting this occasion, as Matth. 6. 19. Matth.
7. 12, c. 5. 10
These kinds of oblation are our Churches offertorie, and
vnbloudy sacrificesCollect for the whole estate of Christs Church. offred by the whole congregation vn|to
the Lord: so farre differing from popish sacrificing, as S.
Pauls in London is from S. Peters in Rome.



1. Cor. 11. 28.
THe sum of the Ministers exhortation before the Com|munion,
is contained in these words of Paul: Let a man
therefore examine himselfe, and so let him eate of this bread, and
drinke of this cup: wherein obserue

Two points:

A preparation: Let a man examine, c.
A participation: and so let him eate, c.



In the first note the

Parties

Examining: a man, that is,
euery man.
Examined: himselfe.

Parts.


Beza translates, andParaphras. in loc. Erasmus expounds , quisque:
so the word is vsed, Iohn 3. 27. A man can receiue nothing ex|cept
it be giuen him from heauen: and Iohn 7. 46. Neuer man
spake like this. A man then in this place signifieth euery man,
subiect, Soueraigne, Priest, people. The which obseruation
ouerthroweth vtterlyBeza annot. in loc. Romish implicite faith. Euery lay man
ought to turne confessor, and examiner, endued with suffi|cient
knowledge for this heauenly businesse: he must looke
not onely thorow the spectacles of the Priest, but also see
with his owne eies, able to try himselfe.
Himselfe.] For that is the duty; not another, for that is a
fault. We must not be1. Pet 4. 15. busie Bishops in other mens Dioces|ses,
but meddle with our1. Thes 4. 11. owne businesse: we must not
breake our neighbours head with the Pharisie, but smite our
owne breast with the Publican.
S.Cousess. lib. 10. cap. 3. Augustine complained of men in his time that they
were Curiosi ad cognoscendum vitam alenam, desidiosi ad cor|rigendam
suam: and reuerendLib. 5. p. 263. Hooker, of men in our time,
that their vertue is nothing but to heare gladly the reproofe
of others vice: like Tailors, who measure, like Barbors, who
cut all other except themselues. ButMatth. 7. 3. 5. our Sauiour Christ
would not haue vs to gaze on the mote in our brothers
eye but rather to pull out the beame in our owne sight.
And his Apostle here, not to pry into other, but to try our
selues; not but that other according to their seuerall charge,
must examine other, as parents must examine their chil|dren:

Exod. 12. 26. 27. and masters must examin their house|hold,
Gen. 18. 19. and Pastors must examine their parishio|ners,
as here Paul corrected  directed the Corinthians: and
for this cause the names of all Communicants are to be sent
vnto the Minister, that there may be made triall of all: yet
if parents and masters and Ministers omit this examination,
euery one must be both able and willing to proue himselfe.

The parts of examination are concerning the

Manner.
Matter.



For the manner a triall is to be made

Vprightly.
Necessarily.


The former is implied in the word Examine: which notes
a diligent and exact inquirie, such as Lapidares and Gold|smiths
vse to finde out true mettall from counterfeit, good
from bad. As the2. King. 4. Shunamite sought for Elisha,Luke 2. Mary for
Christ, the woman for herLuke 15. lost groate: so we must search
as if we would finde, search vntill we finde. Many men exa|mine
their bad maners, as they do their bad mony, seeke as
if they would not see, search as if they would not vndersta~d.
They decline sinne thorough all the cases (asBigasalutis Dom 8. post Penticost. one notes)
In nominatiuo per superbiam, in genitiuo per luxuriam, in
datiuo per simoniam, in accusatiuo per detractationem, in vo|catiuo
per adulationem, in ablatiuo per rapinam: and yet
they will not acknowledge their sinnes in any case. When
other mens examination hath found them out, excuses are
ready:Bernard Tract. de gradi|bus humilitat. grad. 8. Non feci: si feci, non male feci: si male feci, non
multum male: si multum male, non mala intentione; aut si
mala intentione, tamen alena persuasione. Wherefore as the
Esay 21. 12. Si quritis qurite. Prophet said: If ye will aske a question, aske it indeed: so if ye
will examine your selues, examine earnestly, throughly, vp|rightly.
For examination must be made necessarily. This we
may gather out of the word therefore: whosoeuer shall eate
this bread, and drinke the cup of the Lord vnworthily, shall
be guiltie of the body and bloud of the Lord: Let a man
therefore, c.

Triall of our selues then is ne|cessary,
both in respect of our

Dutie.
Danger, if we neglect this
dutie.



In respect of our dutie: for Christ in his first institution
vsed a commanding terme; Doe this.Luke 22. 19. Doe this in remem|brance
of me: so that it is not in our choice to doe it, or not
to doe it. If any be not fit, he must endeuour to make him|selfe
fit: and the way to make fit, is examination: Let a man
examine himselfe therefore c.
Secondly, triall is necessarie in regard of the danger, if we
receiue the Lords Supper vnworthily.

Danger in
respect of

The sinne: vers. 27.
The punishment for
this sinne in

Generall: vers. 29.
Particular: vers. 30.



For this cause many are weake, and sicke, and die. See
Epistle for Mandie Thursday.

Now the matters in which euery Commu|nicant
must be examined, are summarily two:

Faith.
Repentance.


These two (like Hippocrates twinnes) must goe toge|ther
hand in hand. For there is no true repentance without
faith; nor liuely faith without repentance.Serm. 4. before King Edward. B. Latimer said
well; Lady faith is a great state, hauing a Gentleman Vsher
going before her, called agnitio peccatoru~, and a great traine
following after her, which are the good workes of our cal|ling.
He that saith he doth repent, when as he doth not be|leeue,
receiues the Sacrament ignorantly: and he that saith
he doth beleeue, when as hee doth not repent, receiues the
Sacrament irreuerently: both vnworthily.

The parts of faith are

Knowledge.
Application.



Euery Communi|cant
ought to know
the 3. generall points
of holie Religion:
namely, mans

Generation: how he was created ac|cording
toGen. 1. 26. Gods image inEphes. 4. 24. holi|nes
and righteousnes.
Degeneration: how he fell from that
estate, and all hisRom. 5. 12. posteritie with
him.
Regeneration: how hee was againe
Ephs. 2. 5. restored and recreated by Christs
passion, of which this Sacrament is
a signe and seale.


In more particular, euery Communicant must vnderstand

the number and nature of the Sacraments. Our Sauiour
Christ ordained in his Church onely two Sacraments, as
Com. Catechis. generally necessarie to saluation, that is to say, Baptisme,
and the Supper of the Lord Baptisme is a Sacrament of ini|tiation
and insition, assuring the first receiuing into the co|uenant
of grace: whereby men are matriculated andCom. booke, tit. Publique Bap.  We re|ceiue this child. ad|mitted
into the congregatio~, and made members of Christ.
For this cause the sacred Font is placed at the very doore
and entrance into the Church: but the Communion is a sa|crament
of confirmation, to strengthen our faith, and che|rish
grace receiued: and therefore the Lords table by good
order is placed in the best  highest roome of the Church.
Ram. de relig. lib. 4. cap. 8. Baptisme must be receiued of one but once: because wee
cannot be borne twice, one beginning in Christianitie is
enough: but the Lords Supper often, because we need dai|ly
to be nourished in the faith of Christ: once borne, fedde
alway.
The nature of this Sacrament is made knowne by the
names in holie writ giuen vnto it:

Whereof I note principally two: the

Lords1. Cor. 11. 20. Supper.
1. Cor. 10. 16. Commnion.



A Supper in
regard of the

Matth. 26. 20 Time: being instituted in the night that
Christ was betraied, as his far well token.
Things: because it is a holie feast (as Au|gustine
said) Non dentis, sed mentis: not so
toothsome, as wholsome: not corporall
meate, but spirituall Manna.



The Lords Supper
in three respects:

1. Because it was ordained by the
Lord: 1. Cor. 11. 23.
2. Because it was instituted in reme~|brance
of the Lord: Luk. 22. 19.
3. Because it was in the Primitiue
Church vsuallie receiued on the
Lords day: Acts 20. 7.


It is called a Communion in respect of the common vnion
among our selues, hauing at that time more specially per|fect
peace with all men: or a Communion in respect of the
1. Cori. 11. 20. 2. , quasi . publike participation, as being a common messe, not a pri|uate

Masse proper to one, as the Popish priests vse it; or a
Communion, as being a signe and seale of our communion
with Christ: for his graces are conueied vnto vs by the
preaching of the Word, and administration of the Sacra|ments.
Hence the Sacraments (asLib. de corpore  sanguine Dom. cap. 3. apud Bibliothec. Pat. Tom. 4. fol. 162. Paschasius obserues) haue
their name. Sacramenta dicuntur  secreto, e qud in re visibi|li
diuinitas intus aliquid vlra secretius efficit. In the words of
ourArt. 25. Church: Sacraments are visible signes of inuisible grace,
ordained of God as badges and sure witnesses of his good will to|wards
vs. It is meete euery Christian should vnderstand
these, and the like plaine principles of holy faith: butChurch Hom. concerning the Sacrament, part. 1. ex|act
knowledge to discusse controuerted points about the
Sacraments is not required: according to that of Chryso|stome:
The table of the Lord is not prepared for chattering
ayes, but for high towring Eagles, who flei thither where the
dead bodie lieth. It is not for subtle Sophisters, but for simple
beleeuers ascending vp to Christ vpon the wings of faith:
and therefore the Communicant must not only know, but
applie that in particular, which he beleeueth in generall: as
that Christs body was crucified for him; and his bloud shed
for him. Hee that vnderstands, and beleeues, and applies
these things, examineth his faith as he should.

In our repentance we
must examine two points
especially: to wit, our

Contrition for sinne past.
Resolution to preuent, so farre
as we can, all sinne to come.


For the first, Poenitentia est quasiReusnerus class. 3. symbol. pag. 155. punientia. Poenitere (saith
De vera  fal. poenitent. cap. 19. Augustine) is poenam tenere.
Wee must therefore weepe with Peter, and water our
couch with Dauid, and put on sackcloth with Nineueh: nay
we mustIoel 2. 13. rent our heart. For a brokenPsal. 51. 17. spirit is an acceptable
sacrifice to the Lord. OChrysost. hom. De poenitent. magnum donum, quod in poenam de|dit,
in salutem vertit: peccatum tristitiam peperit, tristitia pec|catum contriuit. As the worme bred in the tree deuoures
the tree: so sorrow brought into the world by sinne, doth
ouerthrow sinne: so good is God to turne curses into bles|sings,
and griefe into grace. If thy heart be not throughly
touched for sinne, become sorrie because thou art no more

sorrie: resolue to be more resolued. For (as one wittily) fa|ctum
infectum, si non sit cor affectum. If Ioseph of Arimathea
wrapped the bodie of Christ inMatth. 27 59. cleane linnen; how darest
thou receiue it with an vncleane soule?Chrch Hom. cncerning the Sacraments, part. 2. If thou wilt not
kisse a Princes hand with a foule mouth, eate not the Lords
bodie with a foule minde. Let a man therefore examine him
selfe. c. And so let him eate of this bread, and drinke of this
. Hauing thus examined examination, I come now to
the participation.
And so let him eate, c.] Of which words I purpose to
speake first ioyntly, then seuerally. Considered ioyntly they
confute three popish conclusions: as first, the reseruation,
eleuation, circumgestation, adoration of the bread. Our
Apostle saith here plainly, that the bread must be taken and
eaten:Confess. Ang|litan, art 28. Ergo, not to be reserued, nor carried about, not lif|ted
vp, nor kept in a box to be worshipped.
Secondly, to take to eate, to taste, to drinke, to doe this
in remembrance of Christ, are actions of the liuing, only
pertaining to the liuing: and therefore the Papists are de|ceiued
holding the Masse to bee a propitiatorie sacrifice
both for the quick and the dead. How can the dead eate or
drinke, taste or take?Melancthon in confess. c|cle. Saxon. Tom. 1. fol. 135. Ergo, neither the dutie nor the be|nefit
belongs vnto them, but only to those aliue; who first
examine themselues, and after eate of this bread and drinke
of this cup.
Thirdly, the coniunction of these two: Let him eate of
this bread, and drink of this cup abundantly proues, that both
parts of the Lords Supper ought to be ministred vnto all:
Ergo the Papists in denying the cup vnto the Laitie, wrong
both God and his people, by defrauding them of this com|fort.
As euery one must examine, so euerie one both eate
and drinke: not onely drinke, and not eate, or eate and not
drinke: but both eate, and drinke. Christ foreseeing this
Papisticall error said in his first institution, Drinke yeMatth. 26. 26. all of
it: he tooke the bread and said only, take, eate, indefinitely:
Caluin,  Marlrat in oc. Matth. but when he tooke the cup, he did adde an vniuersall note:
Bibe omnes: Drinke ye, drinke all ye.
We conclude therefore withEpist lib. 1. epist. 8. Cyprian: Adulterum est,

impium est, sacrilegum est, quodcun humano furore institui|tur,
vt dispositio diuina violetur. Christ is the truth, and the
way to the truth: Ergo,Cyp. epist. lib. 1. epist. 3. non aliud fiat  nobis, qum quod pro
nobis prior fecit. Thus much of the words iointly. Now of
euery one seuerally.
And so] Let there be first preparation, and then participa|tion:
when a man is thus examined, let him thus eate. Let
him eate: The which are not words of permission, only lea|uing
it to his choice whether he will eate or not eate: but
they are words of Pauls commission, insinuating that hee
must eate necessarily, not vpon custome, but vpon consci|ence.
For it is not said here; let him, if hee haue no let at
home, or occasion of absence abroad: if he be neither dis|pleased
with his Pastor, nor angry with the people: but let
him without all let examine, and then let him without all
let eate of this bread. Eate:Mat. 26. 26. Christ in his first institution
hath, take and eate. First take, then eate: take not onely into
your mouthes, but into your hands:Bucan. loc. com. Tit. coena, Dom. quaest. 34. 35. hereby representing
the soule and faith: for the taking of the bread and wine
into our hand, sealeth our apprehension of Christ by the
finger of faith: Ioh 1. 12. As many as receiued him to them
he gaue power to be the sonnes of God: euen to them that belee|ued
in his name. Eating of the bread and drinking of the
wine sealeth our application of Christ incorporated into vs
mystically, 1. Cor. 10. 16. For by the strength of faith wee
chew the cud, as it were, and make Christ our owne. Yet
herein obserue a great difference betweene corporall food
and this heauenly bread: for the one digested is made like
vs, but the other receiued into our soule maketh vsRom. 8. 12. Phil. 3. 10. like it.
This action then of taking is very significant: and there|fore
I see no reason why the Priest altering Christs ordi|nance,
should giue the bread into the peoples mouth only,
not into their hand. First, the word  signifieth properly
to take with the hand. Secondly, it is against the rules of
common ciuilitie, that men of discretion, such as Commu|nicants
ought to be, should be fed like children, hauing
their meate put into their mouth. Thirdly, if this taking
be not construed of the hand, but of the mouth, there is an

idle repetition and plaine Tautologie in the words of Christ:
for eating notes orall receiuing: and therefore taking must
imply manuall receiuing. Fourthly, it was the custome of the
Primitiue Church, as we reade inSixtus Se|nensis, vbi in|fr. Eusebius andHierosol. orat. 5 mystagog. Cyril; How
wilt thou (saithTheodoret. hist. lib. 5. cap. 18. Ambrose to Theodosius) receiue the Lords
body with a bloudy hand?
TheSixtus Senen|si Bibliothec. lib. 6 annot. 152. Papists answere that the Church altered this cu|stome,
because some reserued the bread for magicall spels,
and superstitious vses. A sillie shift: for no abuse can take
away the vse of that which is simply good. The Bible must
be read, albeit some2. Pet. 3. 16. peruert it to their destruction: the
word of God must be preached, howsoeuer it be vnto some
the sauour of2. Cor. 2. 16. death vnto death: and so the bread according
to Christs institution must be taken, albeit happily some
keepe it to wicked and idolatrous purposes.
This bread] The nice distinguishing of the Schoole is
like the pilling of an onyon: they pull off so many skinnes,
vntill at last there is no skinne. They turne and tosse the
words of Christs institution, Hoc est corpus meum, so long,
till they bring all that Christ said and did at his last Sup|per
vnto nothing. For so we reade in theirDe consec. dist. 2. . timo|rem. Glossa ibi|dem. Glosse, that
hoc doth signifie nothing. Omnipotent creatures, who
make of something nothing: and againe of this nothing,
something; yea Christ who made all things: for by pro|nouncing
of these words, hoc est corpus meum, they make
their Maker, a dozen gods at once with one sentence. This,
is a pronoune demonstratiue, not indiuiduum, vagum, any
thing, or a nothing.In his Marc. Aton. Con|stant. Stephen Gardiner herein forgat his
Grammar and Logicke too. For hoc, doth determine, and
must, as Paul teacheth, and the circumstances of the Gospell
import, be restrained vnto the bread. Iesus tooke the bread,
and when he had giuen thanks hee brake (no doubt the
bread) that hee tooke, and gaue to the Disciples the selfe-same
that he brake, saying, Take ye, eate ye this that I giue
you, this is my body. What This could our Sauiour meane,
but This that he gaue, This that hee brake, This that hee
tooke? which by the witnesse of truth it selfe was bread. If
the Papists imagine that he tooke bread, but brake it not; or

brake it, but gaue it not: they make the Lords Supper a
D. Bilsons answere to the Iesuit apolog. pag 331. merryiest,
where the latter end starteth from the begin|ning,
and the middle from them both. Either they must dis|sent
manifestly from the proposition of Christ, and exposi|tion
of Paul, from all the Fathers, and some of their owne
Gerson contra loret. lib. 4.  Gardner. ot. diabolic. sophist. vti Bilson vbi supra pag. 732. followers: or else admit our interpretation, This bread is
my body: and if we resolue the words of Christ so, they can|not
be proper, but figuratiue; This bread is the signe and
seale of my body.
Bread.] It pleased our Sauiour to make bread the out|ward
element in this holy Sacrament, for the manifold ana|logies
between it  his body. First, as bread is thePsal. 104. 15. strength
and state of our naturall life; so Christ is for our spirituall be|ing
1. Cor. 12. 6. all in all.
Secondly, as bread is loathed of the full stomacke, but
most acceptable to the hungry soule; so Christ is most wel|come
vnto such asMatth. 5. 6. hunger and thirst after righteousnes.
Thirdly, as bread is vsuall and daily; so Christ should be
to the Christian: feeding on that bread which came downe
fromIohn 6. 33 35. heauen, should be the soules ordinary refection. fourthly, as bread is made one loafe of many graines; so1. Cor. 10. 17. we
that are many are one bread, and one body, because we all
are partakers of one bread.
Paulinus vti Magdeburg. Cet. 5. col. 359. 395. Vnus vbi calix domini, cibus vnus,  vna
mensa, domus de.
Lastly, as corne is cut downe with the sithe, threshed in
the barne with many stripes, torne in the mil with much vio|lence,
then boulted  sifted, last of all baked with extreame
heate in the ouen; and all this, that it may be fit meate for
our body: so Christ in his ripe age was cut downe by cruell
death, his body was whipped, his flesh rent asunder, his
soule was as it wereLament. 1. 13. Ierem. 1. 12. melted in the fierie furnace of Gods
anger: and all this, that he might become food for our soule;
that we might eate of this bread, and drinke of this cup. The
like resemblances are between the wine and his bloud: For
as wine doth make glad the heart of man, Psal. 104. 15. so
the pretious bloud of Christ, asCant. 2. 5. flagons of wine comforts
the sicke soule.Magdeburg. Cent. 5. col. 393. Paulinus sweetly:

In cruce fixa caro est quo pascor,
de cruce sanguis
Ille fluit, vitam quo bibo, corda lauo.
In this exhortation hauing S. Paul for our leader, and the
Church of Scotland for our follower: I hope we need not any
further examine, why the Church doth vse this scripture for
this purpose.Epist. 118. cap. 5. Augustines obseruation is good: insolentis|simae
insaniae est, disputare, an d faciendum fit, quod tota fa|cit
ecclesia.


Sursum corda.
SVrsum cordaCassander li|turgic. cap. 21. seemes to be taken out of the Lamentations
of Ieremy: cap. 3. vers. 41. Leuemus corda nostra cum mani|bus
ad dominum in coelos: vsed in the Church at least 300
yeeres before Popery was knowne in the world. For Augu|stine
who liued withinBaron. annal. tom. 5. fol. 13  flores ist pag. 45. 400 yeeres after Christ, and the
blessed Martyr Cyprian, who diedMagdeburg. cent. 3. col. 249. an. 259. make mention
of it in their writings often: Cyprian inFol. 166. serm. de orat. dominic.
Augustine deTom. 1. fol. 491 vera religione, cap. 3. and epist. 156. and (as
Vbi supra. Cassander obserues) epist. ad Dardan.  lib. de bono perseue|rantiae
Sursum corda then is no rag of Rome, no peece of Po|perie,
but vsed inPerkins refor|med Cat. tit. all presence. all Liturgies of the ancient Church; and
that which may content the Nouelist most, it was borrowed
(as MasterActs and mon. fol. 1275. Fox thinks) not from the Latine, but from the
Greeke Churches. Howsoeuer, it is exceeding fit: for Al|mighty
God in his holy seruice requires our heart princi|pally;
Prou. 23. 26. Son giue me thine heart: so that when we come to his
Temple, specially to his table, euery one must say withPsal. 25. 1. Da|uid,
I lift vp my soule to thee. For (as the Church ofMinisters ex|hort. before the Com. Scotland
truly) the onely way to receiue worthily the Lords Supper,
is to lift vp our mindes by faith aboue all things worldly and
sensible, and thereby to enter into heauen, that we may finde
and receiue Christ, where he dwelleth: a point well vrged
also by our Church: Hom concerning the worthy receiuing of
the Sacrament: part the first.
The Papists entertaine this clause still in the Roman Mis|sale;
but it makes against their reall presence. For if Christs
body,Io. Combis  Theo|log. l. b. 6. cap. 14 so large in quantity, as it was on the crosse, be pre|sent,

in the Sacrament; what need any man lift vp his heart,
when as hee holds it in his hand? Totum hoc (saithSerm. de temp. 174. Augu|stine)
fide tenemus, oculis cordis intuemur; dominus ascendit in
coelum, ascendat cum illo cor nostrum: His bodieActs 3. 21. must bee
contained in heauen vntill the time that all things are re|stored:
it cannot descend downe to vs, we must ascend vp
to it. So Nicolaus Cabasila writes in his exposition of the
Cap. 26. apud Bibliothec. Pat. tom. 4. fol. 496. Liturgie; the Priest after some speech to the people doth
erect their mindes, and lift vp their thoughts, and saith, Sur|sum
corda; let vs thinke on things aboue, not on things be|low.
They consent and say, that they lift vp their hearts thi|ther
where their treasure is, euen to heauen, where Christ
sits at the right hand of his Father.


Luke 2. 14. Glorie be to God on high.
THe Lords Supper is called an Eucharist, because it is a
thanksgiuing to God, for giuing his Sonne to die for
vs: and therefore this Hymne is so fitly sung by men on
earth at the commemoration of his death, as it was by the
quier of heauen at the celebration of his birth: for our re|conciliation
and peace with God, is ascribed in holy scrip|ture
to Christs passion especially: Rom. 5. 10. Heb. 9. 12. 15.

Some makeCaitan. in locum. three parts
of this song (which if you
please) call the

Trebble: Glory to God on high.
Busse: Peace on earth.
Eras. annot. in loc. Meane: Good will toward me~.



Other haue diuided it into two:

The first, concerning
Gods glorie.
The second, touching
our good.Caluin. Ian|sen. Arboreus in loc. For peace on earth, and good will toward men
are both one: because our peace with God is not from our
good will toward him: but altogether from his good will
toward vs. It is God (saithPhilip. 2. 13. Paul) that maketh in you both the
will and the worke: and therefore the Rhemish translation, In
earth peace, to men of good will: and the Romish Glosse, that
Christ brings no peace, but to such as be of goodwill, are insuf|ficient,
and condemned euen by their owne mouth: as we
may reade in the Commentaries of Arboreus, Caietan, Ian|senius,

Maldonatus vpon the place. Concerning other scho|liall,
or scholasticall obseruations vpon the text, I referre the
reader vnto Beauxamis, Erasmus, Caluin and other learned
expositors; especially to Iacobus Perez de Valentia, who
compiled a whole treatise on this Hymne.


It was first vsed in the Communion (as it is thought) by
Walafridus lib. de rebus Ec|clesiast. cap. 22.  Marian. Scot. Cron. lib. 1. pag. 260. Thelesphorus a good man, and aIrenus lib. 3. cap. 3. glorious Martyr, anno
Baron, annal. tom. 2. fol. 120. 254. Iauar. 5. That which followeth in our Communion
book, We praise thee, we blesse thee, was added by that famous
BishopCassander li|turgic. cap. 21. Hilarie: singing it first in his owne Church, anno
Fox, Acts and Mon. fol. 1274.  Duran. ra|onal. lib. 4. cap. 13.  4. 5. 340: and after brought into other Churches by Pope
Symmachus, a. 510: the Churches of Scotland vse the like
forme of thankes at their Communion. And therefore the
Nouelist can mislike nothing in this Hymne, but that which
all other like most, Antiquitie.



2. Cor. 13. 13.
The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, .

THeLuter. com|ent. in Galat. cap. 1. vers. 3. two fiends that torment vs, are sinne, and a bad
conscience: grace releaseth sinne: peace doth quiet
the conscience. Paul therfore begins his epistles with grace
and peace: and the Church ends her deuotions either with
the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, c. or with the peace of
God which passeth all vnderstanding, c. But because there
can bee no peace with God, except wee haue the grace of
Christ: first and chiefly Paul desireth grace, then peace:
Rom. 1. 7. Grace be with you and peace. Because (I say) grace
comprehends in it euery good and perfect gift,1. Cor. 15. 10. by which
only, we are whatsoeuer we are; Paul doth not only begin, but
end his writings also with this one clause specially, Grace
be with you, c. But aboue the rest, the conclusion of this
excellent epistle is most full: and therefore worthilie re|ceiued
of our and other Churches, as the fittest close, to
shut vp our publique prayers. In it obserue Pauls affection
towards the Corinthians, amplified


With

Extention: in re|gard
of the

Thing: The grace of Christ,
the loue of God, the commu|nion
of the holy Ghost.
Persons: With you all.

Intention: Amen.



The worke of our sal|uation
is ascribed in our

Election, to the loue of the Father.
Rede~ption, to the grace of the Son.
Sanctification, to the communion
of the holy Ghost.


SoComment. in loc. S. Ambrose doth expound this text pithily: Dilectio
dei misit nobis Saluatorem Iesum, cuius gratia saluati sumus:
vt possideamus hanc gratia~ communicatio facit spiritus sancti:
God the Father soIoh. 3. 16. loued the world, that hee sent his only
begotten SonneRom. 4. 25. to die for our sinnes, and to rise againe
for our iustification: andIohn 15. 26. God the Sonne, from God the
Father, sent God the holy Ghost which crieth in our hearts
Abba father: applying to our comfort both the loue of
God, and the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ.
The word, God, is vsed here personally, not essentially: for
theAmbrose, Hierom, Theo|phylact. Fathers on this text note the blessed Trinitie, that God
isNon triplex. Augustin. de Trin. lib. 6. cap. 7  Lombard. 1. sent. dist. 19. Trinus in numero, vnus in numine. S. Hierom thinkes that
Paul foreseeing the blasphemous Arrian heresie, placed the
second person in the first roome, God the Son before God
the Father.Caluin.  Marlorat. in loc. Other affirme, that the grace of Christ is na|med
first, because it concernes vs most. For albeit the loue of
God in it owne nature goe before the grace of our Lord
Iesus Christ, chusing vs before the foundation of the world:
Ephes. 1. 4: yet in our view the grace of our Lord Iesus
Christ goeth before the loue of God. Rom. 5. 10 We are re|conciled
vnto God, by the death of his Sonne: we feele the mer|cies
of the one in the merits of the other.
It is a fruitfull obseruation ofVbi supra. Martin Luther, that
Christian religion beginneth not at the highest, as other
religions doe, but at the lowest: it will haue vs to climbe
vp to heauen by Iacobs ladder, whose feete touch the very
earth. And therefore when thou art occupied in the matter
of thy saluation, setting aside all curious speculations of
Gods vnsearchable counsels, all cogitations of workes, of

traditions, of Philosophie, yea and of Gods law too, runne
straight to the manger, embrace the little babe Christ in
thine armes, and behold him as hee was borne, sucking,
growing vp, conuersant among men, teaching, dying, rising
againe, ascending aboue the heauens, and hauing power
aboue all things. This sight will make thee shake off all
terrors and errors, as the Sunne driueth away the cloudes.
In a disputation with a Iew, Turke, Papist, Heretike, concer|ning
Gods infinite wisedome, Maiestie, power; imploy all
thy wit and industrie to be so profound and subtill as thou
canst: but in the matter of Iustification, wherein thou doest
wrestle with the law, sinne, death, and other spirituall ene|mies;
it is the best course to looke vpon no God, but Christ
incarnate, and cloathed with thine owne nature: to fixe
thine eyes vpon the man Iesus only; who setteth himselfe
foorth vnto thee, to be a Mediatour, and saith,Matth. 11. 21. Come vnto
me all ee that labour, and are heauie laden, and I will refresh
you. To behold the Lambe of God, who taketh away the sinnes
of the world: and so by the grace of Christ thou shalt vnder|stand
the loue of God, thou shalt perceiue his wisedome,
power, Maiestie, sweetned and tempered to thy capacitie:
thou shalt finde the saying ofColoss. 2. 3. Paul to be most true, that in
Christ are hid all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge: that
Christ in our iustification is all in all; and therefore good
reason he should haue the first, and most place in this argu|ment;
that his grace should be named first and last.
The loue of God, is the fountaine of all goodnes (as Di|uines
speake) gratiarum gratia: from which originallie
proceeds euery perfect gift and grace. For almightie God
hath not elected vs in regard of our works, or other worth:
but co~trariwise, because God loued vs, we do that which is
acceptable in his sight. I obtained mercie of the Lord (saith
1. Cor. 7. 27. Paul) to be faithfull; Vt fidelis essem, non quia fidelis eram, as
Sent. lib. 1. dist. 41. Lombard aptly.
The nature of this short treatise will not endure, that I
should wade farre into this Abyssus. I rememberRom. 11. 33. Pauls
exclamation; O the deepnes of the riches both of the wisedome
and knowledge of God, how vnsearchable are his iudgements,

and his waes past finding out! And the glosse ofDe verbis Apost. serm. 7. tom. 10. fol. 194 Augustine:
Volentes disputare de de profundo, mersi sunt: Or, (asLomb. vbi supra. other)
Versi sunt in profundum. I come therefore to the Commu|nion
of the holy Ghost: a point more comfortable, then or|dinarily
felt, and yet more felt then can be disputed. It is
said, Gal 4. 6. God hath sent the spirit of his Sonne crying in
our hears Abba father: he said not calling, but crying: and
Rom. 8. 26. hee calleth this crying vnspeakeable groaning.
When a man is tempted and afflicted, hee feeleth the
strength of his enemies, and the weaknesse of his flesh: he
feeleth the fierie darts of Satan, the terrors of death, the
wrath of God, all these cry out against him horribly: so
that the perplexed soule sees nothing but sinne threatning,
heauen thundering, the diuell roring, the earth trembling,
hell mouth open and ready to swallow him vp. But yet in
the midst of all these, Gods holy spirit crieth in our hearts,
Luther. com. in. Gal. 4. 6. and this cry doth outcry the clamors of the law, the bellowes
of hell, and howlings of infernall fiends: it pearceth the clouds,
and ascends vp to the eares of God, insomuch that the bles|sed
Angels seeme to heare nothing else but this cry. The
spirit helpeth our infirmities, and the1. Cor. 12. 9. strength of Christ is
made perfect through our weaknesse. For Christ is most power|full,
when as we are most fearfull: euen when we can scarse|ly
groane, marke the words of Paul; The spirit maketh in|tercession
for vs in our temptation; not with many words,
or long praiers, he crieth not aloud with teares, haue mer|cie
on me O God: but only giues a little sound, and a feeble
groaning, as, ah father: this is but one word, yet notwith|standing
comprehends all things. Indeed the mouth spea|keth
not: but the good affection of the soule crieth aloud
after this manner: O Lord God of compassion and father
of mercies, although I am grieuously vexed on euery side
with affliction and anguish; yet am I thy child, and thou
art my father in Christ. This little word, or rather no word,
but a poore thought, conceiued aright, passeth all the flow|ing
eloquence of Demosthenes and Tully, yea Tertullian and
all the Orators that euer were in the world: for this mat|ter
is not expressed with words, but with groanings, and

these groanings are from the blessed Spirit. Thus you see
the large extent of Pauls affection, in regard of the thing
wished vnto the Corinthians: The grace of Christ, the loue of
God, the communion of the holy Ghost.
The second extension is in regard of the persons, be with
you all: for the Pastor must wish well, not only to the best,
or to the worst, but this praier ought to be made for euery
one as well as for any one. There is none so bad, but hath re|ceiued
some grace: none so good but hath need to receiue
more grace. Wherefore pray we still, that the grace of Christ
may be with vs all.
The Church of England addes a third extension in regard
of the time; for euermore: the which is implied in the text
also, for the Corinthians (as we reade in theCap. 1. vers. 2. former epistle)
were Saints by calling, and so doubtlesse had receiued already
the grace of Christ, and had tasted of the loue of God, through
the fellowship of the holy Ghost. He doth therefore now desire
Phil. 1. 6. that the good worke begun in them, may be perfect:Nicolaus Ca|basila exposit. liturg. cap. 6. that
the grace receiued may continue with them, and increase
daily vnto the end, and in the end: that the loue of God
which cannot be greater secundm essentiam, may be greater
secundm efficientiam, appearing, growing, abounding in
them more and more for euermore.


Amen.

Amen is vsed in holy Scripture three
waies (asLexicon tholeg. verb. Amen. Gabriel and Gerson speake)

Nominaliter.
Aduerbialiter.
Verbaliter.


As a nowne, for truth: Apoc. 3. 14. These things saith A|men,
the faithfull and true witnesse: and so it is added in the
conclusion of euery Gospell, and of the whole Bible, as a
seale to confirme that which is written.
In the beginning, is the first, Amen the last word of holy
writ: a stately beginning, a strange ending. For what is
more stately then antiquitie? what more strange then truth?
Hereby teaching vs that the Scriptures haue vetera and ve|ra,
which are not together in any other writing. For in hu|mane

learning many things are vncertainly true, and more
certainly vntrue: onely the word of God is sealed with
Amen.
Secondly, as an Aduerbe, for verily: so Christ often ii. the
Gospell, Amen, Amen, dico vobis:
Thirdly, as a Verbe, signifying, so be it: Deut 27. 15. Di|cet
omnis populus, Amen: and so it is vsed in Pauls praier ex|pounded
before, and in all our Collects: insinuating our
earnest desire, that those things which we haue faithfully asked,
may be effectually obtained. And this custome of answering
the Minister in the Church Amen, is ancient, as it appeareth
in the 1. Cor. 14. 16. Iustin Martyr Apolog. 2. Hieron. prolog.
lib. 2. in epist. ad Galat. Augustin. epist. 107. Vsum respondendi
Amen antiquissimum esse patet, saith Bellarmine, lib. 2. de Mis|sa,
cap. 16. Here is open confession, I would the Church of
Rome would make open restitution also. For if the people
must answere the Priest Amen, then the Priest must pray to
the peoples vnderstanding: and how shall they vnderstand,
except common praier be said in a common tongue? A
conclusion agreeable not onely to the Scriptures, as Bellar|mine
acknowledgeth, and to the practise of the Primitiue
Church, (asApolog. 2. Iustin Martyr andIn 1. Cor. 14.  Aquin. in cundem loc. Lyra report) and to the
paternes of other Liturgies inEckius loc. com. tit. 37. South India,Cassander li|turgic. cap. 15. Moscoia,
Petrus Bel|lon. de moribus Armen. lib. 3. cap. 12. Armenia, but euen to their owne constitutions, and Masse
booke: for their owneApost. constit. lib. 8. cap. 12. ex emendat. Francisci Tur|riani. Oremus. Gratias aga|mus. Quaesumus. Offerimus. Laudamus. Benedicamus. Adoremus. Clement, and their owne Missale
giue order that the people should answere the Priest in ma|ny
things: and how this can be done well, if the vulgar Li|turgie
be not in a language vulgar, I cannot tell, Paul can|not
tell.
All may see (sauing such as the prince of darknesse hath
blinded) that their owne pens haue condemned their owne
praiers: euen the phrases extant yet in their seruice booke:
Let vs pray, let vs giue thanks, we besech, we offer, we praise, we
blesse, we adore, specially the peoples answering Amen, ui|dently
demonstrate that their publike deuotions at the first
institution were common to Pastor and people: not mum|bled
in a corner alone by the Priest, or chaunted onely by
Clerke and Priest.

Thus I haue briefly surueied all our English Communion
booke, the which (asEpist. Paulin. tom. 3. fol. 9. Hierom said of Iohns Apcalyps) 
habet sacramenta, quot verb: eueryMaster Dee|ring answere of Hardings epist. to Iewel; fol. 5. tittle is grounded vpon
scripture, euery scripture well applied, euery good applica|tion
agreeable to the most ancient and best reformed Li|turgies
in all ages.
I beseech thee therefore (good reader)Rom. 16. 17. marke them di|ligently
which cause diuision and offences, contrary to the do|ctrine
which you haue learned, and auoid them. For they that
are such, serue not the Lord Iesus Christ, but their owne belles;
and with faire speech and flattering, deceue the hearts of the
simple. So the God of peace shall shortly tread downe Satan vnder
our feet, and in fine translate vs from this iarring on earth,
vnto the well agreeing Quier of Heauen, where all sing
in vnitie and vniformitie; Blessing, and glorie, and
wisdome, and thanks, and honour, and power,
and might, be vnto our God for
euermore. Amen.
FINIS.
Lege  age: viue  vale.






