



AN EXPOSITION OF THE DOMINICAL EPISTLES AND GOSPELS vsed in our English Liturgie throughout the whole yeare.
TOGETHER WITH A REA|SON WHY THE CHVRCH did chuse the same.
By IOHN BOYS, Doctor of Diuinitie.
The Winter part from the first Aduentuall Sunday to Lent.
ROM. 1.16.
I am not ashamed of the Gospell.
Bernard. super Cant. ser. 65. Euangelium appellasti? ad Euangelium ibis. Hast thou appealed vnto the Gospell? vnto the Gospell shalt thou goe.
AT LONDON Printed by FELIX KYNGSTON, for WILLIAM ASPLEY. 1610.



TO THE VER|TVOVS AND WOR|THIE KNIGHT SIR IOHN BOYS of Canterburie, my very good Vncle, Grace and peace.
_SIR, you did first plant my studies, Archbishop VVhitegift that president of pietie, watered them, and God gaue increase: to God, as to the foun|taine of all goodnesse, I consecrate all that I haue: to your happy memories, as to the conduits of much good, I dedicate this ensuing Postill, especially to your selfe sur|uiuing, as to my best Patron in Cambridge, where the foundation of this worke was laid; vnto your selfe, as to the chiefe pro|curer of that small Benefice, where the frame was raised; vnto your selfe, as to

the liuely paterne of that doctrine, which is here deliuered.
Accept it as your owne; for it beares your name; and resembling you much, en|deuors to honour you long: so you shall encourage me daily to lessen my debt to the Church, and increase mine ob|ligations vnto your selfe, that liuing and dying I may continue
Your most bounden Nephew, Iohn Boys.





THE FIRST SVNDAY IN ADVENT.

The Epistle, ROM. 13.8.
Owe nothing to any man but this, that yee loue one another, c.

_IT is a good obseruation of Libr. contr Valentin. cap. . Tertul|lian, that heretikes are wont first to perswade, then to teach: on the con|trarie, that orthodoxes vse first to teach, and then to perswade: the which is Saint Pauls ordinarie me|thod: first monere, then mouere. This epistle then allotted for this day be|ing sutable to the rest of his writings, offereth vnto your consideration two principall points.

1. An admonition: Owe nothing to any man but this, c.
2. A double reason of the same,

1. From the worthinesse of the thing: He that loueth hath ful|filled the law.
2. From the fitnesse of the time: Considering the season, that it is now time, c.



In his admonition, obserue two things:

1. A precept: Owe nothing c.
2. An except: But to loue one an|other.



The Gorran. in Loc. first doth insi|nuate, that we must pay

really: for we may not owe.
fully: owe nothing.
generally: to any man.


Melnct.  Tilan. in loc. Some Diuines haue stretched this vnto all manner of duties as well of Debitum mo|rale, legale. Th|mas 12^a^e. quaest. 99. art. 5.  Pt. Aragon. in 22 . quaest. 58. art. 5. loue as law: making it a conclusion of the former doctrine; Giue to all men their due: tribute to whom tribute: custome to whom custome, c. Estote debito|res omnibus vt nemini debeatis: (as Postil. maior. dom. 4. ab Epi|phan. Luther obserues) a strange, yet, a true saying: and it hath a parallell, 1. Co|rinth. 3.18. If any man among you seeme to be wise in the world, let him bee a foole that hee may bee wise. In like manner, he that will liue out of debt in the world, let him owe so much vnto euery one, that hee owe no|thing vnto any one: so Paul Act. 20.27. who kept nothing from any man, was notwithstanding through his loue Rom. 1.14. debtor to many, 1. Cor. 9.19. seruant to all. Gorran. in loc. Other restraine this vnto pecuniarie debts, arising Lexicon Theo|log. Altenstaig. i verb. debi|tu. ex promisso,  commisso. Our promises are due debt. Psalm. 15. The man that will rest vpon Gods holy hill, must not sweare to his neighbour and disappoint him, though it be to his owne hinderance. The word of an honest man ought to bee so currant as his coyne. Luther in 1. Galat. 16. Pomponius an heathen man was so constant, as he neuer made lie himselfe, nor could suffer a lie in other: euery Christian, and a Iulius Scali|ger, vti Iosephus Scaliger in eius vita. Gentleman, albeit not a Christian, ought to be iust in all his words, as well as righteous in all his waies. It is found counsell in affaires of the world; Fast binde, fast finde: Plus enim creditur annulis qum ani|mis: as Seneca wittily: For the seales of men are more re|garded than their soules; and yet ipse dixit of a Christian Pythagoras, is so sufficient, as Quod scripsi scripsi, of a Iewish Pilate.
Debts ex commisso be manifold: some by borrowing, some by buying, some by secret fraude, some by violent oppression. It is not a fault simply to borrow, for then there could be no letting, no lending, no trading in the world: then onely debt is deadly sinne, when a man hath neither meanes nor meaning to repay. Psalm. 37.21. The wicked borroweth and payeth not againe.
Some men hold restitution a point of Poperie: Citing his au|thoritie for the lawfulnesse of vsuri when they would bo|row, but all ea|ging the text, nibil ind spe|rants, when they should pay. bor|rowing by Caluin, and paying by the Bible: but Bishop

Serm. Gosp. Dm. 2. Aduent. Latimer auoweth vpon his credit, that in this all wri|ters agree both old and new, that restitution is necessarie to saluation: Last Sermon before King Edw. the sixth. either restitution open or secret, or else hell. It is easie to shew that in a particular account, which hee deliuered in a grosse summe: first it was a receiued opi|nion among the fathers in the daies of Augustine: Augustin. epist. 54. Non remitttur peccatum nisi restituatur aeblatum: after enter|tained of the best Iustin. insti|tut. lib. 4 tit. 1. c. lib. 6. tit. 2. Ciuilians: and all the Canonists and Schoolemen without exception: and stil embraced of our learned Protestant Diuines; Illyricus, Brentius, Aretius, in the exposition of the words of Luke 19.8. Zacheus. If I haue ta|ken from any man by forged cauillation, I restore him foure|fold: In oc. Melancthon, Loc. de suro in explicat. e|pist. ad Ephes. cap 4. Zanchius, Tract. nt. of repent. cap. 11. Perkins: and all that vnderstand any thing at all. For no man except a new man is saued, he must repent and be borne againe: Now where there is vnsained repentance, there is contrition for sinne, where contrition for sinne, there detestation of sinne, where detestation of sinne, there followeth See Church hom. of repen|tance. part. 2. amendment of life.
Zache, renewed in mind was altered in manners: Ephes. 4.28. he that stole must steale no more: such then as detaine the goods of other vniustly without satisfaction or restituti|on, are not sorrie but Prou. 2.14. reioyce rather in doing of euill. As Vbi supra. Augustine sweetly, Poenitentia non agitur, sed fingitur. I conclude therefore this argument in the words of Institut. lib. 4. cap. 22. La|ctantius: Apud bonos iudices, satis babent firmitatis, vel te|stimonia sine argumentis, vel argumenta sine testimonijs; nos tamen non alterutro contenti, cum suppetat nobis vtrumque, ne cui peruers ingeuioso, aut non intelligendi, aut contr dis|serendi locum relinqumus.
2. We must pay fully: Owe nothing. Many men are willing to pay some part of their debts, but they cannot endure to restore all: they will not compound, except the creditor will take 10. shillings in the pound: a common, but not a commendable course, for a mite is debt so well as a million; tm, albeit not tantum; so good a debt, how|soeuer not so great  debt: if we must owe nothing, then

there must bee full paiment of euery thing. If we can|not pay, God assuredly will accept of votall restituti|on as well as of actuall: of that which is in Latimer. Ser|mon on the Gosp. Dom. 2. Aduent. affect, as if it had been in effect. As 2. Cor. 8.12. Paul sheweth in the like case: For if there bee first a willing mind, it is ac|cepted according to that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not,:Bernard. ep. 77 Illud pro facto reputat Deus, quod homo quidem ver voluit, sed non valuit adimplere.
3. We must pay generally: owe nothing to any: whe|ther he be friend or foe, rich or poore, stranger or neigh|bour: restore all to all. If any man corrupting or corrup|ted in secular offices, hath iuiured many whom he doth not know; Perkins vbi supr. then his best course is to restore to God, that is, to the Church and to the poore. Touching these and the like questions of debt, the learned may further examine 22 . q. 62. Thomas, In oc. Thom. supra. Catetan, Comment in loc. Thom. Aragon, Aphorism. in verb. debitum  restitut. Emmanuel Sa. with many moe: but the best Schooleman in this ar|gument is thine owne conscience: For Rom. 14 23. whatsoeuer is not of faith is sinne. Lombard sent. lib. 4 dist. 39. That is, all thou condemnest in thine heart for sinne, to thee is sinne: satisfie then all other so far, that thou maiest satisfie thy selfe; owe nothing to any.
Yet this precept hath his except. But this that yee loue one another: here then obserue first a difference Melancthon in loc. between ciuill debts and religious. A ciuill debt once paied is no more due: but charitie being payed is still due, August. epi. 62 debe|tur etiam reddita; when a man dischargeth other debts, Anselmus in loc. ex Augusti|. vbi supra. accedit ad eum cui datur, sed ab eo recedit a quo datur. But in paying the debt of loue, the more we giue, the more wee haue; Reddendo multiplicatur: habendo enim red|ditur, non carendo:  cum reddi non possit nisi habeatur, nec haberi potest nisi reddatur. Im etiam cum redditur ab homine, crescit in homine. Et tanto maior acquiritur, quanto pluribus redditur: As Augustine doth excellentlie glosse this text: peruse the cited Epistle, for it is short and sweet: of worldly wealth it may be said truely, bo|num quo communius eo minus: but in spirituall riches it is

quite contrarie, honum qu communius e; maus: or as the Aristt. Philosopher, eo melius, in the words of Prou. 11.24. Salomon, He that scattereth encreaseth: in this except then, I note with In loc. Gorran,

The Matter, in the word diligatis.
The Manner, in the word inuicem.
The Priuiledge in the word nisi.

The matter is to loue: the manner mutually to loue: the priuiledge, continually to loue: Owe nothing but loue: for hee that loueth another fulfilleth the law. This is the first reason enforcing the former exhortation; and it is taken from the worthinesse of the thing. Loue is the ful|filling of all the law; which he prooues by this induction: Thou shalt not commit adulterie, thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not steale, thou shalt not beare false witnesse, thou shalt not lust: and if there be any other Commandement, it is all comprehended in this saying: namely, Loue thy neigh|bour as thy selfe. Loue doth no euill vnto his neighbour: in deed, forbidden in the 6.7.8. Commaundements: in word, forbidden in the 9. in thought, forbidden in the 10. Loue then is the complement of the whole law con|cerning our dutie to God and man. Caluin.  Martyr. in loc. For our loue to man ariseth originally from our loue to God: Augustin con|sess. lib. 4. cap. 9. Amicum in Domino, inimicum pro Domino We loue our friend in the Lord: our foe for the Lord. This (saith In Gal. 5.14. Luther) is the shortest and longest diuinitie: the shortest as tou|ching the words and sentence, but as touching the vse and practise it is more large, more long, more profound, and more high than the whole world. I shall often handle this common place, especially Epistle on Quin|quagesima Sunday.
I come now to the second argument, from the fitnesse of the time: verse 11. This also we know the season, how that it is time, that we should awake out of sleepe: for now is our saluation neerer, c. The summe of it is, Martyr. in loc. that wee must be more studious in performing our dutie now than heretofore~ when wee did first beleeue: for wee must goe

forward and grow vpward: from grace to grace, from vertue to vertue, Ephes. 4.13. till we be of full growth in Christ Ie|sus: or as it is here, till we haue Put on the Lord Iesus. A Astot. violent motion is quicke in the beginning, but slow in the end: a stone cast vpward is then most weake when it is most high; but a naturall motion is slow in the begin|ning, but quicker in the end: for if a man from a Tower cast a stone downeward; the neerer to the Center, the quicker is the motion: and therefore Chrysostom. in epist. ad Rom. bom. 14. when a man at his first conuersion is exceeding quicke, but afterward waxeth euery day slower and slower in the waies of the Lord; his motion is not naturall and kinde, but for|ged and forced: otherwise the longer he liueth, and the neerer he comes to the marke, the more swiftly would he run, the more vehemently contend for that 1. Cor. 9.25. euerlasting Crowne, which he shall obtaine at his 2. Tim. 4.7. races end.
The night is passed, and the day is come.] Theophylact. in loc. Some by night vnderstand the life present; and by day the world to come: in this life many things are hidden as in the darke, but at the last and dreadfull day the bookes and registers of all our actions shall bee laid open, and all things ap|peare naked as they are, to God, men, angels, diuels. If we make but twelue houres in our night, and sixe ages in the world, as vsually Diuines account; then fiue thou|sand yeeres, that is, ten houres of the night were past, when Paul wrote this: and since that almost sixteene hundred yeeres, that is, an houre, and an halfe and a quar|ter; so that now there can remaine but some few minutes, and then the terrible day of the Lord will come, When 2. Pet. 3.10. the heauens shall passe away with a noise, and the elements shall melt with heate, and the earth with the workes therein shall be burnt vp. Wherefore seeing the end of this night, and beginning of that day is at hand, let vs cast away the works of darknesse, c.
Ambros. Hie|ron. Aquin. in loc. Other more fitly by night vnderstand the time of ig|norance; by day, the time of knowledge: by night, the law wherein our Sauiour Christ was onely shadowed;

by day, the Gospell wherein he is openly shewed: and so saluation is nearer Melancthon in loc. because clearer. Our Apostles argu|ment then is Sarcerius in loc. like that of Iohn the Baptist: Repent, for the kingdome of God is at hand, Matth. 3.2.
The Luther. Postil. maior. in epist. Dom. 1. Aduent. Gospell is the day, Christ is the light: faith is the eie which apprehends this light: and therefore see|ing the day is come, let vs cast away the works of dark|nesse, and put on the armour of light.
Sinnes are called the workes of darkenesse: The Prou. 14.9. foole maketh a mocke of sinne: as 2. Sam. 2.14. Abner called fighting a sport: Let the young men arise and play before vs: so many men make sin their ordinarie pastime: Theophylact. in loc. but our Apostle termes it a work, and the wiseman a wearie work too: Wis. 5.7. We haue wearied our selues in the waies of wickednesse: a worke it is, but blacke worke: a deed of darkenesse; in that it doth begin from Satan, who is the Prince of dark|nesse, and end in hell, which is vtter darknesse. See be|fore the song of Simeon: and Aquin. lect. 3. vpon this Chapter.
Holy vertues are called armour of light: armour, be|cause with them a Christian must fight against his ene|mies: Ephes. 6. See Epist. Dom. 21. post. Trin. Light, in three Aquin. in loc. respects.

1. As proceeding from God, who is the Father of lights: Iames 1.17.
2. Shining before men, as lights in the world. Mat. 5.16.
3. Enduring the light: Iohn 3.20.21. He that doth e|uill hateth the light: but he that doth truth, commeth to the light.

Let vs walke honestly, c.] That is, comely: night wal|kers are negligent in their habits: an old gowne will serue their turne, without ruf or cuf: or other handsome trimme. But in the day men are ashamed, except they be in some good fashion according to their qualitie. See|ing then the night is past, and the day is come, let vs put off our night-clothes, and put on our apparell for the day; so walking as we care not who seeth vs in all come|linesse

and honestie. The drunkard is in his night gowne: the fornicator in his night-gowne; the factious schisma|ticke full of strife in his night-gowne too: for he loues no comelinesse in the Church.
Not in eating and drinking, neither in chambering and wantonnesse, neither in strife and enuying:] Here the Defence for not lubcip. cap. 8. No|nelists except against our translation. For we should read surfetting and drunkennesse. I answere, first in particular, that as the Scripture must bee construed by Scripture, so the Church by the Church: it being an axiom in our law, that euery man must interpret himselfe. And another rule: Sententia benignior in verbis generalibus seu dubijs est praeferenda. Now the Church elsewhere BB. Bible. translates and Hom. against gluttonie and drunkennesse. expounds it, as they would haue it. Ergo: their cauill is causelesse.
In generall, concerning mistranslation, I referre them vnto those whom it more properly concernes; I know they know we can easily find faults in the Geneua tran|slation of the Psalmes in English meeter vsed most, and preferred best of all Scriptures in their priuate and pub|like deuotions: If a Salamandrie spirit should traduce that godly labour: as the silenced Ministers haue wron|ged our Communion booke, they would obiect peraduen|ture that sometime there wants in it reason as well as rhythme. Institut. lib. 3. cap. 4. Lantius reports of Arcesilas, that hauing throughly considered the contradictions and oppositi|ons of Philosophers one against another, in fine contem|ned them all: Et constituit nouam non philosophandi phi|losophiam; euen so worldlings and Atheists expending the differences of Christians in matters of religion haue resolued to be of no religion. And vnderstanding the violent contentions about formes of prayer and transla|tions of Scriptures, vse no prayer, no bible, but make Lu|cian their old testament, and Machiauel their new.
The Church, as Paul, meanes too much eating and drinking, for it is lawfull to eat all manner of meat, whe|ther it bee flesh or fish. B. Latimers Sermon vpon this epistle. But there be certaine hedges

ouer which we may not leape: The first hedge is Leuit. 19.26. Thou shalt not eate the flesh with the bloud: that is to say, raw flesh: for if wee should ordinarily deuoure raw flesh, it would ingender in vs a certaine crueltie, so that at length we should eate one another, as Caluin. in Le|uit. 19. Carthu|sin. in Leui. 17. B. Babington in Gen. 9.4.5. Diuines expound that place: we may not be Canibals or man-ea|ters: against this sinne God hath set an high hedge: Thou shalt not kill: extreame famine made Lament. 4.10. Et Iosephus de bello Iudaico. lib. 7. cap. 8. mothers murthe|rers, and turned the sanctuarie of life into the shambles of death: extreame necessitie breakes all hedges of nur|ture and nature: but in ordinarie course, man is no meate for man: but as Hieron. ca|talog. in vit Ignat. Ignatius said, only manchet for God, a seruice and sacrifice for his maker. Happily some will say, well then, if I deuoure not mans flesh, I may eate whatso|uer I lift, howsoeuer I get it. No, God hath set a second hedge; Thou shalt not steale: thou mayest not take thy neighbours oxe out of his stall, nor his sheepe out of his fold, nor his fish out of his poole, but thou must feede on thie owne meate bought into thine owne house, or brought vp in thine house, on that only which is giuen or gotten honestly.
Neither mayest thou commit gluttonie with thine owne, for there is a third hedge, Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selues, lest at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfetting and drunkennes. The gut is a gulfe: vitae cha|rybdis, as Laertius in vita Diogenis. Diogenes aptly: for some man Church hom. against glut|tonie, c. draweth all his patrimonie thorow his throat. As the Babylonians v|sed daily to sacrifice to their Bell, so the glutton to his belly, making it his god, Philip. 3.19. Eate therefore mo|derately eate that is meete, not too much, but so much as doth neither Bernard. de considerat. lib. 1. praecidere, nor excedere necessitatem.
It is lawfull sometime to feast, and to prouide delicates as well as cates; vsing daintie bread in stead of daily bread: but we may not with the rich Luke 16.19. Epicure fare deli|ciously euery day, for this is dissipare, non dispensare bona Domini, prodigallie to waste, not frugallie to spend the gifts of our Lord bestowed vpon vs. Neither mayest thou

take vnmeasurablie what and when thou lift: for there is a fourth hedge: Rom. 14.15. Destroy not him with thy meate for whom Christ died. Haue respect to thine owne and others conscience: first, thou must instruct thy bro|ther in the truth, and then if he continue still in his old Mumpsimus, and will not beleeue, but is offended out of obstinate wickednesse rather then any weakenes, eate, not regarding his frowardnes, especially where the Prin|ces law commands thee to eat, for that is another hedge: Rom. 13.1. Let euery soule submit himselfe vnto the autho|rity of the higher power. Obseruing of Lent and fish-dayes is a policie of the State for the maintenance of fisher|townes, and increase of fisher-men, and therefore this Statute must be obeyed not only for feare of punishment, but also for conscience, saith Rom. 13.5. Paul: 2. Part hom. of fasting. I say conscience, not of the thing, which of it owne nature is indifferent, but of our obedience, which by th law of God we owe to the Magistrate. The Melanctho. loc. com. Tit. de ceremon.  Christian. liber. Beza epist. 24. Perkins tea|tise of consci|ence. cap. 2. particular lawes of Princes grounded vpon the generall lawes of God, euen in things indifferent makes our obedience not indifferent, but necessarie. Thus thou mayest eate food of thine own moderately, without offence to thy brother, or disobe|dience to thy gouernour.
Concerning drunkennes and the rest, often else|where: yet by the way note the craftines of the Diuell, and vnhappines of sinne, which seldome or neuer com|meth alone, it is vnlike the Raile which flieth solitarie, and in this respect most like the Partridge, who calles one another till they make a couey: first, Paul brings in sinne by the brace, gluttony and drunkennes, chambering and wantonnes, strife and enuying; then as it were by the whole couey, for all these birds of a feather flie together; immoderate diet begets chambering, chambering wan|tonnes, wantonnes strife, strife enuying; thus sinne doth first couple, then increase. This text ought to be regar|ded of vs the more, because it was the very place to which Augustine that renowned Doctour by a voyce from hea|uen

was directed at his first conuersion, as himselfe wit|nesseth, Lib. 8. confess. cap. 12.
Put ye on the Lord Iesus Christ.] As we must put off the old man, so put on the new man, and that is done Luther.  Melancth. in loc. two waies, either by putting on his merits, or by put|ting on his maners. Our Sauiour Christ in his life, but in his death especially wrought for vs Esay 61.10. a garment of salua|tion, and Apocalyp. 7.9. a long white robe of righteousnes: now the spi|rituall hand of faith must apprehend and fit this Math. 22.11. wed|ding apparell on vs in such sort, that all our Psalm. 32.1. vnrighte|ousnes may be forgiuen, and all our sinne couered.
Secondly, we must put on the maners and excellent vertues of Christ, in whom was no worke of darknes, but all armour of light; so the phrase is vsed, Iob 29.14. I put on iustice and it couered me, my iudgement was a robe and a crowne. This apparell is the true Perpetuan, neuer the worse, but the better for wearing.


The Gospel. MATTH. 21.1.
And when they drew nigh vnto Hierusalem, c.

_CHrist is Apocalyp. 1.8. Alpha, and Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and ending; where|fore the Church allotting a seuerall scrip|ture for euery seueral Sunday thoroughout the whole yeare, Ferus ser. 1. Dom. 1. Aduent. begins and ends with the comming of Christ: for the conclusion of the last Gospell appointed for the last Sunday, is, Of a truth, this is the same Prophet that should come into the world; and the first sentence in the first Gospell for the first Sunday, Behold, thy king commeth vnto thee. Where|in the Church imitated the method of Gods owne Spi|rit: for as the first prophesie mentioed in the old Testa|ment, is, The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head; and the first historie deliuered in the new Testa|ment

is, The booke of the generation of Iesus Christ; so the first Gospell on the first Dominical, according to the Churches account is Aduentual, a scripture describing Christ and his kingdome, fitting the text vnto the time: teaching vs hereby two things especially, first, what ma|ner of person the Messias is who doth come, secondly, what maner of persons we should be now he is come.

In the former part, obserue two points, a

Preface: All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spo|ken of by the prophet, verse 4.
Prophesie: taken out of Zacha. 9.9. Tell the daughter of Sion, c.


All this was done, that it might be fulfilled] An vsuall phrase with our Euangelist, as cap. 1.22. cap. 8.17. cap. 27. 35. It doth insinuate the sweet harmonie betweene the Prophets and Apostles: as Theodoret. de curat. Graec. affect. lib. 2. Numenius said Plato was nothing els but Moyses translated out of Hebrew into Greeke: and Ascham, that Virgil is nothing els but Homer turned out of Greeke into Latine: and as the Nouelists affirme, that our Communion Booke is no|thing els but the Romane Missall and Portuis thrust out of Latine into English: and as Diuines haue censured Cyprian to be nothing els but Tertullian in a more fami|liar and elegant stile: so the new Testament is nothing els as it were but an exposition of the old. That diffe|rence which Cicero ad Mar. Brutum orat. Zeno put betweene Logicke and Rheto|rick, Diuines vsually make betweene the Law and the Gospell, the Law like the fist shut, the Gospell like the hand open. Augustin. quaest. 73. super Leuit. In vetere no|uum latet: in nouo vetus patet. Euangelium reuelata Lex: Lex occultum Euange|lium: The Gospell a reuealed Law: the Law a hidden Gospell.
This harmonicall concent may serue to confound our aduersaries, and to comfort our selues. It doth abundant|ly confute obstinate Iewes, who expect another Messias to come; conceiting as yet all things not to be done in the Gospell, which was said of him in the Law: so that whereas the great question of the world is, Who is that

Christ? and the great question of the Church, Who is that Antichrist? the Iewish Rabbins are ignorant in both.
Secondly, this harmonie conuinceth all suh Tertul. lib. 4. contra Marcion.  Augustin. Haeres. 21. Here|ticks, as hold two sundry disagreeing Gods to be the au|thors of the two Testaments, one of the Law, another of the Gospell.
It affordeth also comfort: first in generall it may per|swade the conscience that the Bible is the booke of God. For if Prolomee was astonished at the 72. Interpreters, because being placed in sundry roomes, and neur con|ferring nor seeing one another, did notwithstandig write the same not only for sense of matter, but in sound of words vpon the selfe-same text, as In admonito|rio. Iustin Martyr, and De ciuit. Dei. lib. 8. cap. 42. Augustine report; then how should we be moued with the most admirable diuine concodance betweene the Prophets and Apostles, who writing the word of God in diuers places, at diuers times, vpon diuers occasi|ons, do notwithstanding agree so generally, Bellarmin. de verbo Dei lib. 1. cap. 2. that they seeme not diuers pen-men, but rather ined only diuers pens of one and the same writer?
In more particular, it may strengthen our faith in the gracious promises of Almighty God: he speakes the word, and it is done; commands, and it is effected: Hea|uen and earth shall passe, but not one iot of his word shal perish: he promised by Zachary that the Messias of the world should come, and he tels vs here by Mathew that he is come: All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet: Behold thy king commeth vnto thee. Thus much of the Prface generally: now to fist the words seuerally.
Tha, is taken here, non Postil. cathol. con. 2. Dom. 1. Aduent.  Maldonat. in loc. causaliter sed consecutiu, not for an efficient cause, but rather for a consequence and e|uent. Christ did not thus ide into Hierusalem because Zachary foretold it, but Zachary foretold it because Christ would thus ride, Christ being the complement of the Prophets, and end of the Law: yet the word That, in|sinuates (as Hom. 37. in Matth. Chrysostome notes) the finall cause why

Christ did thus ride, namely, to certifie the Iewes how that himselfe only was that King of whom their prophet Zachry did thus speake, that none but he was the King of the Iewes, and Messias of the world.
Fulfilled] A prophesie may be said to be fulfilled Maldonat. in 2. Matth. 15. foure wayes especially: 1. When the selfe-same thing comes to passe which was literally deliuered in the prophesie. So S. Math. cap. 1.22. saith, Esay 7.14. Esayes prophesie; Behold, a Virgin shall conceiue, c. was fulfilled in Mary, who brought forth a Sonne, c.
2. When the thing allegorically signified is fulfilled, as Exod. 12 46. it is said of the Paschall Lambe, Yee shall not breake a bone thereof: yet S. Iohn, cap. 19.36. affirmes this to be fulfilled in Christ: The souldiers brake not his legs, that the scripture should be fulfilled, Not a bone of him shall be broken.
3. When as neither the thing literally nor allegori|cally ment, but some other like is done: so Christ, Math. 15. tels the pele in his time, that the words of Esay, This people draweth neere vnto me with their mouth, c. were fulfilled in them: O hypocrites, Esay prophesied well of you, that is, of such as are like to you.
4. When as it is daily more and more fulfilled, as Iam. 2.23. the scripture was fulfilled which saith, Abra|ham beleeued God. Abraham assuredly beleeued God before, but his offering vp of Isaac was a greater probate of his faith: then the scripture was fulfilled, that is, more and more fulfilled, when Abraham thus far trusted in God. Now Christ fulfilled Zacharies saying in a literall and plaine sense, for he sent for an Asse and rode thereon into Hierusalem, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, Reioyce O daughter Sion, for behold thy King commeth, c.
S. Iohn and S. Matthew relate not the precise text of Zachary, but keeping the sense, they somewhat alter the words. On the contrary, blasphemous Heretikes and A|theists vse to keepe the words of scripture, but altogether

to change the sense. Children full fed often play with their meate: so Lucianists of our time play with the food of their soule, making the Bible their babble. The Lord who will not suffer his Name to be taken in vaine, mend or end them.
As for Heretikes, it is alway their custome to make the scriptures a ship-mans hose, wreathing and wresting them euery way to serue their turne. Tertullian. lib. de praescript. haeretic. Non ad materiam scripturas, sed materiam ad scripturas excogitant: First they make their Sermon, and then they looke for a text.
Herein the Papits of later time most offend, who doe not only faine Abdias. Amphilochius. Hippolytus, c. new Fathers, and falsifie the old In indic. ex|purgat. Do|ctors, putting out, putting in, chopping and changing as shall best fit their purpose, so that the Fathers (as Reue|rend Answer to M. Hardings conclusion. Iewell said) are no Fathers, but their children, no Doctors, but their schollers, vttering not their owne mind, but what the Papists enforce them to speake: they do not, I say, wrong humane authors only, but also pre|sume to censure and constue Gods own bookes as they list, as Contra Faust. lib. 27. cap. 32. Augustine said of Faustus the Manichee; Legant, qui volunt,  inuenient aut falli imprudentr, aut fallere impudentr. Hence Act. 10.13. kill and eate to Peter is a Baronius orat. ad Paul. 5. de Venet. excom. warrant for the Pope to depose Princes. It is written, Psalm. 91.13. Thou shalt goe vpon the Lion and the Adder, the young Lion and the Dragon shalt thou tread vnder thy feet, Nauclerus gen. 40. an. 1177. therfore the Pope may tread vpon the Emperors neck.
Gen. 1.16. God made two great lights in the firmment, that is, two great dignities in the Church, the Priest, and the Prince: but that which ruleth the day, to wit, spirituall things, is the greater; that which ruleth carnall things is the lesser: as Innocentius the third disputes in the Lib. 1. tit. 33. de maior.  o|bedin. cap. 6. De|cretals: and their Ibiem in verb. inter so|lm  lunam. Glosse further addes out of Polomie, that the Sunne containes the bignes of the Moone se|uen thousand seuen hundred fortie foure times, and so many degrees iump is euery Prelae aboue euery Prince. Sometime they cite the beginning without the end, sometime the end without the beginning: sometime

they take the words against the meaning, sometime they make a meaning against the words, and so they do not re|ceiue, but giue the Gospell, as Prfat. co|ment. in 4. E|ungelist. ca. 2. Maldonate fitly: not admit the old scripture, but vpon the point coine a new: for in controuerted places, either they suppresse the words, or else not expresse the sense: as if a man should pick away the corne, and giue vs the chaffe; or conuey away the iewels, and throw vs the bag. The blessed Euangelists had warrant from God, and we warrant from them to quote scripture, sometime more fully for explication, and sometime more shortly for breuitie, yet without al|teration of the sense, though there be some little altera|tion of the sentence. In loc. Marlorats annotation is good, that our Euangelist and other doe not alway repeate the very words in the Prophets and the Law, that we might hereby take occasion to peruse the text, and to conferre place with place. Let vs then examine the words in Za|chary, which are these, Reioyce greatly  daughter Sion: shout for ioy  daughter Hierusalem: Behold thy King com|meth vnto thee.

They contain 2. re|markable points: an

Exultation: Reioyce greatly, c.
Exaltation, or commendation of Christ, as a reason of this excee|ding ioy: Behold thy King com|meth vnto thee, iust, meeke, c.



In the former obserue the

Persons

Exhor|ting,

Principall, God: for the worde of the Lord came to Za|chary, cap. 1. vers. 1. This then is not the word of man, but the voyce of God.
Instrumentall: Za|chary.

Exhorted, Hierusalem.

Act, reioyce.


In that Zachary was Gods organ, marke the worthi|nes of holy Prophets, as being the very tongues and pens of the blessed Spirit: and this dignitie belongeth also to their successors, Apostles, and other Preachers of the word, for S. Matthew speakes in the plurall, dicite, tell ye; Caluin.  Marlorat. in loc. concluding th Prophets and Preachers, whose of|fice is to tell Hierusalem hat her King and Sauiour is come into the world to seeke and saue that which is lost.
Almighty God hath had in all ages either Patriarks, or Prophets, or Apostles, or Preachers, a Moyses, or an E|lias, a Zachary, or a Paul, or an Athanasius, or an Augu|stine, or a Luther, or a Iewel, by whom he spake to his be|loued Spose comfortably. Reioyce greatly daughter Sion: especially the Lord vseth to chse Zacharies, that is, such as are mindfull of God, such as delight in the law of the Lord, and exercise themselues therein day and night.
The persons exhorted are, daughter Sion, and daughter Hierusalem, that is, according to the vulgar Hebraisme, Sion and Hirusalem, as the sonne of man, for man, and sonne of floors, for floore, Esay 21.10. and Psalm. 72.4. the childen of the poore, for the poore, as Augustine vpon that place: so Ribera in Ho|seam ca. 10. num. 28. daughter Sion, daughter Babylon, daughter Hierusalem, for Sion, Babylon, and Hierusalem; a phrase not strange to the Homer Iliad. 7. Poet, who called the Grecians.
Now Hierusalem was the Metropolis of the Iewes, and Sion an eminent mount adioyning to Hierusalem, and at this time the Iewes were the Leuit. 26.12. people of God, and Hierusalem the Psalm. 87.2. citie of God. A Psalm. 76.2. Salm was his taber|nacle, and his dwelling in Sion. Whereas therefor S. Mat|thew, Tell ye the daughter of Sion, he meaneth, Maldonat. in loc. vsing a sy|necdoche, Hierusalem. And whereas Zachary names Hierusalem, he Iasen. in loc. meaneth the Church of God ouer the face of the whole earth, of which Hierusalem is a figure, and so the text i to be construed typically, not topically, for this ioy concernes the Gentile so well as the Iew, the

one as the roote, the other as the branch, as Paul shew|eth in his epistle to the Rom. cap. 11. Indeed Christ is the glory of his people Israel, but he is the light of the Gentiles, illuminating all such as sit in darknes, and in the shadow of death.
Heere then obserue, that Christ is the Churches ioy, and only the Churches ioy: dumb Idols are the Gentiles ioy: Mahumet is the Turks ioy: Circumcision is the Iewes ioy: Antichrist is the Babylonians ioy: the Diuell Clicuts ioy: but onely Christ is our ioy: We Cant. 1.3. will re|ioyce and be glad in thee: Cant. 6.2. I am my beloueds, and my be|loued is mine: Christ is so much the Churches, as that he is none others ioy: for as Tract. de sim|pliciate praela|torum. Cyprian and other Catholike Doctors, He that hath not the Church for his Mother, hath not God for his Father: and he that hath not God for his Father, hath not Christ for his Sauiour. Augustin. serm. 136. de tempore. Per por|tam Ecclesia intramus in portam paradisi: No Church, no Christ; no Christ, no ioy.
This exultation appertaines only to the Church: He that is not a sonne of Sion, a Citizen of Hierusalem, is in the Act. 8.23. gall of bitternes, and hath no part nor portion in this happines.
Now concerning the act, the matter is, to reioyce.
The maner, greatly to reioyce, with iubilation and shouting.
It is a receiued opinion in the world, that religion doth dull our wits, and daunt our spirits, as if mirth and mischiefe wnt alway together: but it is taught and felt in Christs schoole, that none can be so ioyfull as the faithful, that there is not so merry a land as the holy land, and therefore Zachary doth double his exhortation, Re|ioyce greatly shout for ioy: and Cap. 3.14. Zophony doth triple it, Re|ioyce  daughter Sion, be ye ioyfull  Israel, be glad with all thine heart  daughter Hierusalem: Exulta, laetare, iubila.
Now iubilation, as the Agustin. in Psalm. 65.  94. Gregor. moral. lib. 2. cap. 14. Fathers obserue, is so great a ioy, that it can neither be smothered nor vttered: tatius. Hila|ris cum pondere virtus. In the words of Christ, Matth. 11.30. My yoke

is easie, my burde is light. A new yoke is heauie, but when it is worne and dried it waxeth easie: Christ therefore did first weare and beare this yoke, that it might be sea|soned and made light for vs: he commanded vs to fast, and himselfe did fast: he commanded vs to pray, and himselfe did often pray: he commanded vs to forgiue one another, and himselfe pardoned. Againe, when he saith, My yoke is sweet, and my burden is light, he doth insinuate, that the yokes of other are bitter, and their burdens heauie: that it is a sorie seruice to be Sathans vassall, or the worlds hireling, so that the good man takes more delight in performing his dutie, then the wicked can in all his villanies  vanities. I was glad, saith Psalm. 122.1. Dauid, when they said vnto me, we will goe into the house of the Lord. And Psalm. 84.2. My soule hath a longing desire to enter into the courts of the Lord. And Psalm. 81. Sing we merily to God, c.
An vpright Christian is a Musician, a Physician, a Law|yer, a Diuine to himselfe: for what is sweeter Musicke than the witnes of a Prouer. 15.15. good conscience? What is better Physicke Epictetus. then abstinere  sustinere: good diet, and good quiet? what deeper counsell in Law, 2. Cor. 6.10. then in hauing nothing to possesse all things? and what sounder Diui|nitie, Iohn 17.3. then to know God and whom he hath sent, Iesus Christ? On the contrary, the wicked is Wisdom. 5.7. wearied in his wayes, and discontented in his courses. A malitious man is a murtherer of himselfe, the prodigall man a theese to himselfe, the voluptuous man a witch to himselfe, the couetous man a diuell to himselfe, the drunkard all these to himselfe, a murtherer to his bodie, a theese to his purse, a witch to his wit, a diuell to his soule. The blinde Iuuenal. Poet saw so much:
Semitacert
Tranquillae per virtutem atet vnica vita.
De gubernati|one Dei. lib. 1. Salias hath pithily comprehended all in a few words, Nmo alorum sensu miser est sed suo:  ideo non possunt cuiusquam falso iudcio esse miseri, qui sunt ver su

conscienti beati: hoc cuntis beatiores sunt religiosi, quia  habent quae volunt;  meliora qum quae habent omnin ha|bere non possunt. Fiei praesentis oblectamenta capiunt,  beatisudinis futurae praemia consequentur.
Hitherto concerning the Prophets exultation: his ex|altation followeth, Ecce rex tus, c. The word Behold in the Bible is like Iohn the Baptist, alway the forerunner of some excellent thing: and indeed all our comfort con|sists in this one sweet sentence, Behold thy King commeth vnto thee.
Behold,] looke no more for him, but now looke on him; Luke 10.23. Happy are the eyes which see the things that ye see.
King,] a reall and a royall Prince:

Reall in regard of his

right, and that by a Bernard. lib. 3. de considerat. threfold title:

iure creationis.
merito redempti|onis.
don patris.

might, as being the Lord, vers. 3. who commands, and it is done, vers. 6. for he can doe whatsoe|uer he will, and more then he will. A royall Prince both in his affections and actions.


A tyrant doth rob and spoile the people, but the Mes|sias is Iesus, a Sauiour of his people: Matth. 1.21.
A tyrant is a wolfe to scatter and destroy the sheepe, but Christ is the good shepheard, who gaue his life for the sheepe: Iohn 10.11.
Thy] Rom. 9.4. promised vnto thee: borne of thee: bred vp with thee: flesh of thy flesh, and bone of thy bone: not euery ones King: for Satan is Prince of the world: but thy King: for he is God of Luke. 1.68. Israel: his comming was suf|ficient for the whole world, but efficient only for Sion. Or thy King, because it is not enough to confesse in ge|nerall that Christ is a King: for the Diuell himselfe be|leeues the Buer. Maior of the Gospell: but the daughter of Sion must assume and beleeue the Minor, that Christ is her King, Esay 9.6. To vs a child is borne, to vs a Sonne is giuen. There is great diuinitie, saith Comn 1. Gal. vers 4. Luther, in Pronouns: a great Emphasis in nobis and noster, as In Esay cap 9.6. Bullinger Cal|uin note.
Commeth] Iohn 14.6. Christ is the way: we Esay 53.6. wanderers out of the way: Augustin. act. de picur.  Stoicis, cap. vlt. so that if the Way had not found vs, we neuer should or could haue found the way, Plican. in loc. nec opibus, nec ope|ribus, nec opera.
Vnto thee] Glossa ex Chsost. tibi, sicredis: contra te si non credis: if in|credulous, against thee: but if beleeuing, for thee: for thy, not his good; he Ephes. 5.2. gaue himselfe for thee: Postil. catho|lic. con. 2. Dom. 1. Aduent. Nas|cens se dedit in socium, conuescens in cibum, moriens in pre|tium, regnans in praemium. See Epist. Dom. 3. Quadrages.
What could haue been said lesse, and yet what canst thou wish for more? for if Chrst be a King, then he is able: if thine, then willing: if he come, he respects not his paine: if he come vnto thee, he regards not his profit: and therefore reioyce daughter Sion, shout for ioy daugh|ter Hierusalem. These glosses are common in the Fathers and Friars, and I shall often touch vpon them, especially Epist, and Gospell on Christmas day.

The second part of this Gospell insinuates how wee must entertaine Christ in our Thoughts.
The second part of this Gospell insinuates how wee must entertaine Christ in our Words.
The second part of this Gospell insinuates how wee must entertaine Christ in our Deeds.

For the first: we must beleeue Christ to be that Iesus, vers. 11. that great Prophet, who is the Messias and Sa|uiour of the world.
For the second: wee must professe and confesse this faith, hauing Hosanna in our mouthes, and crying, Bles|sed is he that commeth in the Name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest, vers. 9.
For the third: we must spread our garments in the way, cut downe branches from the trees, and straw them in the passage, vers. 8. Melancth.  Culman. in loc. that is, forsake all, and follow Christ, profering and offering our selues whollie to his seruice: or, as the Epistle doth expound the Gospell, see|ing our saluation is neere, the night past, and the day come, let vs cast away the works of darknes, and put on the armour of light, c.
I am occasioned here iustly to direct their ignorance who do not vnderstand, and correct their obstinacie who

will not vnderstand the wisdome of the Church, so fitly disposing of the Gospels and Epistles, as that often the one may serue for a Commentary to the other. As heere S. Matth. Behold thy King commeth: And S. Paul, Our saluation is nigh, and the day is come. S. Paul doth aduise, not to make prouision for the flesh: and S. Matthew reports, how the people accompanying Christ, spread their gar|ments in the way.
S. Paul commands loue in all men, S. Matthew com|mends loue in these men, who gaue such entertainment vnto Christ.
The whole Gospell is a Melancthon. Postil. in loc. liuely picture of the Church, in which are foure sorts of persons especially:

1. Christ, who is King and head, verse 5. and 12.
2. Prophets, who loose men from their sinnes, and bring them vnto Christ, verse 2. and 7.
3. Auditors, who beleeue that Christ is the Messias, openly professing this faith, Hosanna to the Sonne of Da|uid, vers. 9. and manifesting this faith also by their works in obeying the Ministers of Christ, verse 3. and perfor|ming the best seruice they can, verse 8.
4. Aduersaries, who much enuy Christs kingdome, saying, Who is this? verse 10.

Concerning Christs seueritie toward those who play|ed the Merchants in the Temple, See Gospell, Dom. 10. post Trinit.




Epist. ROM. 15.4.
Whatsoeuer things are written aforetime, they are written for our learning, c.

THis Scripture containes in it three things concer|ning the Scripture:

What it is written. Shewing the Scriptures authority.
When aforetime. Shewing the Scriptures antiquity.
Why for our learning. Shewing the Scriptures vtility.

For the first: things only told, passing thorough many mouthes, are easily mistold: it is long ere we get them, and we soone forget them: Almighty God therefore commanded that his Law should be written in bookes, and engrauen in stone, that the syllables thereof might alway be in our eyes, so well as the sound in our eares, and that for two causes especially:

1. That the godly man might Psalm. 1.2. Ioshua 1.8. exercise himselfe therein day and night.
2. That the wicked might neither Deut. 4.2. adde to it, nor detract from it.

In like maner, albeit the Rom. 10.18. sound of the thundring A|postles went out thorough all the earth, and their words vnto the ends of the world: yet the Spirit of wisedome thought it meete that there should be a treatise written of Act. 1.1. all that Christ did and said: and that Luke 1.2. from point to point: entituled, Matth. .1. The Booke of the generation of Iesus Christ. The Scripture then is a Bible, because written: and the Bible, , in many respects excelling all o|ther bookes, especially for the maker and matter, in so much that S. Paul saith, Gal. 1.8. If an Angell from heauen preach otherwise, let him be accursed. And Irnaeus cont. haeres. lib. 4. cap. 14  Euseb. hist. lib. 4 cap. 1. Iustin Martyr goes yet further: If Christ himselfe should preach another God, or another Gospell, I would not beleeue him: Ipse non crederem Domino Iesu.
This doctrine makes against vnwritten verities of Pa|pists, and fond reuelations ofMelancth. in loc. Anabaptists, and factious interpretations of Schismatikes, and impudent conceits of Martyr in loc. Libertines; all which equall their owne phantasies with the Scriptures authority.
The Papists and Schismaticks are all for a speaking Scripture: the Libertines and Anabaptists are all for an infused scripture: the true Catholicks only for the writ|ten scripture; Esay 8.20. to the Law, and to the Testimony. Psalm. 119.105. Thy word is a lanterne vnto my feet, and a light vnto my paths.
The second point to be considered is, that  or , scriptures written aforetime, being the first booke so well as the best booke: for as Lib. contra Praxeam. Tertullian was wont to call Praxeas, hesternum Praxean: so we may terme the most ancient Poets and Philosophers, in comparison of Moyses, vpstart writers. Iosephus lib. 1. contr. Apion. Omnia Graecorum sunt nua  heri. As Galaton painted Homer vomiting, Reliquos ver poetas ea quae ipse euomuisset haurientes: to signifie, saith De varia hist. lib. 23. Aelian, that he was the first Poet, and all other, as well Greeke as Latine, but his apes.
In like maner Moyses is called by De curat. Graec. affect. lib. 2. Theodoret, Oceanus theologiae, the sea of Diuinitie, from whom all other wri|ters as riuers are deriued. The which point as it is excel|lentlie confirmed by Theodoret, In Protrept. Clemens, Libris contra Appin. Iosephus and others, so it is ingeniously confessed euen by the heathen Historiographers: Clem. 1. Strom. Eupolemus lib. de Iudaea regibus, a|uoweth Moyses to be the first wise man: In Epinomide. Plato. that a barbarous Egyptian was the first inuentor of Arts, Iustin. Mart. in admonitorio. Appion, Ptolomey, Palaemon, haue granted the same: and vpon the point, Strabo, Plinie, Cornelius Tacitus, and o|thers, as icinus reports, lib. de religione Christiana, cap. 26. To demonstrate this more particularly; The Troian war is the most ancient subiect of human history: but Try was taken in the dayes ofClem. 1. Strom. Dauid. about the yeare of the world, Bcholcer. in Chron, ad ann. 2788. 2788. and Homer flourished Idem ad ann. 3000. anno 3000. whereas Moyses was borne Idem ad an|num 2373. anno 2373.
Secondly, this  Martyr in loc. confutes the Marcionites

and Manichees, and all such as reiect the old Testament. For the place, to which the text hath reference, is taken out of the 69. Psalme, verse 9, that the scriptures of Mo|ses and the Prophets are written for our instruction. It is plain by Christs iniunctio~, Iohn 5.39. Search the Scriptures: as also by that of our Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. These things happened vnto them for ensamples: and were written to admonish vs vpon whom the ends of the world are come. If all little histo|ries, then much more the great mysteries are our schole|masters vnto Christ: Let vs examine therefore the third obseruable point, concerning the Scriptures vtilitie; Whatsoeuer things are written afore time, they are written for our learning. The Scripture (saith Paul) is the peoples instruction: the Scripture, say the Bellarmin. de verbo Dei, lib. 2. cap. 15. Papists, in the vulgar tongue, is the peoples destruction. The Scripture, saith 2. Tim. 3.17. Paul, doth make the man of God absolute: the Scripture, say the Papists, in a knowne language, makes men here|ticall and dissolute; but the Bible makes men heretikes, as the Sunne makes men blinde: and therefore In his Wicket. Wickliffe truly; To condemne the word of God translated in any language for heresie, is to make God an heretike.
Not to presse this place nor vrge any other scripture, we may beate the Rhemish and Romish in this controuer|sie with their owne weapons, Antiquitie and Custome. For it is Sixtus Senen. bib. lib. 6. annot. 152. acknowledged that the Christians in old time read the Bible to their great edification and increase of faith in their mother tongue. The Rhem. preface, sect. 4. Armenians had the Psalter, and some other peeces of Scripture translated by S. Chrysostome. The Sclauonians by S. Hierome: the Goths by Vulpilas, and that before he was an Arian: The Italians three hundred yeers since by Iames Archbishop of Genua: and the Bible was in French also two hundred yeeres a|goe. Beside these, the D. Elk an|swer to Rhem. prefac. vbi sup. Syrians, Arabians, Aethioptans, had of ancient time the Scriptures in their seuerall lan|guages; as it is manifest by those portions of them, which are at this day brought from their countries into this part of the world.
To speake of our owne countrey; venerable Beda did translate the whole Bible into the Fox Preface before the 4. Euang. in the Saxon. Saxon tongue, and the Gospel of S. Iohn into English. K. Histor. Eli. lib. 1. cap. 37. Alfred also con|sidering the great ignorance that was in his kingdome, translated both the Testaments into his natiue language. Queene Anne, wife to Richard the second, had Scrip|tures translated in the vulgar, as Thomas Arundel, then Archbishop of Yorke and Chancellor of England, men|tioned at her funerall sermon, anno Polydor. Virg. hist. Anglican. lib. 20. fol. 420. 1394.
Moreouer; in a Parliament of this King Richard there was a bill put in to disanull the Bible tra~slated into Eng|lish, vnto which Iohn Duke of Lancaster answered, and said: We will not be the refuse of al men; other Nations haue Gods lawes in their owne language. Thomas A|rundel, as we reade in the constitutions of Tit. de magi|stris. Linwood, be|ing translated vnto the sea of Canterburie, made strait prouision in a Councell holden at Oxford, that no ver|sion set out by Wickliffe or his adherents should be suffe|red, being not approued by the Diocesan.
It is apparent then out of our owne Chronicles, that the Bible was turned into the mother tongue before and after the Conquest; before and after the time of Wickliffe; before and after the daies of Luther: and all this paine was vndertaken by good and holie men, that the peo|ple of God reading and vnderstanding the Scripture, through patience and comfort of the Sonne might haue certaine hope of another life.
As then I condemne the malice of Papists in forbid|ding; so likewise the negligence of carnall Gospellers in forbearing to reade those things aforetime written for our learning. Our forefathers heretofore spared neither cost nor paine: they ventred their crownes and their heads too for the new Testame~t in English, translated by Master Tyndall: and when they could not heare the Gos|pell in the Church publikely, they receiued much com|fort by reading it in their houses priuately: the very chil|dren became fathers vnto their parents and begat them

in Christ, euen by reading a few plaine Chapters vnto them in a corner: but in our time, when euery shop hath Bibles of diuers translations, editions, volumes, annota|tions, the number of those who can read is but small, the number of those who doe reade is lesse, the number of those who reade as they should, least of all. If a lear|ned Clerk should en a treatise for thy particular instru|ction, thou wouldest instantly with all diligence peruse it. If a Nobleman should send thee gracious letters con|cerning thy preferment, thou wouldest with all dutifull respect entertaine the~. If thy father, or some other friend, taking a iourney into a farre countrey, should penne his Will, and leaue it in thine hands and custody, thou woul|dest hold it as a great token of his loue. Behold the Bi|ble is written by Wisedome it selfe for our learning, that we may be perfect vnto all good workes. It is Gods Chrysost. in 2. Ths. 2. E|pistle, and Letters patent, wherein are granted vnto vs many gracious immunities and priuiledges: it is his Te|stament wherein all his will is reuealed, whatsoeuer hee would haue done or vndone: and therefore let vs pray with the Church, that wee may in such wise reade holie Scriptures, heare, mark, learne and inwardly digest them, that by patience and comfort of Gods holie word, wee may embrace and euerhold fast the hope of euerlasting life: through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.



The Gospel. LVKE 21.25.
There shall be signes in the Sunne, c.


THe Malach. 4.2. Sunne of righteousnesse appeareth in three signes:

Leo.
Virgo.
Libra.


First roring as a Lion, in the Law: Exod. 20.19. so that the people could not endure his voyce. Then in Virgo, borne of a Math 1 25. Virgin, in the Gospell: in Libra, weying our workes in his Dan. 5 27. ballance at the last and dreadfull audite. Or there

is a three-fold comming of Christ, according to the

three-fold difference of time

Past.
Present.
Future.



Which Serm. 3. de aduentu Dom. Bernard hath vtte|red elegantly: venit

ad homines.
in homines.
contra homines.


He came among men in time past, when as the Word was made Iohn 1.14. flesh and dwelt among vs: hee comes into men in the present by his grace and holie Spirit: Apoc. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the doore and knocke. He shall in the future come against men, to iudge both the quicke and the dead: but the Sonne of man hath but two commings in the forme of man: his first comming in great meeknes, his second in exceeding maiestie. At his first comming he rode vpon an asse: in his second (as it is here said) he shall ride vpon the clouds. In his first comming he came to be iudged: in his second, he comes to iudge. In his first com|ming the people did triumph and reioyce, crying Hosan|na: but in his second comming the people shall bee at their wits end for feare, and for looking after those things which shall come on the world.
In that therefore the Church hath adioyned this Gos|pell of his second comming vnto that other of his first comming; it doth teach all Teachers this lesson, that their song be like Dauids, of Psal. 101.1. iudgement and mercie; that in all their sermons they mingle faith and feare; Ferus serm. 1. in Euangelium Dom. 2. Aduent.  Acosta con. 1. Dom. 1. Aduent. that they preach Christ to be a Iudge so well as an Aduocate. This method Christ himselfe did vse, who did as well expound the Law, as propound the Gospell; who de|nounced woe to the proud Pharisies, and pronounced blessednesse to the poore in spirit; Luke 10.34. who powred wine and oyle into the wounds of him that was halfe dead: oyle which is supple, wine which is sharpe: and when he departed he gaue to the host two pence, Theophylact. in 10. Luc. that is, to the Preachers who take charge of him, the two Testaments, and willed them to temper and applie these two till hee

come againe, that thinking on the Gospell we might ne|uer despaire, and thinking on the Law wee might neuer presume: that looking vpon Christs first comming wee might reioyce; and expecting his second comming wee might feare: because there shall be signes in the Sunne and in the Moone, c.
In handling whereof I will not trouble you with idle curiosities: only note two plaine points:

Especiallie, to wit, the Certaintie Of Christs second comming.
Especiallie, to wit, the Vncertaintie Of Christs second comming.

The certaintie, that he shall come: the vncertaintie, when he shall come.

The certain|tie is declared heere by

Words:

Affirmed barely: vers. 27. They shall see the Son of man come in a cloud, c.
Enforced with an asseueratio~: verse 22. Verily I say vnto you, c. adding further a pere~ptory conclusion: vers. 33. Heauen and earth shall passe away, but my words shall not passe away.

Wonders: vers. 27. There shall be signes, c.


The words are spoken by Christ: as it is apparent vers. 8. Now Christ is truth: Ergo, this prophesie cannot be false. That which hee foretold touching Hierusalem in this Chapter, is in euery particular come to passe: why then should this prophesie be thought vntrue, concerning the worlds destruction, when as that other was true concer|ning Hierusalems desolation?
Zachary foretold that the Messias in his first comming should in meekenesse ride vpon an asse, and, as S. Cap. 21.4. Mat|thew reports, all that was done: behold here a greater than Zachary tels vs that the Messias in his second com|ming shall ride vpon the clouds: and shall we doubt of his word, who is that eternall Word? shall wee beleeue Zachary, who was but one of the small Prophets, and

shal we distrust him who is that great Prophet? Ioh. 6.14.
But because men will not beleeue him vpon his bare word, who made all the world with his word: Psal. 33.9. He spake, and it was done: he doth vse an oth and earnest asseueration in the 32. verse, Verily, I say vnto you. c. Because there is none grater then imselfe, he doth sweare by himselfe, Truth doth protst by Truth, This generation shall not passe, till all be fulfilled.
The word generation hath perplexed as well old as new writers exceedingly. Sometime generation in scrip|ture signifieth an age: As Ecclesiastes 1.4. one generation passeth, and a|nother commeth: and Psalm. 100.5. the truth of the Lord endureth from generation to generation that is, euer, from age to age. Now anseius con|cord. cap. 124. generation in this acception is 100. yeares. So Nestor is said to liue , three ages, that is, three hundred yeares: and therefore some Diuines haue referred this vnto the destruction of Hierusalem only, which happened within an hundred yeares after this prophesie: so learned Annot. in Matth. 24.34. Erasmus and Beza construe the place, both of them, interpreting the word aetas: and the translators of Geneua following them in our lesser Eng|lish Bible, This age shall not passe: but as well the transla|tion as obseruation is defectiue, because Christ saith here, This generation shall not passe, till all these things be done, , not only those which concerne the deso|lation of Hierusalem, but all those likewise which con|cerne the worlds end.
Abulensis in loc. vti postil. cathol. con. 4. Dom. 2. Adunt.  Iansenius vbi supra. Other by this generation vnderstand the nation of the Iewes, as Luke 17.25. The sonne of man must be re|proued of this generation: and Math. 23.36. All these things shall come vpon this generation: that is, this nation.
S. Com. n Matth. 24.34. Hierom by generation vnderstands all mankinde, as if Christ should say, the generation of men shall con|tinue till all be fulfilled, and then in fine they shall ac|knowledge that I spake the truth.
Aquin. caten. in Matth. 4. Chrysostome, In loc. Matth. vbi supra. Theophylact, Euthymius, expound this of that generation onely Psalm. 24.6. which seeke God; of Gods

elect and faithfull people, as if Christ should speake thus, Albeit there be signes in heauen, and troubles on earth, yet Matth. 16.18. hell gates shall not preuaile against the Church: Matth. 28.20. I am with you alway, saith Christ, vntill the end of the world. The generation of such as beleeue in me shall not passe, till all this be fulfilled: and therefore let none of my followers be discouraged, but rather lift vp their heads, in that their redemption is so neere. This exposi|tion I take to be both pertinent and profitable, because Christ in this Chapter had foretold, that his Disciples should be persecuted and brought before Kings and Princes for prosessing his Gospell, verse 12. Yet this ge|neration shall not passe, but there shall be a Church al|way to confesse the faith in despight of the Diuell. Origen.  A|quin. caten. in Matth. 24. The Church one day shall passe too, but not till these things be done, then in the end it shall inherit a better posses|sion in Gods owne kingdome without end.
Postil. catholic. vbi supra. Other by generation vndrstand all that time be|tweene Christs first comming and his last; for the whole world being diuided into three generations, a time be|fore the law, a time vnder the Law, a time after the Law the time of the Gospell is Hora nouissima, the last houre: 1. Epist. Iohn 2.18. and, We are they vpon whom the ends of the world are come, 1. Cor. 10.11. so that ye shall not looke for another Gospell, or another change; for the prea|ching of this Gospell and the world shall end together.
Maldonat. in Matth. 24.34. Other by generation vnderstand not only the Iewes, or the Christians, or all men only, but the whole vniuer|sall world, termed elsewhere the Creature. This genera|tion, that is, this world, in which all things are generated, shall not end till these signes, forerunners of it ruine shall come to passe. So Christ interprets himselfe in the verse following, Heauen and earth shall passe, but my words shall not passe aay. That is, howsoeuer the earth be moue|able, and the powers of heauen shake: though both wax old as doth a garment, and all things in them are subiect to mutation and change, yet Hebr. 13.8. Christ is yesterday, and

to day, the same also for euer: so that if you will credit Christ, either vpon your owne reason and experience, or vpon his word and oath, beleeue this also, that he shall come riding on the clouds with great power and glory to iudge both the quick and the dead.
Secondly, Christs comming to iudgement is shewed heere by wonders in heauen, in earth, and in the sea, which shall be like harbingers of that dreadfull and ter|rible day: There shall be signes in the Sunne, and in the Mone, and in the earth: the people shall be at their wits end through despaire: the sea and the water shall rore, c.
Euery man is desirous to buy the Kalender, that at the beginning of the yeare he may know what will happen in the end: Merchants and Husbandmen especially, that they may see this yeare what dearth, or death, or other accidents are likely to ensue the next yeare. Bahodus Pontanus bibli|othe. cocio|u~ Dom. 2. Ad|uent. Behold then here Christs Prognostication, foretelling by signes in the Sunne, and in the Moone, and in the Starres, what shall come to passe in the end of our yeares, as also, what shall betide vs in the new yeare, the world to come. The Thomas sup|pleme~t. quaest. 73 artic. 2. Ma|thematicians of the world neuer mentioned or dreamed of an vniuersall eclipse of the Sunne and Moone toge|ther, only Christs Almanacke reports this. I purpose not in particular to discusse any curious question, but only to note in generall, that these wonders in heauen, and extra|ordinarie troubles on earth, are manifest forerunners of the worlds ruine; that as we know Summer is neere when the trees bud, so when we see these things come to passe, we may be sure that the kingdome of God is nigh: for as a man that is dying hath many phantasies, euen so, saith Chrysostome, the world declining shall haue manifold er|rors, in so much if it were possible Gods elect should be deceiued. Matth. 24.24.
Aristotle could not conceiue the world should haue an end, because he thought and taught it had no begin|ning: but diuine Plato who liued in Egypt, and read (as it is Iustin. Martyr in admonitorio. supposed) the bookes of Moyses, acknowledged the

worlds creation, and so subscribed to the worlds destru|ction, holding this axiome, Quod oritur, moritur, That which hath a beginning, hath an end. Whatsoeuer hath an end, had a beginning; the which is to be construed of compounded elementarie substances, subiect to genera|tion and corruption, as all things in this world are. For as we reade in scripture, Some things haue a beginning, but no end, as Angels, and the soules of men.
Some things haue no beginning, but yet haue an end, as Gods eternall decrees.
One thing, to wit, Ens Entium, Almighty God, hath neither beginning nor end: 1. Tim. 6.16. who only hath immorta|litie of all other things: the Apocal. 1.8. first and the last: and yet in himselfe there is neither first nor last.
Some things haue both a beginning and end, as the world, which had a creation, and is subiect to corruption.
1. Iohn 2.17. The world passeth away, and the glory thereof, and then when as the powers of heauen shall be shaken, and the 2. Pet. 3.10. element shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works that are therein shall be burnt vp, then the sonne of man shall come in a cloud with power and great glory.
Now this certainty of Christs comming to iudgement

affordeth abundant matter of comfort to the godly.
affordeth abundant matter of terror to the wicked.
affordeth abundant matter of instruction to both.

Comfort to Gods elect: for when these things come to passe, then, saith Christ in 28. verse, Lift vp your heads, for your redemption draweth neere. Now you are prosecu|ted and persecuted, deliuered vp to the Synagogues, and cast into prison, but at that great assise there shall be a ge|nerall goale deliuery, and you that haue done good, shall goe into euerlasting ioy, and your enemies who haue done euill, into euerlasting fire. Heere ye mourne, but hereafter all teares shall be wiped from your eyes: here ye sow in hope, but then ye shall reape with ioy; when as ye shall see the sonne of man comming in the clouds, c. As God is the God of comfort, so his booke is the booke

of comfort: Whatsoeuer things are written aforetime, they are written for our learning, that wee through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might haue hope.
The very soule of all the Bible is the Gospell: and the summe of all the Gospell is the Creede: and the maine point of all the Creed is that article concerning our re|surrection and hope of eternall glorie, when Christ shall appeare. The Church then hath well anexed that Epistle to this Gospell, as a consolation against desolation. By the booke of comfort, wee know that our Redeemer li|ueth, and that he will come againe to iudge and reuenge our cause.
We beleeue that an eternall kingdome was secretly granted vnto vs in our election, openly promised in our vocation, saled in our iustification, and that possession shall bee giuen in our glorification: when as the Iudge of the world shall say, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the world. 1. Thes. 4.16. When the Lord himselfe shll descend from heauen with a shout, and with the voyce of the Archangel, and with the trumpet of God; we shll be caught vp in the clouds to meete him, and so shall euer be with him. And therefore pray wee daily, Thy kingdome come: Come Lord Iesus, come quickly. Amen.
Now as this is comfortable to good men, so most ter|rible to the wicked: as Christ, vers. 26. Their hearts shall  them for feare. They Apocal. 9.6. shall seeke death in those daes, and shall not finde it. And, as it is Apocal. 6.16. They shall sy to the mountaines and rocks, fall on vs, and hide vs from the presence of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lambe. This hath been their day, wherein so farre as they could they haue done their will; the next is the Lords day, wherein they must suffer his will; Zoph. 1.15. a day of anger, a day of trouble and heauinesse; a day of destruction and desolation; a day of obscuritie and darknesse; a day of clouds and blacknesse. The reprobate shall see the sonne of man in the clouds aboue, to condemne them: beneath,

hell mouth open readie to deuoure them: before, the di|uels haling them: behinde, the Saints and all their dea|rest friends forsaking them: on the left hand, their sinnes accusing them: on the right, iustice threatning them: on all sides, the whole world made a bone fire terrifying them; to goe forward, insupportable; to goe backe, im|possible; to turne aside, vnauailable: no maruell then if at the worlds end, men be at their wits end.
Thirdly, this administreth instruction vnto all: for as it is in the Epistle: Whatsoeuer things are written afore|time, are written for our instruction. And this is so good a lesson, that if we could obserue it well, wee should neede no more teaching: so saith the Wiseman, Ecclesiast. 7.36 Remember the last things, and thou salt neuer doe amisse.

The last things are foure:
Death.
Iudgement.
Heauen.
Hell.

But the chiefe is iudgement: for all the rest attend it. Death is vsher to iudgement going before; Heauen and Hell executioners following after. Death would not bee so fearfull, if iudgement did not follow: Hell would not be so painfull, if iudgement went not before: without it heauen would not be desired, nor hell feared. Hee then that remembers the last day, remembers in it all the last things: and he that remembers the last things, cannot do amisse. Wherefore let vs euer embrace that godly medi|tation of S. rome: Whethr I eate or drinke, or whatsoe|uer I doe else, I thinke I hre the last trmpe: Arise ye dead and come vnto idgement. The consideration of the worlds destruction is a suffiient instruction to keepe good men in honest courses,  to terrifie bad men from euill waies. Italians, in a great thunder, vse to ring their bels, and discharge their cannon shot, that the roring of the one, may lessen the terror of the other. Diz. con. 1. Dom. 1. Aduent. In like sort Satan hangs tinckling cymbals on our eares, and de|lights vs with the vanities and musicke of the world, that

we may forget the sound of the last trumpe, and so that Du Bartas, 1. day, 1. weeke, fol. 15. day be seene, before foreseene of most.
As it is certaine that Christ shall come; so most vncer|taine when he shall come: for he speakes of the time not definitly, but indefinitly: vers. 25. Then there shall be signes: vers. 27. Then shall they see the Sonne of man comming in a cloud: vers. 28. When these things come to passe, then look vp, for your redemption draweth neere. But how neere now? Math. 24.36. no man or Angel can tell. Cap. 6.2. Esay saw God in his throne, and the Seraphims stood vpon it, couering his face with two wings, and his feet with two wings: his face, Hieron. com. in loc. Isaiae sup. Praeterita ante mundum  su|tura post mn|dum sire non possumus: sed media tantm contemplamr. kee|ping vs from the secrets of Gods eternall predestination in the beginning: his feete, not disclosing when he will come to iudge the world in the end.
The certaitie then of this vncertaintie, may teach vs not to bee Musculus  Marlorat. in Matth. 24.36. curious or carelesse; not curious, for why should we presume to know more then other men? more then all men? more then Angels? more then Christ him|selfe? It is a kinde of sacriledge, saith De gubernat. Dei lib. 3. Slianus, to breake into Gods holie place, and prie into his secret sanctuarie, and to know more then he would haue vs to know.
Christs Apostles were his Secretaries, his especiall fa|uourites and followers, from whom hee kept nothing which was for their good, and yet he said vnto them, Act. 1.7. It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his owne power. The glorious An|gels abound with much knowledge, naturall, experimen|tall, reuealed, hauing farre better meanes of knowledge then wee: forasmuch as wee know the Creator by the creatures; whereas they know the creatures by the Crea|tor. Bernard. ser. in illud Psalmi: Audia~m quid loquatur in me Deus. fol. 345. Opus habet humana anima, quasi quodam vehiculo Creaturae, vt adcognitionem Creatoris assurgat. Cm  con|tr long perfectius angelica natura in Creatore notitiam habet creaturae: Angels alway Matt. 18.10. behold the face of God in heauen, in which as in a glasse they see much more then is possible for vs on earth to discerne. Let not then

an heauie lump of clay presume to know more then hea|uens heralds: and yet Christ, to satisfie further our curio|sitie, saith in the 13. of Marke that himselfe knowes not that day and houre. Now Mat. 10.24.25 the disciple is not aboue his ma|ster, nor the seruant aboue his Lord: It is enough for the disciple to be as his master is, and the seruant as his Lord. He is a foole that will be wisr then Wisedome it selfe: but Christ as man was either ignorant of it, or else had no commission to reueale it: or as Part. 3. qu. 10. at. 2. ex Augu|stino lib. 83. quaest onum quaest. 60. Aqin; Dicitur nescire, quia non facit scire: Hee is said himselfe not to know, be|cause he Responsum nesindi non natuae, sed vo|lunt atis. vt Hi|lar. de Trin. lib. 6. would not haue vs to know. Such as will en|quire more touching that text, may see Sixt. Seen. Bib. sent. lib. 6. annot. 105. Soarez Conimbricen. traect. 3. in Mat. Bellarm. lib. de anima Christ 1. cap. 5 sect. am de quarto. Ian|sen. concord. cap. 124. Maldonat. in Matth. 24.36. I will end with the saying of Epist. 146. Augustine: Ne nos addamus inquirere, quod ille non addidit dicere. Ecclesiast. 3.22 Let vs not seeke the things that are too hard for vs: but that which God hath commanded let vs thinke vpon with reuerence. Deut. 29.29. Secret things blong to the Lord; reuealed things vn|to vs.
Secondly, this vncertaintie of Christs second com|ming, may teach vs not to be carelesse: Nam ideo latet vl|timus dies, vt obseruetur omnis dies: God would haue vs ignorant of the last day, that we might be vigilant euery day. This vse Christ makes in the words immediatly fol|lowing my text: and Matth. 24.42. and Mark. 13.33. It behoueth vs, vpon whom the ends of the world are come, to bee more watchfull: because Satan is growne more wrathfull, Apocal. 12.12.
Du Bartas: 1. day, 1. weeke. as Lysards cut in peeces,
Threat with more malice, though with lesser might:
And euen in dying shew their liuing spight.
The Father of mercies and God of compassion increase our faith, and fill our lampes with oyle, that when the Bridegrome shall come, wee may meete him, and enter with him into the wedding; August. soliloq. cap. 35. where there is ioy be|yond

all ioy, pleasure without paine, life without death, euery thing that is good, without any thing that is euill. Amen.



The Epist. 1. COR. 4.1.
Let a man this wise esteeme vs, euen as the Mini|sters of Christ, c.

THe people of 1. Cor. 3.3. Corinth in Pauls age, like the people of Suruey of the pretended holy dic. cap. 29. England in our time, were very factious and hu|morous, extolling some Preachers, and despising other indiscreetly, without either iudgement or loue. S. Paul therfore rebukes sharply this insolent rashnes, and shew|eth in this scripture, 1. What euery man should iudge, verse 1. Let a man c.
2. What he should not iudge of the Preachers: in

which point he doth

1. report, verse 2.
2. reproue their fault, and that two wayes:

1. , by way of correction, I passe very little to be iudged of you, c. vers. 3.4.
2. , by way of direction, He that iudgeth is the Lord, and therfore iudge nothing before the time, vers. 5.



Let a man] Whereas the Corinthians ascribed either too much or too little to their teachers, our Apostle shews a Martyr  Cal|nin. in lc. meane, Let a man this wise c. neither mag|nifying them as Christ, for they are not Masters but Mi|nisters, and yet not vilifying them as ordinary seruants in Gods house, for they are stewards, and that of Gods own secrets.
Albeit Paul 1. Cor 3.6. plant, and Apollos water, only God gi|ueth increase. Paul Augustn. con|traiteras Peti|lian. li. 3. cap. 35 planted in preaching, Apollos wate|red in baptizing: some plant by their words, other water by their works: some plant by doctrine, other water by their exhortation: some plant by speaking,

other water by writing, but in all God is all.
He that planteth is nothing, he that watereth is nothing, quin. in loc. that is, no great thing, no principal agent, but a subordi|nate instrument: wherefore let not a man boast in , Whether it be Paul or Apollos, or Cehas, or the word , or death; whether the be things present, or things to come. euen all are yours and e Chrits and Christ Gods. If then the Preachers are yours, and you are Christs, and Christ Gods, Rm. 11.36. as of him, and through him, and for him are all things, so vnto him, and not vnto men, giue all the praise and glory.
Let a man esteeme vs not as Christ, but as the Mini|sters of Christ, not as Lords, but as stewards in Gods house: now stewards administer not their owne goods but their masters, and one day must account for them, and therefore ye must haue, and we behaue our selues as accountants. Luther postil. maior. in loc. Antichrist then is not the vicar of God, but a factor of Satan, in preaching his owne Decrees, and equalling them with the diuine law.
But albeit Preachers are seruants, yet are they not meane, but high stewards: and this is an exceeding great dignitie to be Christs mouth, Christs voice, Christs mes|sengers, Christs angels, in so much as Matth. 10.40. he that receiueth them, receiueth him, and he that despiseth them, despiseth him, as ambassadours speaking from him, and for him, as our Apostle 2. Cor. 5.20. elsewhere. They be not only common ambas|sadors, but legati  latere, stewards of his hidden secrets: not only dispensatores ministeriorum as in the vulgar La|tine; but Erasmus in loc. according to the originall, mysteriorum, ad|ministers of his sacraments, which are mysteries, and Preachers of his faith, which is a deepe secret, 1. Tim. 3.16. of all other the greatest: and yet it is the Luther loc. com. tit. de mi|nisterio verbi. Ministers pro|per office, with Iohn Baptist to shew the Lambe of God, which taketh away the sinnes of the world.
They are the mouth of God in preaching to the peo|ple, and againe the peoples mouth in praying to God; euen mediators as it were betweene God a man: as

Moses said of himselfe, Deut. 5. I stood betweene the Lord and you, to declare vnto you the word of the Lord. This doth intimate how wee should teach, and you should heare. First how wee should preach: If any man speake, let him talke as the words of God. 1. Pet. 4.11.
It is a good obseruation, that the Lawyer ought to be|gin with reason, and so descend to common experience and authoritie. The Physician he must begin with pe|rience, and so come to reason and authoritie: but the Di|uine must begin with authoritie, and so proceed to rea|son and experience.
2. This may teach you to heare our voyce; 1. Thes. 2.13. not as the word of men, but as it is indeed the word of God. Christ said of the wicked Pharisies in the 23. of S. Matth. Quae dicunt, facite: Doe as they say, but not as they doe: August. contra literas Petilian. lib. 2. cap. 6. Dicunt enim quae Dei sunt, faciunt quae sua sunt: They doe their owne workes, but speake the Lords word. And therfore so long as the Preachers deliuer the wholesome words of our Lord Iesus, 1. Tim. 6.3. or doctrine which is accor|ding to his words, you must entertaine them as Angels of God, euen as Christ Iesus; honouring their place and re|uerencing their persons. And this I take to be the pith of the first part.
In the second, S. Paul teacheth how wee must not iudge: first he reports, then reproues their fault. His re|port is in these words: Hieron. in loc. Hc iam quaeritur c. Erasmus in loc. , non : Aquin.  Gorran. in loc. Heere among you Corinthians it is discussed and disputed who is a faithful Minister,  who is vnfaithfull.
And herein they wrong both God, his word, and his Ministers: God, to whom onely iudgement belongs in this case. Some peraduenture may iudge of the Ministers eloquence; many of his industrie, but none of his faith|fulnesse: which is the Matth. 24.45. chiefe thing required in a ste|ward. A man may be fruitfull and yet not faithfull; an instrument to saue other, and yet be condemned himself: for he may preach Christ not for Christ, but happely for other respects: as the fornicator makes delectation his

end, not generation; so the Preacher, 2. Cor. 4.2. adulterans ver|bm, as it is in the vulgar, intends not to get children in Christ vnto God, but gaine, or glorie to himselfe. Ye know the men, ye know not their minde: ye see their fact, not their faith; onely God knowes the secrets of all hearts.
Secondly, it is an iniurie to Gods word, in hauing the faith of our glorious Lord Iesus Christ in respect of per|sons, Iames 2.1. It is not any who, who may either priui|ledge an error, or preiudice a truth: if another Gospell, hold him accursed, although the Minister be an Angell: if a truth, doe as they say, though the teacher be a diuell: poyson in a golden cup is as hurtfull as in an earthen pot: wine in a siluer bowle no better then in a woodden dish. When one faith, I am Pauls, and another I am Apollos, are ye not 1. Cor. 3.4. carnall? Is not this grosse carnalitie, to set vp I|dols in the Church, and to worship them in stead of God?
Thirdly, this is an indignitie to the Preachers, in that artles men will take vpon them to iudge of art. By the Pou tons A|brigement, title, Brewer and Butcher. lawes of the land, a person occupying the craft of a But|cher, may not vse the occupation of a Tanner; and a Brewer may not deale in the occupation of a Cooper: Quod medicorum est promittunt medici, tractant fabrilia fabri. None prescribe physick but such as are Doctors, at least practitioners in the facultie: none plead at the com|mon barre, but such as are learned in the law: yet euerie one, as Hierome complaines in an Epistle to Paulinus, takes vpon him exact knowledge in Theologie, and will teach both Clerke and Priest what they should say, what they should doe. So that often it fareth with Preachers, as it doth alway with fish, none so welcome as new come: If a stranger happely come among vs, albeit he be neuer so weake for his learning, neuer so wicked for his liuing; yet all the countrie must gad after him, and neglect their owne pastors: Matth. 13.57. as Christ in the Gospell, A Prophet is not honoured in his owne citie, and in his owne house. This

was a soule fault in Corinth: Apollos, and Cephas and Paul were despised, while false teachers were deified. In|deed Paul writes in the third chapter of this Epistle, as if some followed him, and other Apollos: himselfe for his plaine doctrine, and Apollos for his excellent eloquence. But in the sixth verse of this chapter hee saith, he applied those things vnto himselfe, and Apollos figuratiuely; Aquin. in loc. meaning that Peter and Apollos and himselfe were neglected, and other vpstart seducers only regaded: he did vse the names of Gods Apostles in his censure for the benefit of the Corinthians: For your sake, that ye might learne by vs that no man presume aboue that which is written, and that one swell not against another for any mans cause.
So men in our daies are too partiall in hearing and censuring their Teachers: as one said, Auditories are like Faires; the Pedler and the Balladmonger hath more co~pany then the graue rich Merchant: Children  fooles hang vpon them who sell toyes, and neglect those who haue their shops stuft with good commodities: and this assuredly doth discourage many Pastors learned and pro|fitable. For euery man hath not a magnanimous spirit, spernere se sperni, to tell his auditorie with Paul, I passe ve|ry little to be iudged of you. For so this fault is reproued in the third verse.
The false teachers had extolled themselues and disgra|ced him; affirming 2. Cor. 10.10. that his bodily presence was weake, and his speech of no value. S. Paul therfore hauing the testimo|nie of a good conscience, resolutely tels the Corinthians, I little passe to be iudged of them, or you, or any man: Hee Marlorat ex Martyr. in loc. saith not, I esteeme not at all; but I little regard: that is, not so much respect your iudgement, as that I should be discouraged in doing my dutie. The witnesse of con|science is more comfortable then the vulgar breath: in comparison of the one, I little prise the other. Or as In loc. Gorran: It were a great thing to be iudged of such as are spirituall; but it is a very small thing to be iudged of

you, who are thus carnall. As De remedys ortuitorum ad Galionem. Seneca: Male de me lo|quuntur, sed mali; mouerer si de me Marcus Cato, si Lalius sapiens, si duo Scipiones ista loquerentur: nunc malis displi|cere, laudari est.
Either of mans iudgement.] Our Apostle wils vs to re|buke with all long suffering and doctrine. Now himselfe is a paterne of his owne precept: for left he should seeme too bitter in chiding the Corinthians, and despising their iudgement; he doth in this clause somewhat qualifie his speech, insinuating that he doth except against all others iudgement, so well as theirs. Happely some will obiect it is vnciuill and vnchristian, not to regard what men speake of vs: As wee must haue care of our conscience, so likewise of our credit:
Ouid.Qu semel amiss poste nullus eris.
It is good in our courses to gaine the fore-game; for it is exceeding hard to play an after-game of reputation. Answere is made, that albeit Paul esteemed little their iudgement in regard of 1. Thess. 2.6. himself, as expecting the praise of God, and hauing a good certificate from his owne conscience; yet in respect of other who might hereby be scandalized, and so the Gospell hindred, he was assuredly grieued, and therefore reproues here their fault boldly, that they might repent heartily: To me it is little, but vnto other it is a great scandall, that I should be thus a|bused and neglected of you.
Iudge not mine owne selfe.] I know more by my selfe then you or any man else: and yet I cannot iudge my selfe, therefore much lesse ought yee to iudge me. This seemes contradictorie to that of 1. Cor. 11.31. Paul: If we would iudge our selues we should not be iudged. I answer with In loc. Aquine,

that there is a three-fold iudgement:

1. Discussionis.
2. Conde~nationis.
3. Absolutionis.


Euery man may, yea must iudge himselfe with the two former; hee must examine himselfe, and vpon examina|tion altogether condemne himselfe. Euery man ought

daily to commune with his owne heart, and to search out his spirit: Psalm. 77.6. Scopebam spiritum, I did as it were sweepe my soule: Bernard. me|ditat. cap. 5. Diligenter attend, quatum proficias vel quantum deficias: Examine thy selfe whether thou hast gone forward or backward in the waies of the Lord. Summon thy selfe, as it were before another, and so fift the whole course of thy life, wherein thou hast offended in thought, word, deede; by sinnes of omission, or com|mission, against God, thy neigbour and thy selfe. Iudge thine owne selfe in secret before thy selfe, and thou shalt not be condemned at the last day before all the world. Do this, saith Vbi supra. Bernard, Si non semper, aut saep, saltem in|terdum: If not alwaies, or often, at least sometime: espe|cially, saith our Apostle, when yee come to receiue the blessed sacrament of our Lords Supper: Let a man exa|mine himselfe, and so let him eate of this bread, and drinke of this cup.
The second kinde of iudgement is of condemnation. So Cap. 13.1. Iob: I will reproue my waies in his sight. Cap. 9.20. If I would iu|stifie my selfe, mine owne mouth shall condemne me. So Psal. 143.2. Da|uid: Enter not into iudgement with thy seruant, for in thy sight shall no man liuing be iustified. And S. 1. Epist. 1.10. Iohn: If wee say we haue no sinne, wee deceiue our selues, and the truth of God is not in vs.
A Christian in this world is August. tract. 80. in Iohan. al|luding to that of S. Iohn chap. 15.2.3. mundus  mundandus: cleane in part, and in part to be made cleane: Hieron. epist. ad Cesiphont. tom. 2. fol. 254. all his per|fection consists in acknowledging his imperfection; all his righteousnesse in Augustin. de cit. Dei lib. 19 cap. 27. forgiuenes of sinnes, rather then in perfection of vertue. Yea but, say the Pelagians, and after them the Papists, Elizabeth and Zachary were iust, obseruing all the commandements and ordinances of the Lord, Luke 1.6. Iob an vpright man departing from euill, and preseruing his innocencie, Iob 2.3. In Dauid no wic|kednesse, Psal. 17.3. and here Paul; I know nothing by my selfe.
I answere to the first: If Zacharie was a Priest, then a sinner: for as we reade, Heb. 7.27. the Priests manner was

first to offer sacrifice for his owne sinnes, and then for the peoples. If then Zacharie did sacrifice, he had sinne, and sinne is a transgression of the Law: so that he did not ex|actly keepe the whole law, but himselfe and his wife so farre obserued the commandements as that they were blamelesse in the worlds eye: Bacer.  Be|za in loc. no man could iustly con|demne them for doing vniustly.
But, as Confess. lib. 9. cap. 13. Augustine said, Vae etiam laudabili vitae homi|num, si remota misericordia discutias eam: Woe to the commendable life of man, if God set mercie aside in iudging of it.
Euen their owne Serm. de qua|druplici debito. Bernard confesseth ingeniously, that if the Lord should take a strait account of vs his ste|wards, it were impossible that any should answere the thousanth, yea the least part of his debt, nec millesimae nec minimae parti.
For the commendation of Iob, it is not simple but com|paratiue: There was none like him on the earth; at least none so righteous in that part of the earth in the land of Vz. Gregor. Moral. lib. 1. cap. 1. It was a great praise to be so good among that peo|ple, who were so bad. According to the measure of hu|mane perfection Almightie God hath giuen him so great testimonie of righteousnesse, saith De peccatoru~ meritis  re|missione, lib. 2. cap. 12. tom. 7. fol. 472. Augustine: Hast thou not considered my seruant Iob? how none is like him in the earth, an vpright and iust man, one that feareth God, and eschueth euill. But himselfe is afraid of himselfe: Verebar omnia opera mea: So the Romish translation hath it: I was afraid of all my workes, Iob 9.28. And in the second verse of the same chapter: How shall a man bee iustified before God? and in the third verse: If I contend with him, I shall not be able to answere him one for a housand.
Now for Dauid, his praise was not generall, but parti|cular and partiall. There was no wickednesse found in him, Euthymius in loc. that is, no plot or practise against Saul; wherof he was accused vniustly: but otherwise in other things, his sinnes were so many, and those so heauie, that hee crieth out in the 38. Psalme, Put me not to rebuke, O Lord, in thine

anger, c. Dauid was no traitor, but Dauid was an adul|terer, and a crull murtherer: He turned from nothing the Lord commanded him all the daies of his life, saue only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite. 1. Kings 15.5.
What, had Dauid no fault else, but only that against Vriah? Yes surely, Dauid was Psl. 51.5. conceiued in sin, and sha|pen in wickednesse. As he was the sonne of many yeares, so the father of many sinnes. In his priuate conuersation hee did so much offend, as that he saith in the 130 Psalme, If thou O Lord be extreame to marke what is done amisse, oh Lord who may abide it? That text then is to be construed of his publike gouernment, as the circumstances import; as he was a King, the Scripture giueth him this commen|dation, that, excepting the matter of Vriah, hee gaue no publike scandall in the whole time of his raigne. Dauid was in many things a bad man, but in most things a good King.
So likewise this speech of Paul: I know nothing by my selfe, is not Calin i loc. generall, extended to the whole course of his life, but particular touching his Apostleship. So Bi|shop Serm. 3. be|fore King Ed. 6 Latimer said: As for sedition, for ought that I know, me thinkes I should not need Christ, if I might so say. Paul knew nothing, that is, no vnfaithfulnes in exer|cising his ministerie; which hee did vtter here, not to i|stifie himselfe, as it is apparent in the next clause, but to glorifie God. As wee finde in the 15. Chapter of this E|pistle, vers. 9. I am the least of the Apostles, not worthie to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God: but by the gce of God I am that I am, and his grace was not in vaine, for I laboured more abundantly then them all; yet not I, but the grace of God which is with me. S. Paul then, assisted with Gods especial grace, found nothing in him|selfe to condemne himselfe, for his vnfaithfulnes in prea|ching: but in other actions hee was so buffeted with Sa|tan, and ouerladen as it were with his infimities, as that he grieuously Rom. 7.24. complaineth: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer me from the bodie of this dath? Hee that

cals himselfe in Ephes. 3.8. one place the least Saint, in 1. Tim. 1.15. another ac|knowledgeth himselfe the greatest sinner. But what need wee looke any further? He that here saith, I know no|thing by my selfe, saith also, yet herein am I not iustified: as I doe not condemne, so not absolue my selfe. The Pa|pist then in citing this text, hath lost a pound to gaine a peny: For although a man doe all that he can, he is still an vnprofitable seruant. I know no vnfaithfulnes in me, yet I am not hereby iustified: for, as In loc. Gorran and Aquin note, Paul might haue many secret sinnes vnknowne to himselfe: according to that of Psal. 19.12. Dauid; Who can tell how often he offendeth? O clese thou me from my secret faults. Euery way of a man (saith Prou. 21.2. Salomon) is right in his owne eye: but the Lord pondereth the heart: and who can say, Prou. 20.9. I haue made mine heart cleane? Or, as D. Fulk in loc. D. bbot contra Bishop, pag. 574. Caluin. institut. lib. 3. cap. 14. Sect. 18.  cap. 17. sect. 14. our Diuines ex|pound it, howsoeuer Paul was faithfull in his office, yet his and all our good workes are stained with some ble|mish.
There was iniquitie in the holie sacrifices of the chil|dren of Israel: but their high Priest did beare the ini|quitie to make the offering acceptable before the Lord: Exod. 28.38. There is vnholinesse in our holiest actions, but Christ our high Priest hath borne the iniquitie: and they are accepted of God in him, not by themselues or their owne perfection, but as perfumed with the sweete incense of Christs obedience: who to make both vs and them accptable, gaue himselfe an offering and a sacri|fice of a sweete smelling sauour to God: Ephes. 5.2. See Epist. Dom. 3. Quadrages.




The Gospel. Matth. 11.2.
When Iohn in prison heard the works of Christ.


THis Gospell hath two principall parts:

A question moued by S. Iohn Baptist, in the 2.3. verse.
An answer made by our Sa|uiour Christ, in the rest.



In the question foure things are regardable:

1. The place where: in prison.
2. The time; when, he heard the works of Christ.
3. The messengers: hee sent two of his disciples.
4. The message Art thou he that shall come, c.



Christs answere con|cerneth either the Message Of Iohn.
Christs answere con|cerneth either the Or person Of Iohn.

That which concerned the message of Iohn, he deliue|red vnto the messengers: vers. 4.5.6. Goe and shew Iohn what ye haue heard and seene.
That which concerned the person of Iohn: he deliue|red vnto the multitude when the disciples of Iohn were departed: vers. 7.8.9.10.

Wherein obserue these three circumstances:

1. When: After Iohns disci|ples were gone, auoyding hereby all flatterie.
2. To whom: To the multi|tude, confirming in them a reuerend opinion of Iohn.
3. What: his speech altoge|ther te~ded vnto the praise of Iohn.



And it is partly

Negatiue, shewing what he was not for his life: vers. 7.8.
Affirmatiue, shewing what hee was for his office, vers. 9.10.


This I take to be this Gospels anatome and epitome.
When Iohn, in prison.] Psal. 34.18. Many are the troubles of the righteous. If they were many and not troubls, hen, as it is in the prouerbe, The more the merrier: or if they were troubles,  not many; then, the fewer the better cheere. But it hath pleased almightie God to couple them both together; in nature, troubles; in number, many: that thorow many tribulations we might enter into the kingdome of God: Act. 14.22.
Some therefore are touched in their reputation, as Su|sanna: some crossed in their children, as Ely: some perse|cuted by their enemies, as Dauid: some wronged by their friends, as Ioseph: some tormented in their bodie, as La|zarus: some suffer losse of goods, as Iob: some restrai|ned of their libertie, as here Iohn in prison. As Naples is called in Ortelius. history, the butt, and Millaine the bale of for|tune: so the good man is the butt of the wicked, where|at he shootes his sharpest head arrowes: and therefore wee must put on Gods armour, following S. Iohs exam|ple. When we are in prison, or in any other affliction, we must not flie to witches, or relie too much on men, but immediatly send to Christ; I say send two messengers vnto God, our almes and our prayers: for they will doe our errand for vs, as they did for ornelius, Act. 10.4.
Not to follow the common postils in this argument, I note out of these two circumstances, of place and time, two commendable vertues in Iohn, to wit, his discretion and humilitie. The disciples of Iohn held their master a greater Prophet then Christ: albeit he told them plain|lie, that he was not worthie to vntie the latchet of Christs shoe, Matth. 3.11. Behold then his exceeding wisedome, who sent his disciples vnto Chrst, hen him|selfe was mot abased in regard of his prsent imprison|ment, and imminent deah, and when Christ on the other side, was most famous for his wondrous works  strange miracles: When Iohn bing in prison, heard he workes of Christ, he sent two of his disciples vnto him.


The disciples of Iohn had three faults, as wee finde in the Gospell:

Enuie: Iohn 3.26. Behold he that was with thee beyond Iordan baptizeth, and all men follow him.
Ignorance; supposing Iohn 3.28. Iohn to be Christ.
Incredulitie; ioyning with the Pharisies against Christ, say|ing: Matth. 9.14. Why doe wee, and the Pharisies fast oft, and thy dis|ciples fast not?


Now in Iacob. de vo|rag. ser. 1. Dom. 3. Aduent. Christs schoole there were three perfections opposite to these three defects: Examples of humilitie against enuie: words of wisedome against ignorance: workes of wonder against incredulitie. Iohn therefore sent his disciples vnto Christ, that seeing his humilitie, their enuie might be lessened; that hearing his wisedom their ignorance might bee rectified; that wondring at his workes their incredulitie might be confounded: and because Clem. Strom. 2. faith is the mother of all vertues, and infideli|tie the nurse of all wickednesse, the Baptist then sent his disciples, when he heard of the great workes of Christ; that going, they might see; seeing, wonder; wondring, beleeue; beleeuing, be saued.
A good example for all Marlorat. ex Caluin. in loc. Preachers to follow; that they take their hint, and best opportunity to benefit their auditors. Euery Pastor is a steward in Gods house; and a steward must not only prouide meat enough, but also prepare it in due season: otherwise, saith De conside|rat. lib. 3. Bernard, it is not dispensatio, but dissipatio. This ought to be their first and last Ldolphus de vita Cristi, part. 1. cap. 56.  Zepperus co. 1. Dom. 3. Aduent. care: for Iohn in prison euen at deaths doore was most carefull to commend his schollers vnto the best Tu|tor: and this paterne fits all parents, as well as Preachers. In a word, all Dz cone. 2. Dom. 2. Aduent. superiors that they be watchfull, for the good of such as are vnder them. 1. Tim. 5.8. If there be any that pro|uidth not for his owne, and namely for them of his houshold, he denieth the faith, and is worse then an infidell. If such as neglect their families in temporall things, be worse then

infidels; how bad are they who neglect them in spirituall things, vsing no paines in their life, nor care at their death; that their seruants and children after their depar|ture, may be brought vp in instruction and information of the Lord?
But that which is especially noted out of those cir|cumstances, is, Iohns humility, who was not vaine glori|ous, or factious, or any way desirous to draw disciples af|ter him, but rather to send them vnto other, who could better instruct them. If all our Preachers were like Iohn, there would be much lesse diuision, and much more de|uotion in the Church. An itching shepheard must neces|sarily make a scabbie sheep.
He sent] When the Pastor is restrained of his libertie, let him not cease to prouide for his flocke: when the Ma|ster of the family cannot come to Church himselfe, let him send his seruants vnto Christ.
Two] For mutuall society, because Eccles. 4.9. two are better then one: if one fall, the other may lift him vp; if one forget, the other may remember: and yet not mo then two, lest turba should proue turbulenta, lest many heads should make many Creeds. Beauxamis har. Euang. Tm. 2. fol. 255. As Iosuah sent two to spie the pro|mised land; so Iohn sent two to spie the promised Lord.
Art thou he that shall come] At the first sight hereof some may suppose that Iohn did doubt, whether Christ was the true Messias or no: for otherwise he would neuer haue sent his disciples with this question; Art thou hee that shall come c. But if you call to mind that which is written before; that Iohn baptised Christ in Iordan, and how hee saw the holy Ghost descending vpon him, and how he pointed him out with the finger, This is the Lambe of God. Or if you shall aduisedly consider what fol|loweth after this question of Iohn in this present Chap|ter, what honourable testimony Christ gaue of him, that he was not a reed shaken with the wind; that is, an incon|stant man, one that preached Christ to be come, and now to make question of his comming: that he was a Prophet,

yea more then a Prophet: if, I say, we note the text either precedent or consequent, it will appeare more manifest then light at noone that Iohn himselfe did no way doubt of Christ: and therefore to let passe all other expositions, I follow with the whole streame of Iansen. Con|cord. cap. 47. Beuxamis vbi sup. Culman. conc. 1. Dom. 3. Aduent. Musculus Ma|dn, c. in loc. late writers, that old interpretation of S. Com. in loc. Herome, Hom. 27. in Matth. Chrysostome, In loc. Theo|phylact, Euthymius, Hilary, Lib. 9. in Mat. fol. 80. Rupertus, all which are of this opinion, that Iohn Baptist made not this doubt in regard of himselfe, but in the behalfe of his doubting dis|ciples, as yet not throughly perswaded that Christ was the Sauiour of the world: and therefore did he send them vnto Christ, that by occasion of Christs answere, hearing his words, and seeing his wonders, they might be fully satisfied, and in fie saued.
A candle being put in a close roome, will shew forth it selfe thorow the little cranies of the wals, and chinckes of the window. Iohn was a Iohn 5.35. burning and shining lamp: and therefore though he was shut vp in prison, yet notwith|standing shined in his humility, wisdome, loue, zeale be|fore men, euen like the Sun giuing the greatest glimpse at his going downe.
Goe and tell Iohn] Why tell Iohn? He knew before that Christ was the Messias: he might haue said rather; I tell you; not, Goe you and shew Iohn: Mldona. in loc. but Christ would take no notice of their vnbeliefe, lest he should shame and discourage them too much.
What you haue heard and seene] What you haue heard of others, and seen your selues: for as S Cap. 7.21. Luke reports at that very time bfore their eies, our Sauiour cured many of their sicknesses and plagues, and of euill spirits, and vnto many blind men he gaue sight: as if hee should reason thus; I haue made the premises; it remaineth onely that ye gather the conclusion: Esay 35.5. he that inlightneth the eies of the blind and openeth the eares of the deafe,  Esay 61.1. bin|deth vp the broken hearted, ad preacheth good tidings vnto the poore, c. hee is assuedly the Messias of the world: But I doe all these; therefore goe tell Iohn what yee

haue heard and seene, the blind receiue their sigt, the lame walk c. Ye know the tree by his fruit. Bernard. pist. 107. Non ex elijs, non ex floribus, sed ex fructibus. Here then we may larne to teach ignorant people with our workes as wll as our words, Ludolph. vbi upra,  Acosta Con. 3. Dom. 2. Aduent. that all men may see, so well as hae what we are.
Yea but why did not he shew them in plaine termes, but demonstrate by miracle, that he was the Mssias? He told the woman of Iohn 4.6. Samaria before shee did aske: why then did hee not tell them when they did aske? Chryso|stome giues this reason; because Christ knew the woman of Samaria would easily belieue, therefore hee vsed a bare word onely: but the disciples of Iohn were hard of beliefe, and therefore he hought it best to teach them by works, and not by words: Iohn 5.36. I haue greater witnesse hen the witnesse of Iohn; for the works which the Father hath giuen me to finish, the same works that I doe, beare witnsse of me, that the Father hath sent me. Wherefore Iohn 10.38. though yee be|leeue not me, yet beleeue he works: Go shew what ye haue seene; the blinde receiue their sight, the lame walke, the leapers are cleansed, and the deafe heare, the dead are raised vp, c. These Iohn 15.24. works which I haue done, the like whereof were neuer done, testifie that I am hee who should come: and so will your master Iohn, that he looke for none other. This answere was thought sufficient by Christ, which is wisdome it selfe: Go and shew Iohn the things that ye haue heard and seene. But if Christ now will finde any faith among our Atheists, he had neede to come with new miracles, I might haue said with more then miracles, lest our searching wits finde the reason of them: or otherwise conclude them to be but our igno|rance of the cause. Men and Gods, as it is in the fable of the golden chaine, were not able to draw Iupiter downe to the earth, and yet Iupiter was able to draw them vp to heauen: so we must submit our reason vnto faith, and not faith vnto reason.
And as they dparted, Iess began to say vnto the people.] This part of our Sauiours answere concernes the com|mendation

of Iohn: if Cicro orat. pro Archiapoet. O fortunate, qui tuae virtutis Homerum prae|conem inuene|ris. Alexander the great accounted Achilles happie for that he had so good a trumpeter of his honor as Homer, what an exceeding glory was it for the Baptist to be thus extolled by Christ, who being truth it selfe would not flatter, and could not lie.
Ludolphus: Beauamis: Ian|sen. Marlorat. Bucer. c. in loc. Diuines out of these circumstances of persons and time, note Christs wisdome and sinceritie; wisdome, who did not magnifie Iohn before those who did already praise him too much: his sinceritie, that would not flat|ter him before his owne disciples, albeit hee did extoll him before the people, when they were gone. It is an olde saying of In Ezechiel. Gregorie: Plus nocet lingua adulatoris, qum gladius perscutoris; The word of the flatterer, hurts more then the sword of the persecuter.
A malicious enemie doth often good by telling vs of our vices, but a fauning friend wrongs vs in telling vs of our vertues: either commending that which wee haue not, or too much extolling that which wee haue: the which is termed in the Canon law simonia linguae, verball simonie. Leuit. 2.13. Salt was vsed in the legall sacrifices, but not hony, that our lips may offer vp acceptable sacrifice to God. We must haue salt in our Colos. 4.6. speech, and not honey complements, as being more desirous to correct our ac|quaintance wisely, then to flatter them basely.
Reusner. class. 1. Symbol. p. 145 Sidona non sunt dona, quae dant hostium;
Nec verba quae dant verba, sed sunt verbera.
The Parasite, saith the Platus. Poet, hath bread in one hand, and a stone in the other; vsing vs as the Iewes did Christ; carrie vs vp to the top of an hill, and then cast vs downe headlong. Luk. 4.27. Christ therefore rebuked the Pharisies be|fore their face, but commended Iohn behinde his backe, not to his owne but to the people, lest they should en|tertaine an ill conceit of him who was a Preacher and a Prophet: and here by the way note, that the difference betweene the Disciples of Christ and Iohn in matter of ceremonies, as fasting and washing of hands, made no schisme in the Church; but Iohn gaue this testimonie of

Christ, that he was not worthie to loose the latchet of his shoe: and Christ here commends highly both the carri|age and calling of Iohn; affirming of the one, that hee was not an inconstant or vaine man; of the other, that he was a Prophet and more then a Prophet. There are three kindes of Prophets according to the threefold distincti|on of time: some write of things past, as Moses: In the beginning God created, c. penning an hexameron ma|ny yeares after the world was made: some of things to come, so Christ was foretold by the mouth of all his holy Prophets euer since the world began: some of things pre|sent, as Zacharias in his song: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he hath visited and redeemed his people: Christ being then conceiued had begun his visitation; and such a Prophet was olde Simeon at Christs circumcision: Mine eyes haue seene thy saluation. Now Iohn is more then any of these, because he is all these; prophesying of things past: I am the voice of him that crieth in the wilder|nes, opening an olde text of Cap. 40.3. Esay; prophesying of things present: Behold the lambe of God that taketh away the sinnes of the world; prophesying of things to come, Repent, for the kingdome of God is at hand.
Secondly, Iohn is more then a Prophet; for whereas other prophesied onely in their life; Iohn was a prophet in his mothers bellie before hee was borne: for Luk. 1.41. when Elizabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe sprang in her wombe, the which was so sensible a prophesie, that Elizabeth instantly called Mary the mother of our Lord.
Thirdly, Iohn was greater then the Prophets vnder the lawe, because they prophesied of Christ to come: but Iohn bare record that he was come, being, as Beauxa~mis harmon. Tom. 2. fol. 258.  Al|bert. in loc.  Caluin. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 9. Sect. 5. diuines haue tearmed him, a midling, betweene a Prophet and an Apostle: a propheticall Apostle, and an apostolicall Prophet: Trtullian. lib. 4. contra Marcio. Limes inter vtrumque constitutus, in quo de|sinerent vetera,  noua inciperent: The Baptist then is more then a Prophet, in pointing him out with the fin|ger;

who is the very center of all the Prophets aime.
Fourthly, greater then a Prophet, Hieron. in loc. in that he bapti|zed the Lord of the Prophets.
But what need we looke any further, when as our Sa|uiour in the very next verse giues a sufficient reason of this assertion out of the Prophet Cap. 3.1. Malachie: This is he of whom it is written, Behold I send my messenger before thy face, c. Maldonat. in loc. Other Prophets are sent to men, but Iohn to God, from God the Father to God the Sonne: Behold, saith God the Father, I send mine Angell before thee, c.
Christ in all his Sermons vsually cited text for the proofe of his doctrine: so Iohn the Baptist; I am the voice of a crier, as saith the Prophet Esay: So Saint Peter, This is that which was spoken by the Prophet Ioel: so Saint Paul buildeth all his exhortations and conclusions vpon eui|dence of holy writ; teaching vs hereby, that howsoeuer the descant bee fetched out of the schoole; yet the grounds of all our preaching must be taken out of Gods owne booke: Beleeue this, for it is written: doe this, for it is written. Augustin. epist. 48. Adi, dicit Dominus, non dicit Donatus, aut Rogatus, aut Vincentius, aut Hilarius, aut Augustinus, sed dicit Dominus. Expound one text by comparing it with another; for the Prophets are Doron Basili|con, lib. 1. pag. 8. commentaries vpon Mo|ses, and the Gospell is a short exposition of both; and that you may the better performe this, examine the que|stions, harmonies, concordances, annotations, glosses of the learned Doctors in Christs Church from time to time; for it was an impudent speech of Abelardus, Omnes sic, sed ego non sic: and worthily censured by Epist. 190. Bernard: Os talia loquens ustibus iusts tunderetur, qum rationibus refelleretur: For as the word of God was not penned in olde time so lkewise not to be consued in our time by any priuate spirit: 2. Pt. 1.20.21.
eold I se my .] Our Euangelist reports  spoke by God the Fath but the Prophet as  by the Sonne: Bhld, I  end my essnger and  before me. This alering of the per|sons

hath troubled Interpreters a little: Pet. Galat. de arcanuilib. 3. cap. 12.  Ian|sen. Concord. cap. 13. some therefore thus, I send my messenger before my face; that is, before my Sonne, Hebr. 1.3. This obseruation is true, but not per|tinent: Ribera in Ma|lach. 3. num. 4.5. for to send a messenger before a mans face, is no|thing els but to send a messenger before him, as Hab. 3.5. Before him went the pestilence: and Ieremie, Lament. 1.5. Her children are gone into captiuitie before the enemie: An|te faciem tribulantis; and so Christ expounds it here, be|fore thy face, that is, before thee.
Now for the changing of the persons, it is vsuall in the Bible: Saint 2. Pet. 1.21. Peter affirmes tha the word of God was written by the holy Ghost; but Saint Paul saith, Hebr. 1.1. that God the Father in olde time spake by the Prophets. Cap. 52.6. Esay doth ascribe this vnto the Sonne; My people shall know my name, in that day they shall know, that I am he who sent to them: and the reason hereof is plaine; be|cause all the workes of the sacred Trinitie, quoad extra, be common vnto all the three persons, and so God the Father, and God the Sonne, and God the holy Ghost, send. The persons diuersitie then alters not the sacred Identitie: but as Hieron. Ian|sn. Maldonat. in loc. Interpreters obserue, that text of Malachie compared with this of Matthew, proues no|tably that God the Father, and God the Sonne are all one, their power equall, their maiestie coeternall.
My messenger:] In the vulgar Latin, Angelum meum: V Beda in cap. 1. Marc. Origen therefore thought Iohn was an Angell; but other expositours more fitly, that the Baptist was Angelus of|ficio~, non natur; so Malachie cals other Prophets, An|gels, in his 2. Chapt. 7. The Priests lips shall preserue know|ledge, and they shall seke the law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts: Angelus Domini: so Prea|chers are called Apoc. 2.1.8.12 Angels in the new Testament, that is, messengers and ambassadours of God; and here the Gos|pell agrees with the Epistle. This is a paterne of S. Pauls precept: Preachers are to be respected as the Ministers of Christ, and stewards of God, for God saith of Iohn the Baptist, Behold I send my messenger, c.
Happily some will obiect, if ordinarie Prophets are called Angels, how doth this testimonie proue Iohn to be more then a Prophet? Answere is made by Zacharie, Luk. 1.76. that Iohn is  the Prophet,  here by Matthew, that Angell, as it were bedell or gentleman vsher vnto Christ. As then in a solemne triumph they be most honoured, who goe next before the king; so Iohn being next vnto Christ, euen before his face, is greater then they who went farre off: he was the voice, Christ the word: now the word and the voice are so nere, that Iohn was taken for Christ. Againe, Iohn may be called that Angell, in Theophylact. in loc. regard of his carriage so well as his calling, for albeit he did no miracle, yet, as Maldonat. in loc. one said, his whole life was a perpetuall mirale: first, his conception was wonderfull; begotten, saith Serm. 6. Ambrose with prayer: Non tm com|plexibus qum orationibus: An Angell from heauen a|uoucheth as much in the first of Luke, verse 13. Feare not Zacharie; for thy prayer is heard, and thy wife Elizabeth shall beare thee a Sonne, and thou shalt call his name Iohn. It was another miracle, that a babe which could not speake, yea, that was vnborne, began to execute his angelicall office, and to shew that Christ was neere: that dumbe Zacharie should prophesie, was a third wonder at his circumcisi|on; and so the whole life of Iohn was very strange, li|uing in the wildernes more like an Angell then a man: and in a word, those things which are commendable in other seuerally, were found in him all ioyntly, being a Prophet, Euangelist, Confessor, Virgin, Martyr: liuing and dying in the truth and for the truth. I know not (as Vbi supra. Ambrose speakes) whether his birth, or death, or life was more wonderfull.
How Iohn doth prepare the way before Christ, is shewed in the Gospell on next Sunday; yet obserue this much in generall, that it is the Ministers office to shew men the right way to saluation, and to bring them vnto God: our Sauiour hath promised to come vnto men; it is our dutie therefore to knocke at the doores of your heart

by preaching faith and repentance, to prepare the way for our master, that when himselfe knocks he may be let in, and so sup with you, and dwell with you, and you with him euermore. Amen.



The Epistle. PHILIP. 4.4.
Reioyce in the Lord alwaies: againe, I say reioyce.

A Text of reioycing against the time of reioycing: whereby the Church intimates how wee should spend our Christmas ensuing; not in gluttonie and drun|kennesse, in chambring and wantonnesse doing the di|uel more seruice in the twelue daies, then in al the twelue moneths: but rather Colos. 3.16. in Psalmes and hymnes and spiri|tuall songs, making melodie in our hearts vnto the Lord: I say the Church allotting this scripture for this Sunday, teacheth vs how this holy Time should be well imploied, not in vnholinesse and mad meriments among Lords of misrule: but in good offices of religion, as it becomes the seruants of him who is the God of order: obseruing this festiuall in honour of Iesus, not Iacchus; alway praising our heauenly Father, in louing vs so well as to send his Sonne to saue his seruants: and lest we should erre in our spirituall reuels, obserue in this Epistle both

The Matter Of our ioy.
The Manner Of our ioy.
The matter and obiect of our ioy: reioyce in the Lord.
The manner: how Long; alway reioyce.
The manner: how Much; againe and againe reioyce.

It is an old rule in Arist. Ethic. lib. 2. cap. 5. Philosophie, and it is true in Diui|nity, y^t affections of the mind, as, anger, feare, delight, c. are in their own nature neither absolutely good, nor sim|ply euill, but either good or bad, as their obiect is good or bad. As for exa~ple, to be angry or not angry, is indiffe|rent: Be agrie, and sin not, saith Ephes. 4.26. Paul; there is a good an|ger. Whosoeuer is angrie with his brother vnaduisedly (saith

Matth. 5.22. Christ) is in danger of iudgement; there is a bad anger. So Matth. 10.28. Feare not them that kill the body, and are not able to kill the soule: but rather feare him which is able to destroy both soule and body in hell. So likewise to reioyce, or not to reioyce, in it selfe is neither absolutely dis|gracefull, nor altogether commendable: we may not re|ioyce in the toyes of the world, in frowardnes, or doing euill, faith Prov. .14. Salomon: Non in vitijs, non in diuitijs, saith Ser. de nimi fallacia praesen|tis vitae, sol. 39 Bernard: Luk. 6.26. Woe bee to you that thus laugh, for yee shall waile and weepe but wee may delight in the Lord, saith Dauid. Reioyce in Christ, saith Mary: then our ioy is good, when as our ioyes obiect is good, yea God; as Paul here; Reioyce in the Lord.
As sorrow is a straitning of the heart, for some ill: so ioy the dilating of the heart for some good, either in pos|session or expectation. Now Christ is our chiefe good; as being author of all grace in this life, and all glorie in the next: and Zanchius in Philip. 3.1. ex Graecorum scho|lijs. therefore we must chiefly reioyce in him, and in other things only for him: in him, as the donor of euery good and perfect gift: for him, that is, according to his will: as the phrase is vsed, 1. Cor. 7.39. If her hus|band be dead see is at libertie to marrie with whom shee will, only in the Lord.
So then we may reioyce in other things; for the Lord as in the Lord: we may reioyce in our selues, as being the Lords; and in other, because they reioyce in the Lord. Psal. 16.3. All my delight is vpon the Saints that are in the earth, and vpon such as excell in vertue: So likewise wee may reioice with the Ecclesiast. 9.9. wife of our youth, and disport our selues in good companie: we may make Christmas pies, and Haruest dinners: in a word, reioice in euery thing which may further our spirituall reioycing in the Lord. But 1. Cor. 10.31. whether wee eate or drinke, or whatsoeuer we doe else, all must be done to the honor and glorie of God. Reioyce in the Lord alwaies: and againe I say, reioyce.
Yea but Christ, Mat. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourne: Luk. 6.21. Blessed are they that weep. Thepylact.  Marlorat. ex Brent. in loc. This reioycing is

not contrarie to that mourning: for such as mourne are blessed in being comforted: and comforted by reioycing in the Lord. Reioyce, saith Luc. 6.23. Christ, in that day and bee glad, when any shall hate you for my sake: the which his Apostles accordingly fulfilled, Act. 5.41. They departed from the Councell reioycing, that they were counted worthie to suffer rebuke for his Name: that Christ would vse them as his Bernard. de considerat. lib. 2. buckler: and Rom. 5.3. Wee reioyce in tribulations. The Father of mercies and God of all con|solation comforteth vs in al our afflictions: 2. Cor. 1.5. As the suffe|rings of Christ abound in vs, so our consolation aboun|deth through Christ. Esay 61.3. He doth appoint comfort to such as mourne in Sion: hee doth giue beautie for ashes, oyle of ioy for sorrow, the garment of gladnesse for the spirit of heauinesse: so that a martyr when he is most mourne|full, is mirthfull: he speakes of his tormentor, as Plato in Ap|log. Socratis.  Epictet. Encei|rid. cap. vlt. Socra|tes of Anitus; and Xiphilin. in vi|ta Neronis. Petus of Nero the Tyrant, Occidere me potest, laedere ver non potest: He may well kill me, but he shall neuer ill me. Nihil crus sentit in neruo, cm manus est in coelo, saith In lib. ad Mar|tyr. Tertullian: Euery cut is a wide mouth to praise Christ, as the Martyr Prudentius Peristephan. hymn. 10. Romanus sweetly:
Tot ecce laudant ora quot sunt vulnera.
Grates tibi  praefecte magnas debeo,
Qud multa pandens ora, iam Christum loquor.
Blessed are they that die for the Lord, because they re|ioyce in the Lord. No losse, no crosse can interrupt our spirituall ioy: for as it followeth in the text to be consi|dered, it must be continuall, alway reioyce. The Christian must keepe Christmas all his life, though not in his hall, yet in his heart: alwaies in his minde, albeit not alway with his mouth.
It is a true rule deliuered in the schoole, that Gods af|firmatiue lawes, Thomas 12. . quaest. 71. art. 5. ad. 3.11. obligant semper, sed non ad semper: ad semper velle, but not ad semper agere; requiring disposition perpetuall, and practise so often as occasion is offered. Holy, iust, valiant men are they who can whensoeuer they will, and will whensoeuer they ought, execute what

their seuerall perfections import. There is a time for all things, and therefore seuerall duties ought to be dischar|ged in seuerall seasons. He that saith heere reioyce alway, saith in another place, 1. Thes. 5.17. pray continually, and in all things giue thankes: and therefore we need not alwais actually pray, nor actually giue thankes: not actually reioyce, in word and outward gesture, but as opportunitie shall re|quire. If then as time, neuer a better time, then this holy time: neuer greater cause to Zachar. 9.9. shout out for ioy, then now, for that our King comes vnto vs: it is our bounden dutie alwaies intentionally; bt at this time with Psalms and songs actually. No sinne, no sorrow must hinder our spirituall reioycing. For in all our aduersitie God is euen at hand; Aquin. in loc. not onely nigh in his Maiestie, Acts 17.7. though doubtlesse he be not farre from euery one of vs, but also nigh in his mercie. Psal. 145.18. The Lord is nigh vnto all them that call vpon him. A Psal. 46.1. very present helpe in trouble. Yea the Lords second comming is at 1. Pet. 4.7. hand, when as hee shall iudge and reuenge our cause; rewar|ding vs with eternall happinesse, and punishing our ad|uersaries with euerlasting fire: and therefore reioyce al|waies in all things: I say, reioyce in the Lord: for wee cannot alway reioyce in the things of this life. 1. Iohn 2.17. The world passeth away, and the lust thereof, but Christ is euermore the same: the beginning and end of all other things, himselfe without either beginning or end. If then our ioyes obiect be God, it may be continuall: but if fixed on earthly things, exposed to manifold changes and chances; it must necessarily be mutable. Bernard serm. de nimia fali cia praesentis vite. Gaudium in materia conuertibili mutari necesse sit re muta. So that as the Ouid. de pont, lib. 4. Poet truly: Gaudia principium nostrisunt saep do|loris. Prou. 14.1. Euen in laughing the heart is sorrowfull, and the end of mirth is heauines. The world is a sea of glasse, A|pocal 4.6. Bullinger on. 24. in Apocal. brittle as glasse, tumultuous as the sea: but hee that reioyceth in the Lord, is like Psal. 125.1. mount Sion which standeth fast for euer. If then any desire to re|ioyce alway, let him reioyce in the Lord.
And againe I say, reioyc.] The Teoplact, in loc. troubls of this life ae so great, and our patience so little, that Paul doubleth his exhortation Marlora. in loc. to presse the duty, and expresse our dul|nesse: and indeed our reioicing cannot be continued, ex|cept it be multiplied againe and againe: reioice there|fore for mercies already receiued, and againe reioice for mercies hereafter promised. For receiued grace: first, for thy creation: Almighty God might haue made thee a dull asse, a venemous serpent, an vgly tade; whereas he created thee according to his own image and similitude, as it were diuinitatis epitome. For the world is Gods book, and man is Index of that booke, or a commentary vpon that text: reioice therefore in the Lord,  say with Psalm. 8. Da|uid; What is man that thou art so mindfull of him, or the Son of man, that thou shouldest visit him? Thou hast crowned him with worship and glory: thou makest him to haue dominion of the works of thy hands, and thou hast put all things in subie|ction vnder his feete, as a ladder whereby men might as|cend to the consideration of thy greatnes and goodnes.
For thy preseruation, he might haue denied thee sight, as he did to Bartimeus, or made thee deafe or dumbe, or a cripple, as we reade of many in the Gospell, and daily see many crying and dying in our streets. If the Lord of hosts had not bin thy guard, all other creatures his soul|diers would haue banded themselues against thee; fire would haue deuoured thee, water would haue drowned thee, mother earth would open and swallow thee quick; Habacuk .11 the stone out of the wall, the beame out of the timber would fight against thee: but Psal. 91.11. he hath giuen his Angels charge ouer thee, to keepe thee in all thy waies: he doth defend thee vnder his wings,  Deut. 28.6. blesse thy going forth, and thy comming home; blesse the fruit of thy body, the fruit of thy ground, the fruit of thy cattell; euery way so blesse thee, that thou maiest alway reioice in the Lord.
For thy redemption, at this festiuall especially; consi|der with Ser. 1. de Ad|uentu. Bernard, Quis est qui venit, vnde, qu, ad quid, quando, qu: meditate on Gods vnspeakable loue, who

sent his Sonne, his first begotten, onely begotten Sonne, whom he loued as himselfe. The very Heb. 1.3. character and brightnes of his glory to deliuer vs his seruants, vnduti|full as vnprofitable, from the hands of all our enemies. If thou hast any feeling of these mysteries, any faith, be it so small as a graine of mustard seed, euermore reioice in the Lord.
For thy sanctification also: many men in a reprobate sense doe not call vpon God; cannot call vpon God. Whereas he hath giuen thee grace to pray with the con|gregation publikely, with thine owne family priuatly, with thy selfe secretly; giuing thee grace to feele thy sinnes, and to be sorie for the same: reioice for these good benefits in possession; and againe reioice for those mer|cies of God in expectation; for that 2. Cor. 4.17. most excellent and etrnall weight of glory, which he hath 2. Tim. 4.8. laid vp, and in that day will giue to such as loue his appearing. Let vs euermore reioice in this Rom. 12.12. hope, saying with Cap. 3.18. Haba|cuk, I will reioice in the Lord, I will ioy in the God of my sal|uation.
Faith is the mother of our reioicing in the Lord: for Christ dwelleth in our hearts by Ephes. 3.17. faith, and faith is by Rom. 10.17. hearing of the word: spirituall ioy then is increased by reading, hearing, meditating on holy Scriptures. Iohn 15.11. I haue spoken vnto you these things, that my ioy might remne in you: Luke 24.32. Did not our hearts burne within vs while he talked with vs, and opened vnto vs the Scriptures?
It is increased also by good life. For as sin doth Ephes. 4.30. grieue the spirit, so good workes on the contrary cheere the soule. Prouerbs 21.15. It is ioy to the iust to doe iudgement. Postil. mai|res cum glosss  figuru in epist. Dom. 3. Aduent. Here the Gospell and Epistle parallell; for the way of the Lord is prepared especially by faith and repentance. Now poenitens de peccato dolet;  de dolore gaudet: He that is a good man sorroweth in his sinnes, and reioiceth in his sorrow; and that he may doe this, he must reioice in the Lord: wherefore be not carefull for that which is worldly, but make your patient mind knowne vnto men,

and let your petitions bee manifest vnto God. And the peace of God which passeth all vnderstanding, keepe your hearts and minds through Christ, giuing you many ioyes in this life, to the end; and in the next, his eternall ioy, without end. Amen.



The Gospel. IOHN 1.19.
This is the record of Iohn, When the Iewes sent Priests and Leuites from Ierusalem to aske him, What art thou?

THis Gospell is a dialogue betweene certaine Priests and Iohn the Baptist. The Priests inquire after his person and place, cariage and calling. Their interrogato|ries are fiue: the which are answered by S. Iohn seuerally; shewing, and that directly, both what he was not, as also what he was; not Christ, not Elias, not the Prophet; but the voice of a Crier in the wildernesse.
The first question is, Who art thou? Diez conc. 1. Dom. 3. Aduent. Quis ego sum? is the question of a good man? Tu quis es? of an enuious. He that hath a bad house gads abroad. The wicked are 1. Pet. 4.15 busie Bishops in other me~s diocesses. A true saying in it selfe, but vpon this text a false glosse: for it belonged vnto the Melanct. Cal|uin.  Marlo|rat. in loc. Priests office to mannage the businesse of the Church, and exactly to know what euery Prophet was. And albeit Euthmius is of opinion, that the Iewes here|in malitiously disabled their knowledge: yet it is more probable that they made this question, to see whether he was Christ. For as we read, Luke 3.15. All men mused in their hearts of Iohn, if he were not the Christ: and our Iohn 5.35. Sauiour told the Iewes plainly, that they for a time re|ioiced more in Iohn, who was but a candle, then in him|selfe who was the Sunne of righteousnesse, and light of the world: and albeit these messengers vttered not so much in word, yet assuredly they harboured such a con|ceit

in their hearts, therefore Iohn answering their Theophylact.  Caitan. in lc. in|tention, rather then their question, acknowledged in|genuously, that he was not the Christ.
In which answere, obserue the matter and the man|ner. In the matter he confessed the truth, denying him|selfe, where note his Cuman in loc. con. 1. modesty; and acknowledging Christ to be the Messias, where note his Zepperus in loc. constancie. Fort (saith Hom. 7. in Eang. Gregory) graue non est gloriam  honorem non petere, sed valde graue est non eum suscipere cum offer|tur. It was then great humility to refuse this honour, which not onely the people, but also the Priests, as it should seeme, were ready to cast vpon him: hereby tea|ching vs in all our actions, to seeke, not our owne, but Gods glory, saying with this holy Baptist, Iohn 3.30. he must increase, but we must decrease. The constant resolution of Iohn is also remarkeable, confessing Christ freely, not on|ly before the multitude, but also before the Leuites and Pharisies, men of great learning, and no lesse place in the Church, and such as he might well suspect would call his preaching into question.
But the maner of his confession exceeds far the mat|ter: hee confessed and denied not, and said plainly, I am not Christ. The which words are not superfluous and idle, for euery tittle of the Scriptures hath his worth and weight. Such repetitions are vsuall in the Bible, to set out things more fully, as Eccles. 1.2. vanity of vanities, vanity of vanities, and all is vanity. Cant. 6.12. Returne, returne, O Shulamite returne, returne. Ierem. 22.29. O earth, earth, earth, heare the word of the Lord. By this iteration then of one and the same thing, S. Iohn shewed how vnwilling hee was to rob Christ of that honour, which onely belongd vnto him. When Acts 10.26. Cornelius fell downe at Peters feet, and would haue worshipped him, Peter instantly tooke him vp, saying; Stand vp, for euen I my selfe am a man. When the men of Acts 14.15. Lystra would haue sacrificed vnto Paul Barnabas; they rent their clothes, and ran in amg the people, crying, We are euen men, sub|iect to the like passions that yee be. When that other Iohn

would haue worshipped the glorious Angell who shew|ed him his reuelation, Apoc. 22.9. he said vnto Iohn; See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow seruant: so carefull are Gods children in all ages to giue God the things appertaining to God: honour to whom honour, feare to whom feare, diuine worship to whom diuine worship belongeth. Here wee may iustly condemne the Papists, in giuing that kind of Thom. in 3. sent. dist. 2.  part. 3. quest. 25. at. 4. worship to the crosse, which is onely due to Christ. If a man should aske them whether the crucifix were Christ, I hope they would answer with Iohn, and deny, and con|fesse plainly that it is not the Christ. Giue then to the cru|cifix the respect due to the crucifix, reseruing to the cru|cified that honour which onely belongs to the crucified.
If a man should aske the bread in the Sacrament, What art thou? it would answere plainly with Iohn, in such lan|guage as it can, I am not the Christ; approuing it selfe to our sight and taste, that it is a morsell of bread, a creature, not a Creator,  therefore not to be worshipped  ado|red as God. If good men on earth, and glorious Angels in heauen, haue refused alway to bee reputed Christ; what shamelesse Idolaters are they, who say; heere is Christ, and there is Christ; this is Christ, and that is Christ?
The second question is; Art thou Elias? To which Iohn answers, No. Yet Matth. 11.14. Christ saith, he is that Elias. An August. tract 4. in Iohan.  Greg. hom. 7. in Euangel. An|gel from heauen hath answered this obiection, Luk. 1.17. Iohn Baptist is Elias in power, not in person, indued with the like temperance, like wisdome, like courage. Now the Pharisies imagined that Elias Malachi 4.5. himselfe should come, not another in the spirit of Elias; and therefore Iohn ac|cording to their meaning, answered truly, that he was not Elias. How Ioh and Elias parallel, see Beauxamis Harmo. Euangel. Tom. 1. fol. 101. Ludolphus de vita Chri|sti. part. 1. cap. 19. Postl. catholic. Con. 2. Dom. 4. Aduent. Whether Elis shall come before the great day of the Lords second comming, see Luther postil. maior. in loc. and his Maiesties Premonition, from the 62. pag. to the 80.
The third question is, Art thou a Prophet? To which Iohn answered also negatiuely. Christ said he was more then a Prophet: himselfe that he was lesse then a Prophet. There are three degrees of

humility:

1. To submit our selues vnto our betters.
2. To giue place to equals.
3. To yeeld vnto inferiours.


All these were found in Iohn: he submitted himselfe to superiors, affirming that he was not Christ: he gaue place to equals, answering that he was not Elias: he did yeeld to his inferiors, in saying he was not a Prophet. Maldonat. in loc. Yea but Iohn out of his humilitie must not tell an vntruth: his fa|ther Zacharias in the Benedictus, cals him the Prophet of the most high; and Christ, more then a Prophet. Hom. 15. in Ioan. Chry|sostome, In loc. Theophylact, Euthymius, and other Greeke fa|thers are of opinion, that the Pharisies imagined Iohn to be that Prophet spoken of by Moses, Deut. 18.15. The Lord thy God will raise vp vnto thee a Prophet like vnto me from among you, euen of thy brethren, vnto him ye shall hear|ken. Beza in Ioban. 1.21. The which text must bee construed either of the whole Colledge of Prophets, or else of Christ, the chiefe of the Prophets: and therefore Iohn answered directly, that he was not that Prophet;  the Prophet. Lib. 1. com|ment. in Ioban. Ru|pertus, and other Latine Doctors affirme, that the Phari|sies in this interrogatory, desired to know whether his office were like that of Esay, Ieremias, Amos, and the old Prophets: vnto which Iohn might answere well, that he was not such a Prophet: for their office was to foreshew Christ by some works, or foretell him by some words; vel dictis praesignare, vel factis praefigurare, saith Rupertus. But Iohns ambassage was not to foretell that Christ should come, but plainly to tell that Christ was come. Thou shalt be called the Prophet of the most high: not to prefigure, but to goe before the face of the Lord. A Prophet s a Preacher of the Gospel, not as a Priest of the Law.
Hitherto Iohn Baptist answers negatiuely, shewing what he was not, neither Christ, nor Elias, nor a Prophet.

Wheein hee did not satisfie the messengers of the Iewes fully. That therefore they might returne a more perfect answere, they further importune and presse him, to know what he was; What saiest thou of thy selfe? The which is the fourth interrogatory. To this Iohn affirmatiuely, decla|ring what he was: I am the voice of a Crier, c.
There were two chiefe prophecies of him: one, that he should be that Angel of the Lord; and this, that he should be the voice of a Crier in the wildernesse. Here then Diez con. 1. Dom. 3. Ad|uent.  Malde|na. in loc. In|terpreters obserue Iohns humility, giuing himselfe the meanest title; not Christ, not an Angell, not a Prophet, but onely vox clamantis, c. Culman. con. 2. Dom. 4. Ad|uent. Wherein he liuely descri|beth a good Preacher of the Gospell, hee must be the voice of a Crier in the wildernesse, to make straight the way for the Lord.
The word of God is a proclamation in writing, com|mon to all, and the Minister is the voice of the Crier to giue notice to the people, that the matter of the procla|mation concerneth them and euery one of them: Acts 13.26. Men and brethren, and whosoeuer among you feareth God, to you is the word of this saluatio~ sent: To Acts 3.26. you God rai|sed vp his Sonne Iesus, and hath sent him to blesse you by tur|ning euery one of you from your iniquities.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth spea|keth: A Preacher therefore must cry from the bottome of his heart: the which is prefigured Ezekiel 3.1. Sonne of man, eat this roll, and goe and speake vnto the house of Israel. Vtter nothing to the people, but that which thou hast first digested thy selfe.
The voice] A word is first conceiued in the heart: then vttered by the voice; yet we heare the voice before wee know the word: so Christ the eternall Word was before Iohn, and all other Preachers. In the beginning was the Word, and that beginning was before all beginning: yet the world knew not the Word, till it was preached by the voice of men and Angels: albeit the word in it selfe be before the voice, yet vnto vs the voice goeth before the

word: Iohn 1.15. He that commeth after me was before me. Christ then is the Word; and euery Preacher of Christ is a voice; the which one word confounds all such as being called thereunto, doe neglect their dutie of preaching. In euery voice, specially a Church voice, three commendable qualities are required; that it bee cleere, sweete, and high.
Cleere: for as Hierome said, Omnia in sacerdote debent esse vocalia: All things in a Diuine should preach: his ap|parell preach, his diet preach, his whole life preach: 1. Tim. 4.12. An example in word, in conuersation, in spirit, in faith, in pure|nesse. Such a voice was the Baptist; his preaching was of repentance, and he liued as a penitent: as he did bold|ly speake the truth, so constantly suffer for the truth: on the contrarie, bad manners and false doctrine make harsh and hoarse the loud voice.
Couetous Iudas had an hoarse voyce: filthie Nicolaes an hoarse voyce: Simon Magus an hoarse voyce: Peter in denying his Master, through extreame coldnesse of feare, had an hoarse voyce too for a time. Manicheus, A|rius, Pelagius, all Hereticall, Schismaticall, Atheisticall teachers are hoarse voyces in Gods quier.
Ile solus praedicat viua voce, quipraedicat vita  voce.
Secondly, the Church voice must be sweet: euery seed is not to be sowen at euery season, in euery ground: and so it is in Gods husbandrie: The voyce therefore must 2. Tim. 2.15. aright diuide the word which it sings and saies; obser|uing time, and keeping it selfe in tune, speaking to the proud boldly, to the meeke mildly, to all wisely. The bels hung on Exod. 28.33. Aarons garment were of pure gold, hereby signifying that Aarons voyce should bee no founding brasse, no iarring cymball, but a sweete ring, prouing sweetly, reprouing sweetly, confuting error sweetly, con|firming the truth sweetly; running ouer all the changes of Gods ring, mentioned 2. Tim. 4. without any iarre or false stroke sweetly. Such a voyce was Iohn the Baptist, rebuking Luke 3.19. Herod, hardened in his wickednes, rufly; ta|king

vp y^e dissembling Matth. 3.7. Pharisies bitterly; speaking to his own disciples gently, singing to euery one the true note fitly: and this, as Psal. 58.5. Dauid speakes, is to charme wisely.
Thirdly, the Church voyce must bee high, and that in

regard of the Matter, of which He speakes.
regard of the Men, to which He speakes.

And such a voyce was the Baptist also. First for the mat|ter, he reached many streines neuer sung before: Repent, saith he, for the kingdom of heauen is at hand. This note was neuer heard of the people, nor sung by the Priests in old time. Iohn being more then a Prophet, exalted his voyce aboue the Prophets, and in a plaine song, with|out any crotchets, preached him who is higher then the highest.
Secondly, in regard of the men, to whom he spake: For, as it followeth in the next word, hee was the voice of a Crier. Now men vse to crie aloud,

Thom. caten. i 3. Math. ex Raban.  Beauxamis Har. Tom. 1. fol. 100. Either

When they speak to me~ which are a far off.
When they speake to men which are deafe.
When they are angrie.


Sinners are farre off from God, and exceeding deafe: and therfore we must be angrie crying aloud, and lifting vp our voyce like a Esay 58.1. Trumpet, shewing the people their transgressions, and to the house of Iacob their sinnes.
First, sinners are farre off, as it is said of the Luke 15.13. prodigall childe gone into a farre countrey, like Esay 53.6. lost sheep, straied out of Gods pastures into Satans inclosures: and therfore it is our office not onely to whistle, but also to crie: Re|turne, returne,  Shulamite, returne, returne.
God doth not goe from man,Non tellus cym|ham teurem cymba relin|quit. but man from God. He that saileth nigh a rocke, thinketh the rock runnes from the shippe, when as indeed the shippe rides, and the rock stands still: euen so we leaue the waies of the Lord, and runne our owne courses, and then wee complaine that God is farre from vs, and that our crie comes not nigh him. It is true that God is Prou. 15.29. farre off from the wicked, not

because he is moueable, for hee is euer the same, but be|cause they bee wandring: yet they cannot flie from his Psal. 139.6. Vbinon est per gratiam, adest per vindictam. August. meditas. cap. 29. presence. The further from East the neerer vnto the West: the more they goe from Gods grace, the neerer his iustice: Psal. 119.155. saluation is far from the wicked, but iudge|men hangs ouer their heads. It is our dutie therefore to recall men,  Deo irato ad Deum placatum, from God as an angrie Iudge, to God as a mercifull Father. If we draw neere to God, Iam. 4.8. he will draw neere to vs: as the good father of the prodigall sonne, when hee perceiued him a farre off, he had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him. It is said in the text, that the sonne did go to his father; but the father ran to meete his sonne. The fathers compassion and mercie, was greater then the sonnes passion and miserie.
Secondly, sinners are deafe, and therefore wee neede to crie aloud. Some will heare, but with one eare, like Bilney to B. Tonstal, vti Fox Acts  Mon. fol. 917. Malchus in the Gospell, hauing their right eare cut off, and only bringing their left eare to the sermon, mis|construing all things sinisterly: Some stop both their eares; like the deafe adder, refusing to heare the voice of the charmer, charme hee neuer so wisely: Psalme 58.5. In Psal. 57. Tom. 8. fol. 392. S. Augustine writing vpon those words, hath reported out of naturall Historiographers, that the serpent de|lighting in the darknesse, where withall he hath inclosed himselfe, claspeth one of his eares hard to the ground, and with his taile stoppeth the other, lest hearing the Marsus hee should be brought foorth to the light: so worldly men stop one eare with earth, that is, with coue|tousnesse; and the other with their taile, that is, hope of long life.  22.29. Ieremie therfore crieth: O earth, earth, earth. O vnhappie caitiue, thou that hast nothing but earth in thy mouth, euer talking of worldly wealth: thou hast nothing but earth in thy minde, euer plotting how to ioyne house to house, and field to field; nothing but earth in thine hands, euer busied about the trifles of this life; heare the word of the Lord, which 1. Tim. 6.17.18 chargeth thee

not to trust in vncertaine riches, but in the liuing God: and that thou be rich in good workes, euermore readie to distribute while thou hast time; stop not thine eare from the crie of the poore with hope of long life, but re|member what Iob saith in his 21. chap. vers. 13. They spend their daies in wealth, and suddenly they go downe to hell. Luk. 12.20. O foole this night will they fetch away thy soule from thee, then whose shall those things be which thou hast prouided?
Thirdly, men speake aloud, when as they be angrie: so the Preacher ought to be zealous in the cause of God; euermore displeased with the sinnes of his people, saying with Psal. 139.21. Dauid; Doe not I hate them, O Lord, who hate thee? and am not I grieued with those that rise vp a|gainst thee? Such a crier was S. Peter telling Simon the Sorcerer that he was in the Act. 8.23. gall of bitternes  bond of iniquitie. Such a crier was Paul, taking vp Elymas; Act. 13.10. O full of mischiefe, the childe of the diuell, and enemie of all righteousnesse, c. Such a crier was Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 3. Polycarpus, who told Marcion that he was the diuels darling. And such a crier euery Diuine should bee, as a Simon helping to beare the crosse of the distressed; and a Act. 4.36. Barnabas, which is the sonne of consolation: so like Iames and Iohn, stiled in Mark. 3.17. scripture Bonarges, which is, sonnes of thunder: as Serm. 64. Ambrose fitly, vox and clamor must goe together, the voice preach faith, the crie repentance; the voice com|fort, the crie threaten; the voice sing mercie, the crie sound iudgement: so most Musculus  Maldonat. in Matth. 3.3. Iansen. concord. cap. 13. Dz con. 1. Dm 3. Aduent. Interpreters expound vox clamantis, according to the vulgar Hebraisine, vox cla|mans. Yet it is a good obseruation of Aquin. caten. Math. . Ru|pertus com. in Matth. lib. 2. ol. 17. other, that Iohn is not the crier, but the voice of the crier: for it is Christ who crieth in Preachers, he speakes by the Luke 1.70. mouth of all his holie Prophets: he crieth, O ye Prou. 1.22. foolish, how long will yee loue foolishnes? he crieth, Repent, for the kingdome of God is at hand: he crieth, Come vto me all ye that are wea|ried and laden, and I will refresh you. To day then if yee will heare his voice harden not your hearts, but suffer

the words of exhortation and doctrine: be moued at his crie, lest he despise your call. As he saith in the first of the Prouerbs: Because I haue called, and yee haue refused, I haue stretched out mine hand, and none would regard: therefore they shall call vpon me, but I will not answere: they shall seeke me earely, but they shall not finde me. Think on this all ye that forget God, ye that suffer Christ to stand and knock, and crie at the doore of your hearts, and yet ye will not let him in.
In the wildernes] That is, in the world a desert of good|nes, wherein the Preacher must fight with beasts, as 1. Cor. 15.32. Paul at Ephesus in the shapes of men, crying vnto rauening wolues, couetous foxes, roaring lions, c. Here is the place where he must crie: for in heauen there is no crying, but all singing, and in hell there is no crying, to take heede of woe; but howling and crying for woe: while then you are in the Matth. 5.25. way, while it is called to Heb. 3.13. day, giue eare to the voice of the crier.
Or in the wildernes] That is, Calu.  Mar|lorat. in Mat. 3. ex Hilario  Gregorio. Ierusalem; out of order as a desert: or in the wildernes: that is, among the Ex Hieronymo  Ambrosio. Pontanus in theatro Dom. 4. Aduent. gen|tiles and desolate people, strangers from the common|wealth of Israel, and aliants from the couenants of pro|mise before Christs comming: but now the Esay 54.1. desolate hath moe children then the married wife. The Gentiles heretofore were without an husband, and the synagogue of the Iewes had God for her loue; but now contrarie|wise the Church conuerted to the faith, beares moe chil|dren vnto God then euer the synagogue did. The voice of the crier shall gather and call so many sheepe to Christs fold, that the wildernes shall say in her heart, Esay 49.21. Who hath begotten me these children, seeing I am bar|ren and desolate?
Or in the wildernes] Coster. con. 3. Dom. 3. Ad|uent. Literally, because that is the most fit place for the Preacher of repentance, wherein there is least tumult: and againe, to signifie that the peo|ple should follow the Pastor; not the Pastor humour the people. The Preacher is the voice of a crier in the wil|dernes,

not a carpet diuine for table Gospellers in a cor|ner. I will not any further examine the place, the end is all, and that is to make straight the way of the Lord.
The wicked walke either in circles, or else in ouer|twhart waies. Impij ambulant in circuitu, saith Psal. 12.6. Dauid, wearying themselues in the labyrinth of their vnruly de|sires; or if they walke not circularlie, they walke in wrie waies and by-waies opposite to the Lords way: for ex|ample; The vaine glorious doe all their good workes to be Matth. 7.1.5. seene of men, and so they crosse Gods way tending to another end; onely the children of God walke in the straight way, in a right line beginning and ending in God; as euery good gift is from him, so it is by them re|ferred vnto him; as his is the power, so his is the praise.
The end of our preaching is not to make way for our selues  our own preferment, but for our Master and his glorie: Make streight the way of the Lord, as saith the Prophet Esay. Wherefore leauing all other expositions, I come to the Prophets interpretation, as it is recorded in his 40. Chapter, at the 3. and 4. verses. A voice crieth in the wildernes, prepare yee the way of the Lord: make streight in the desert a path for our God. Euery valley shall be exalted, and euery mountaine and hill shall be made lowe: and the crooked shall bee straight, and the rough places plaine.
Now these things are to be construed in a Hyperius in loc. Esaiae. spirituall sense. For Thomas caten. in 3. Matth. ex Chrysost. as Kings in their solemne progresses haue their waies leuelled and straightned against their com|ming into the countrie: so the Preachers as harbingers and sumners of Christ, ought to prepare the people, that he may come vnto them, as about this time he came vnto them. Presumption and pride make mountaines and hils in Christs way; desperation holes in Christs way; vaine|glorie makes crooked the way: couetous cares are briers and bushes in the way; noisome lust makes foule the way: wherefore the voice of the crier in the wildernes must dig downe the mountaines, exalt the valleis, stub

vp the briers, make smooth the rough, rectifie y^e crooked. Behold, saith God to the Ierem. 1.10. Prophet, I haue set thee ouer the nations, and ouer the kingdomes to plucke vp, and to roote out, and to destroy and ouerthrow, to builde and to plant. The which S . Biis against  Ie|suites, fol. 160, 161. text is wrested by the Papists exceedingly, to proue that the Pope hath authoritie to depose Princes, and dispose of their crownes at his pleasure. But God expoundes himselfe in the words immediatly before: I haue made thee a Prophet, and put my words into thy mouth: a Preacher with words in his mouth, not a Magistrate with a sword in his hand; and therefore their owne Lyra in Iere. 1 glossographer interprets it thus: I haue appointed thee to roote vp; that is, to roote vp vices, to beate downe he|resies, and to build vp vertues. And In loc. Ierem. Theodoret; To root vp kingdoms is nothing else but to denounce Gods hea|uie iudgements against them: As Hierome; To cast them downe by the word of Almightie God. Vt facias opus prophetae, sarculo, non sceptro, opus est tibi, saith De considerat. lib. 2. Bernard; That thou maist doe the worke of a Prophet, thou must haue a weeding hooke, not a scepter: And as Pastoral. part. 3 adont. 35. Gregorie notes aptly, the Prophet is willed here first to roote vp, and after to plant; because the foundation of truth is neuer well laid, except the frame of error be first subuer|ted: at the first wee must cast downe the mountaines by the preaching of the Law; then exalt the valleyes by the preaching of the Gospell. Such a voice was the Prophet 2. Sam. 12. Nathan: at the first he did cast downe the mountaine, the presumptuous hypocrisie of King Dauid, rebuking him for his sinnes, and thundring out iudgements for the same: but when he saw this huge mountaine cast down, when Dauid was vnder foote, deiected in spirit, crying out, I haue sinned against the Lord; Nathan presently raiseth vp this valley, saying, The Lord hath taken away thy sinne. This course A. 2. S. Peter vsed in his first sermon, in beginning whereof hee charged the Iewes with their sinnes: but so soone as they were pricked in their hearts, and said, Men and brethren what shall we doe? S. Peter

presently lifteth them vp againe by preaching Christ for the remission of sinnes. And well might Iohn call him|selfe such a voice, for all his preaching stood vpon two legs; repentance, and faith; Matth. 3.10. digging downe the moun|taines by the one, and Ioh. 1.29. raising vp the valleyes by the other.
The great Doctor hauing heauen for his chaire, earth for his schoole, the whole Bible for his text, and the whole world for his audience; began this method in the first sermon that euer was made: Gen. 3. Adam by fol|lowing his new schoolemaster the diuell, waxed proud, and began to grow so big as a mountaine: God therfore doth first cast him downe, shewing the greatnesse of his fault, and then hee raiseth him vp againe, by promising that the seede of the woman should bruse the Serpents head. Seeing then wee haue both precept and paterne from God himselfe; let vs bee followers of him as deare chil|dren, pulling downe the mightie from their seates, and exalting the humble and meeke. To begin with the first:

There are two sorts of mountaines:

One assuming too much vnto the~|selues, out of their owne merit.
The other presuming too much vp|on Gods mercie.


Euery man is naturally like Simon the Sorcerer, Act. 8. conceiting himselfe to be some great man: as Martin Loc. com. tit. de proect. in Christianism. Luther said, All of vs haue a Pope bred in vs; an opinion of our owne workes: albeit there be in vs no reall ver|tue, no true substance; yet, Narcissus like, we are inamou|red with our owne shadowes: and this is the Luther. vbi sup. it. de prae|sumption. Serpents head, the beginning of all euill: Omnium iniustitiarum est fer sola causa iustitia. Wherefore we must labour euerie day to dig downe this high mountaine: we must descend that wee may August. con|fes lib. 4. cap. 12. descendite vt ascendatis ad Deum, cecidistis enim ascenden|do contra eum. ascend: as wee fell by ascending, so wee must be raised by descending. Beda wrote of the Publi|can: Appropinquare noluit ad Deum, vt appropinquaret ad illum. Hee that will not be a mountaine in Christs way, must not be a mount-bank of his owne vertue, but leuell

himselfe euen with the ground, Philip. 2.12. working his saluation in feare and trembling.
The second kinde of mountaines are such as raise themselues vpon meere presumption of mercie, boasting of a shorter cut to heauen then either the good works of Papists, or good words of Puritanes, abusing that sweete text of Rom. 5.20. Paul; Where sinne aboundeth, there grace super|aboundeth. Indeed where sinne is Cal.  Aquin. in loc Paul. felt and grieued for, thee Gods grace is greater then our sinne, Melancthon in loc. Paul. tom. 4. fol. 124. both in im|putation and effect: for our sinnes are finite, whereas his goodnesse is infinite, the salue is greater then the sore. August. de spi|ritu  litera, cap. 6. Non peccantis merito, sed superuenientis auxilio. But when we draw iniquitie with cords of vanitie, and sinne as with cartropes; when wee speake good of euill, and euill of good; when as without any remorse we sin pre|sumptuously; when as we fall not forward as Abraham and Ezechiel, but backward as old 1. Sam. 4.18. Eli, and the Iohn 18.6. Iewes who tooke Christ; then assuredly the more sin, the lesse grace. Shall wee continue still in sinne that grace may a|bound? God forbid. Yea God hath forbidden it, enioy|ning vs to bee holie as hee is holie, that being deliuered out of the hands of all our enemies, wee might serue him in holinesse and righteousnesse all the daies of our life.

A man is deiected and made a valley two waies: in regard of his

Great faults.
Little faith.


The voice of the Crier must pronounce Gods procla|mation and generall pardon for the one, and applie it in particular for the strengthening of the other.
The fift and last question of the Pharisies is: Why bap|tizest thou then, if thou be not the Christ, neither Elias, nor the Prophet? Vnto which Iohn answered: I baptize with water, c.
This last interrogatorie was the first in their inten|tion: Ammonius in caten. Graec. ci. tat. for the Pharisies had a tradition, that none might baptize but Christ, or some great Prophet, and therefore they did first aske craftily whether hee were Christ or a Prophet: and then hauing Maldonat. in loc. ex Chrysost. vndermined him thorough|ly,

with what authoritie doest thou baptize? being nei|ther Christ, nor Elias, nor a Prophet? S. Iohns answere is opposite, but apposite. Melancthon. loc. com tit. de baptis. Ioan.  Christi. I am a Minister, but not a Mes|sias; I giue the outward signe, but Christ is he who doth giue the inward grace: I baptize you with water, Matth. 3.11. but hee that commeth after me shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and fire. Doct. Fulk in Matth. 3.11. In which he compareth the ministerie of man with the power of God; the outward baptisme with the spirituall baptisme: where of the first is done by the hand of man, the other is peculiar only to Christ. Calu.  Mar|lorat. in 3. Mat. 11.  Melanct. vbi supra. The com|parison is not as the Papists imagine, betweene the baptisme of Iohn and Christ, but betweene the per|son of Iohn and Christ: for the baptisme of Iohn and Christ are one, both in effect and authoritie: for Iohns baptisme was not of his owne deuising, but of Gods in|stitution: as hee sheweth his commission in the first of Ioh. 33. He that sent me to baptize with water, c. a text which hath made Desacramento Baptismi lib. 1. cap. 20. Bellarmine contradict himselfe twice in one page. For whereas he first had set downe peremp|torily that Iohn instituted his owne baptisme; now hee confesseth honestly that God was author of it for the matter in generall, but not for the manner in particular: and yet after long search hee cannot finde in what rite Iohns baptisme differs from Christs.
It is an axiome deliuered in their owne Lombard. sent. l.b. 4. distinct 3. schoole, that there are but two things essentiall in Baptisme, verbum  elementu~, the outward element of water, and inuoca|tion of the blessed Trinitie. So S. Tract. 80. in Ioan. Tom. 9. fol. 303. August. Accedit ver|bum ad elementu~  fit sacramentu~: Other things are re|quired in a Sacrame~t circumstantially, not substantially. Now Bellarmine out of this text grants that Iohn vsed the right element: for he saith, I baptize you with wa|ter: and out of De spiric. sanct. lib. 1. cap. 3. Ambrose cites against himselfe, that Iohn inuocated the sacred Trinitie, Father, Sonne and holie Ghost: Ergo. the baptisme of Iohn and Christ are one for essence: so likewise one in effect, for Iohn preached the baptisme of repentance Mark. 1.4. for the remission of sinnes: Ergo,

forgiuenes of sinnes is by the baptisme of Iohn so well as by the baptisme of the blessed Apostles: as Lib. 5. de bap|tism cap 10. Augu|stin, De baptism. lib. 1. cap. 2. Basil. Orat. de lau|dib Basilij. Greg. Nyssen. out of that text obserue: nei|ther doth the Vbi sup. ca. 21. Cardinal disauow their glosse, though the Councell of Sess. 7. con. 1. Trent hath denounced anathema to such as hold baptismum Ioannis habuisse eandem vim cum baptis|mo Christi  let Matthaeus Tortus, if he can vnloose this wedge for his Master. I feare that ouerthwart Diuine so little, that I say with Luther; Hunc nodu~ ne soluunt, ne soluent vnquam omnes papicolae in vnum Chaos confusi. The Scripture makes no difference betweene Iohns and our baptisme: but this only; Melanct. in 3. Mat. tom. 3. fol. 256 that we baptise in Christum pas|sum  rsuscitatum; whereas Iohn baptised Acts 19.4. in Christum passurum  resurrecturum See Epist. Dom. 17. post. Trin.



The Epistle. GALAT. 4.1.
I say, that the heire so long as he is a child differeth not from a seruant, c.

IGnorant people behold rather an Greg. Nyssn. grat. de laude Theodor. solet pictura tacens in pariete loqui. The Papist calles it the lay mans gospell. Image well pain|ted, then a booke well written, and are sooner perswa|ded with plaine similitudes and familiar examples, then with subtill reasons and accurate discourses Our Apostle therefore after hee had vsed for his purpose (namely, to proue that iustification is not by the law, but by faith in Christ) the comparison of a mans will, of the prison, of the schoolemaster in the former Chapter, addes also this of an heire; wherein as in euery similitude two

points are remarkable: the

proposition: vers. 12.
reddition in the rest.



In which our twofold estate must bee considered, of

Thraldome, vder Moses.
Freedome, by Christ, when the lawes tyrannical go|uernement ends: and that is,




Two maner of waies, as Luther. in loc. In|terpreters out of the text:

1. By the co~ming of Christ in the flesh once at the fulnes of time: vers. 4.5.
2. By the co~ming of Christ in the spirit daily: vers. 6.7.



In his firstcom|ming, note the

Fact: vers. 4. and in it the

Giuer: God, whose good wil appeares in bestow|ing on vs his Sonne:

Fitly: when the time was full come.
Freely: for hee was not bought or stolne, but sent.

Gift: Christ described heere by his

Diuinitie: his Sonne.
Humanity: made of a woman.
Humility: bond to the law.


Effect: vers. 5. to redeeme them which were bound vnto the law, c.


The heire as long as he is a child] This comparison is ta|ken out of the Roman law by which it is ordained that a pupill, albeit he be Lord of all his fathers inheritance, should be kept vnder tutors and gouernours, vntill hee come to full age; to wit, vnder tutors till Iustinian. in|stitut. l. 1. tit. 22. fourteene yeeres, vnder Curators vntill Idem eodem tit. 23. fiue and twenty. Idem codem tit. 20. Tutores dantur impubribus, Curatores puberibus. Tutors are guar|dians of the pupils Idem codem tit. 14. person principally: so called, L. 1. D. de Tu|tela. Quasi|tuitores at defensores; but L. in copulan|di. 8. . de nup|tijs. Curators are factors especial|ly for his goods and estate.
Now the Ward, during the time of his minority, suf|fers much bondage; differing, saith Paul, nothing from a seruant; nothing in respect of any present possession, or actuall administration of his owne estate, but very much in respect of his right and proprietie, being Gorran. in loc. dominus ha|bitu, non vsu: as hauing Termes of the law. pag. 103. free hold in law, though as yet

not free hold in deede: and so the Ward doeth differ from the slaue; who was in old time no L quod at|tinet. 32. D. de reg. iuris. person in law, but a meere chattell, and as it were of the nature of L. 2. D. ad le|gem Aquileam. cattell.
It was in Pauls age then a great slauery to be a pupill. And Serm. at Pauls Crosse. Bishop Latuner complained of late, that there was not a schoole for the Wards, so well as a Court: a schoole for their learning, so well as a Court for their lands. It should seeme Gardians in his daies vsed young Noble men not as Lords, but as seruants; as Paul here, c.
In like manner, when wee were little children, in our nonage we were heires, hauing the promise of an eternall inheritance to come, which should be giuen vnto vs by the seed of Gen. 12.3. Abraham: that is to say, by Christ, in whom all nations should be blessed; but because the fulnesse of time was not yet come, Moses our tutor and gouernor held vs in bondage The law doth threaten, accuse, condemne, so long as we be children in vnderstanding, dwarfes in faith, ignorant of Christ. Saint Paul cals the law rudiments of the world; not onely Gorran.  Aquir. in loc. because it is our first Galat. 3.24. schoole|master, and A, B, C, to Christ, but Luther. in loc. because it leaues a man in the world, and prepares not a way for him to hea|uen. I kill not, I steale not, I commit not adultery: this out|ward honest conuersation is not the kingdome of Christ, but the righteousnes of the world.
The law when it is in his principall vse, cannot iustifie, but accuse, terrifie, condemne. Now these are things of the world, which because it is the kingdome of the di|uell, is nothing else but a puddle of sinne, death, hell, and of all euill: and so the whole law, especially the ceremo|niall, are Gal. 4.9. beggerly rudiments of the world.
I speake not this to disgrace the law, neither doth Paul so meane; for it is holy, righteous, spirituall, diuine: but because Paul is in the matter of iustification, it is, as Vbi supra. Lu|ther obserues, exceeding necessary, that he should speake of the law as of a very contemptible thing. Wherefore, when Satan assaults thee with the terrors of the law, ba|nish

that stutting and stammering Moses far from thee: let him vtterly be suspected as an heretike, or as an ex|communicate person, worse then the Pope, worse then the diuell himselfe, quoth Luther: bu out of the matter of iustification, and conflict of conscience, reuerence Mo|ses as a great Prophet, as a man of God, euen as God.
In the ciuill life Moses and Christ agree: for our Sa|uiour said, he came not to destroy, but to Mat. 5.17. fulfill the law; but in the spirituall life, the one cannot abide the other: for Gal. 3.11. no man is iustified by the la; but the iust shall ue by faith. And therefore when Christ is presen, the law must de|part out of the conscience, and leaue the bed, which is so Esay 28.20. strait that it cannot hold two, to Christ alone. Let him onely raigne in righteousnesse, in peace, ioy, life, that the soule may sleepe and repose it selfe in the multitude of his mercies sweetly without any terror of the law, sinne, death, hell. And thus you see the law tyranniseth ouer our consciences, as the cruell tutor doth ouer his vnfortu|nate Ward, till God in fulnesse of time giueth vs free|dome by Christ.
When the time was full come] Not by fatall necessitie, but by Gods appointment. For there is a time for all things, and Almighty God doth all things in his due time; he created and redeemed vs in his due time, preser|ueth, iustifieth, sanctifieth in his due time, and he will also glorifie vs in his due time.
Now the comming of Christ in the flesh, is called the fulnesse of time for many respects: as,

1. For the Iohn 1.16. fulnesse of grace receiued by his com|ming.
2. Because Christ is the fulfilling of the 2. Cor. 1.20. promises of God, as being in him, yea and amen.
3. Because the Rom. 10.4. Law and the Lu. 1.70. Prophets are fulfilled in him.
4. Because the times from Christ are the 1. Cor. 10.1. ends of the world, and it was fit hee should come so late, when the time was full, for Aquin. in loc. two reasons especially:

1. Because Christ is a Lord, yea the Lord, and there|fore most meete there should be great preparation, and long expectation of so puissant a person.
2. Because Christ is the grand Physition of the world, and therefore very requisite al sinners, his patients, should throughly Matth. 9.12. The whole need not a Physition. feele their sicknesse and misery before hee came to visit and redeeme them; vt conuincerentur homi|nes de morbo, vt quantum ad defectum scientiae in lege natu|rae,  quantum ad defectum virtutis in lege scripta.



His Sonne] God is father of

All men, and all things, by creation generally.
His elect, by adoption specially.
Christ, by nature, singularly. See before the Creed: Art. His onely Sonne.


Made of a woman] In expounding this clause, we must take heed of sundry wicked heresies, on the left hand, and on the right. On the left; first, of August. bres. 44. Paulus Samosate|nus, and Idem. bres. 45 Fotinus, affirming that Christ had his being and beginning from his mother Mary: whereas the Scrip|ture teacheth plainly, that Christ was made of the seed of Dauid according to the Rom. 1.2. flesh: not according to his person, for that is eternall. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and that Word was God. Againe, we must take heed of Irenus. lib. 1. cap. 25. Ebion, holding, that Christ was not conceiued of the holy Ghost, but begot of Ioseph: and the reason of his madnesse is taken hence; because Mary is called a woman, not a virgin. Gloss.  Au|gust. contra Fu|stum, lib. 23. cap. 7.  Thom. 3.  p. quaest. 28. ar. 1. ad 3.. Our answere is, that a wo|man in scripture doth not alway signifie the maried, or one that hath knowne a man: but sometime it doth onely denotate the sex, as Gen. 3.12. The woman which thou ga|uest to be with m, she gaue me of the tree, and I did eat. Eua must needs be a virgin, because so soone as she was made she was maried: and yet the text calles her woman at that time, when there could bee no time for man to cor|rupt her.
On the right hand we must shun the rockes of Valen|tinus

and Nestorius: of . haer. 11. Valentinus, who taught, Christ had not his body from Mary but that he brought it with him from heauen, and passed thorow the wombe of the virgin, as water thorow a conduit pipe: contrary to the text here; made of a woman. Gorran. in loc. Ex muliere, non in muliere: not in a woman, but of a woman. And the preposition Aquin. in loc. ex, notes the matter, as an house is made of timber and stone; bread is made of wheat; wine, of grapes: and therefore Christ had the materials of his body from Mary: so some copies haue it here, Erasmus an|not. in loc. , not . Yet Christ had not his formale principium of Mary, for the holy Chost was agent in his wonderfull conception: and therefore fitly said here to be borne, or as we reade, to be made; not begotten of a woman.
By this also we may shun Nestorius his rocke, who thought Mary might not be called the mother of the Sonne of God: for the text is plaine; God sent his Sonne made of a woman: Ergo, the Sonne of God was the sonne of Mary. For the confutation of this error, the famous Councell of Ephesus was assembled, wherein it was Magdeburg. Cent. 5. Col. 889. concluded, and that in the first canon, that Mary should be called the mother of God. See before, the Creed; Art. Borne of the virgin Mary.
Bond to the law] Though he were Lord of the law, yet made he himselfe subiect to the law, circumcised accor|ding to the law, and presented in the Temple, according to the law; yea it executed vpon him all the iurisdiction it had ouer vs. It doth by good right accuse, conuince, condemne vs. For alas, all of vs are Psal. 14.4. sinners, and by na|ture the children of Ephes. 2.3. : but Christ did no sinne, neither was there 1. Pet. 2.22. guile fund in his mouth: yet not|withstanding the law was no lesse cruell against this in|nocent and blessed lambe, then it was against vs cursed and damnable sinners: yea much more rigorous. For it made him guilty before God of all the sinnes of the whole world. It terrified and oppressed him with such an heauinesse of spirit, that he sweat blood; and in fine,

condemned him to death, euen the death of the Crosse. Thus Christ was made bond vnto the law, to redeeme them which were bond vnto the law: for hee died for our sinnes, and indured all this for our sakes; and so being vnder the law, conquered the law by a Luther in loc. double right: first, as the Sonne of God, and Lord of the law: secondly, in our per|son, which is as much as if our selues had ouercome the law; for his victory is ours.
And therefore remember alway this sweet and com|fortable text in the midst of all dangers, all assaults of ty|rants, all temptations of Satan, in the houre of death espe|cially, saying to the law; Thou hast no power ouer me; for God the Father hath sent his Sonne to redeeme mee from thy bondage; thou dost accuse, terrifie, condemne in vaine: for I will Augustin. manuel. cap. 23. creepe into the hole which bloudy Longinus made with his speare in my Sauiours side There will I hide my selfe from all my foes; I will plunge my conscience in his wounds, death, victorious resurrection, glorious ascension; besides him I will see nothing, I will heare nothing. 1. Cor. 15.56. The sting of death is sinne, and the strength of sinne is the law. But thanks be vnto God, which hath giuen vs victory, through our Lord Iesus Christ.
Defence for not subscri|bing, part. 1. cap 9. The Nouelists exception against our translating na|turall sonnes, is idle: for our Communion booke doth not call vs naturall sonnes, as Christ is Gods naturall Sonne by eternall generation: but as it were naturalized by spi|ritual regeneration, adopted through election and grace: so Paul elsewhere termeth vs Rom. 8.17. Coheres with Christ. Nei|ther doth this paraphrase wrong the Patriarks before the law, nor the Prophets vnder the law: for as I haue noted out of Martin Luther; Chirst, who came in the flesh once, comes in the spirit daily, crying Abba Father, as it followeth in the text: he is one Heb. 13.8. yesterday, and to day, and shall be the same for euer. Yesterday, before the time of his comming in the flesh: to+day, now he is reuea|led in fulnesse of time: For euer the same lambe of God, Apoc. 13.8. slaine from the beginning of the world. The Luther. in loc. Fathers

then had Christ in spirit; which holy spirit made them free from the bondage of the law: so that they and we are saued by one and the same grace, by one and the same faith in one and the same Anglican. Confes. art. 7. Christ.
How the blessed Spirit crieth in our hearts, assuring our spirit that we are the children of God; helping our infirmities, and making request for vs with sighes, which cannot be expressed; see before, The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, c. This Epistle doth accord with the Gospell, which intimates in particular, how Christ be|came the Sonne of man, that hee might make vs the sonnes of God: how Christ is Iesus and Emmanuel. Both fit the time, that in the midst of Christmas our soule might magnifie the Lord, and our spirit reioice in God our Sauiour: who was made of a woman, and made bond vnto the law, to redeeme those who were bound vnto the law: that wee might bee sonnes and heires of God through him.




The Gospel. MATTH. 1.1.
Liber generationis, Iesu Christi, filij Dauid, filij Abraham.

_SVmma Theologiae Scriptura, summa scrip|turae Euangelium, summa Euangelij : summa summarum Iesus Christus, filius Dauid, filius Abraham; ille primus, ille postremus: Alpha legis, Omega Euan|gely: principium  A|men. August. lib. 5. de ciuit. cap. 18. Velatus in veteri Testamento, reuelatus in no|uo: in illo praedictus, in isto praedicatus. Vno spiritu dicam bre|uissim, nihil aliud continet verbum Domini nisi verbum Dominum.
Innuit hoc in praesentiitulo Matthaeus; annuit Paulus ad Corinthios Cap. 2. vers. 2. prim. Non statui quicquam inter vos sci|re nisi Iesum Christum crucifixum. Apertis ait Augusti|nus confessionum quinto, cap. 4. Infoelix homo qui scit caetera omnia, te autem nescit: beatus autem quite scit, etiamsi illa omnia nesciat: qui ver te  illa nouit, non propter illa beatior, sed propter te solum beatissi|mus. Est ars artium,  scientia scientiarum, ea legere  a|gere quae narrantur in hoc libro generationis filij Dauid, filij Abraham.

Cuius frontispicij duo sunt luminae:

Inscriptio Euangelij.
Descriptio Christi.


Inscriptionis (vt ita loquar) duo praecipus sunt radij re|spcientes Euangelium: 1. Quod, . 2. Qud .

Descriptionis item duo; splendet |nim Malc. .2. sol iustitiae

Nomine,

Proprio: Iesus.
Appellatiuo: Christus.

Genere, Filius Dauid, Filius Abra|ham.


Vbi quatuor problemata veniunt examinanda:


1. Curhos potissimm duos ex tm longa Parentum Chri|sti serie Euangelista nominauerit?
2. Cur Dauidem Abrahamo, iuniorem seniori antepo|suerit?
3. Ad quem referatur secundus genetius filij, ad Chri|stum, an ad Dauidem?
4. Quomodo Christus  filius Dauid,  filius Abra|ham?

Ad haec omnia fusius explicanda Hicron. ad De|metriadem. Tom. 1. sol. 62. Tulliani fluius sic|caretur ingenij, credo Terrullianus non sufficeret. Ego pr|inde cum In Epitaphio Nepoian. Hieronymo sequar eos. qui terrarum situs in bre|ui tabella pingunt: adumbrata, non expressa dabo:  in his (vt aliquando Epist. 33. Synesius in re dissimili) faciam hercle quod Eccho facit, voces quas accepi fidelissim reddam. Bucan. praef. loc. com. Vt Aeschylum poetam dicere solitum fuisse narrat Atha|naeus, tragoedias suas esse particulas de magni coenis Homeri: sic omni studio contendi ex instructissimis optimorum autho|rum mensis selectiores portiunculas decerpere. Vos specta|tissmi conuiuae pro sapientia vestra gustate, sed edentl; fercula siquidem istiusmodi more candido deuoranda, non ore canino laceranda.
Inprimis occurrit libri consideratio, ; causae vero quae snctissimos Euangelistas ad scribendum impulere, partim communes, partim speciales.

Communes erant duae:

Prima, vt credamus Christum.
Securd, vt credamus in Christum.


1. Vt credmus Christum;  hae dicitur hstoric sides: ita Lucas in prologo: Visum est mihi (praestantissime The|ophile) omnia alt repetita ordine ad te scribere, vt cog noscas corum verborum de quibus cruditus es histori|cam veritatem.
2.  credams in Christum;  hae nisi Satanae tenta|tionibus Aug. epist. 80. cedat  caedat saluisica fides est. Ita Ioannes Euangelij cap. 20. vers. 31. Haec scripa sunt vt credatis Iesum sse Chrisum illum,  vt credentes vitam habea|tis in nomine ius. Has rationes (et  atthaeum  Marcum) omnibus Euangelistis fsse communes

apparet, quia mens omnium eadem, idem spiritus, cor vnum, via vna.

Speciales autem, quae singulis occasionem Euangelium scribendi dedere, partim colliguntur 

Scriptura.
Coniectura.


Escriptura: Lucas enim, cap. 1. vers. 1. significat se ad historiam componendam impulsum qud intellexerat conatos esse ultos Euangelium texere, qui parm fidelitr id praesti|tissent. , non Stella in loc. Matthaeus, non Marcus, Maldont. in loc. sed Apelles, vt Beda; Basilides, vt Ambrosius; Merinths, vt memorat Epiphaenius: aliae ferebantur etiam eo tempore euangeliae Erasus in loc. Nazaraeorum, Matthiae, Nicodemi, Thomae, quae postea velut apochrypha reiecit Ecclesia. , conatisunt, sed quod conatiminim perfecerunt: vt Hom. 1. in Luc. Origenes, In cap. 1. Luc. Am|brosius, De consensu Euangelistarum, lib. 4. cap. 8. Augustinus annotrunt.
E coniectura: Ioannes ab Episcopis Asiae rogatus, Euan|gelicam narrationem aduersus Haereticos exarauit. Cum enim Ebionaei, Cerinthiani, Nicolaitae diuinitatem Christs iam iam negarent, viderat caeteros Euangelistas in ea con|firmanda minus olei posuisse; ad eam potissimum probanda~ Euangelium sibi scribendum existmauit: vt Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 11. Epiphanius haeresi 51. Hieronymus in In vita Ioan. Euangelist. catalogo: nec non Augustinus in prooemio expositionis in Ioannem,  reliqui fere omnes theologici tractatores.
Reddit alteram Hist. lib. 3. cap. 26. Eusebius causam, qud visis Euangelijs Matthaei, Marci, Lucae, probarit equidem omniae vtpote ve|ra; sed quaedam esse praetermissa quae praecesserant ante bap|tistae captiuitaem,  haec adijciend curauit.
Refertur apud Cent. 1. lib. 2. col. 569. Magdeburgenses etiam tertia, nempe qud animaduerterat Euangelistas reliquos historiae magis studisos, admodm paucas Christi conciones recitare, qui|bus eum abundare cernimus.
Matthaeus autem iste noster Hieron. preoem. in Mat.  Sixt. Senen. Biblioth. lib. 1. sol. 17. Hebraeorum causa suam contexuit historiam. Cum enim illis dis praedicasset  am ad Aethiopes transiturus erat, Hebraico sermone descrip|sit Euangelium, vt haberent certam non modo narrationem, sed quasi Magdeburg. cent. 1. lib. 2. col. 576. methodum vnuersae religionis Christianae. Sic

Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 1. sic Athanasius in synopsi: sic Euse|bius histor. lib. 5. cap. 8. sic Augustinus lib. 1. de consen|su Euangelistarum, cap. 2. sic Theophylactus  alij quam plurimi doctores, quasi ex maiorum traditione docuerunt.
At quis ex Hebraico in Graecum verterit, pauci dicunt,  qui dicunt, contradicunt. Maldonat. prooem. in Mat. cap. 5. Athanasius Iacobu~, Prooem. iu Matth. Theo|phylactus Ioannem: Praefat. in Mat. quaest. 25. Abulensis ipsum Matthaeum tran|stulisse putat. Augustinus dicit incertissimum, cuius ego iu|dicium credo certissimum. In vita Mat|taei. Hieronymus Hebraic se vidisse testatur in bibliotheca Caesariensi, quam Pamphilus Mar|tyr extruxerat: hodi inter Iudaeos reperitur,  typis etiam excusune prodijt; quod an idem illud sit quod Hieronymus vi|derat ipse non disputo, constare clamitant nonnulli; verm ego cum Annot. in Matth. 1. Erasmo malim extare qum constare.
Si quis adhuc desiderat plura de rationibus Matthaei, quare scripserit, de loco vbi scripserit, de te~pore quando scripserit, adeat ille Vbi supra. bibliotheca~ Sixti Senen.  haec omnia disceptan|tes copiosissim Magdeburgenses, cent. 1. lib. 2. in vita Mat. Caesare~ Baroniu~, Ecclesiast. annalium, Tom. 1. fol. 288. Al|phons. Tostatu~, in prolog. Matth. quaest. 2. Atque sic acce|pistis (amplissimi viri) quo consilio Matthaeus Marloratus argument. in E|uang. Matth. praedicandi munere non contentus, etiam scriptis ad posteros transmitte|re voluerit hunc librum de generatione Iesu Christi; omnem scilicet mouebat ipidem vt no~ modo viuus sed etiam Maldonat. prae|sat. in Euangel. cap. 6. mor|tuus aedificet Hierosolymam sanctam Dei ciuitatem, vt quemadmodum ad mortuos (testante 1. Epist. cap. 4.6 Petro) praedicatum erat euangelium, ita etiam per mortuos annunciaretur. Haec ego explicat, vos vt placuerit applicate: vel ipsum biblij no|men apud Academicos excitat attentionem; cui magis arri|det biber qum liber, indignus omme Acaemici; cui magis alius quis qum iste liber, indignus nomine Christiani.
Inepte Stancarus apud Lib. de Christo mediatore, cap. 2 Bellarminum; Plus valet vnus Petrus Lombardus qum centum Lutheri, ducenti Me|lancthones, tercenti Bullingeri, quadringenti Petri Mar|tyres, quingenti Caluini. Rectis ego, Plus est in vn sen|tentiola aurei huius enchiridij, qum in omnibus Liuij, Pla|tonis, Plutarchi, Demosthenis, addo Tullij, Aristotelis,

Theophrasti spaciosis voluminibus. Incomparabiliter pul|chrior est haec Margarita Christianorum, qum Helena Graecorum, vt olim Epist. 9. Augustinus Hieronymo.
Quemadmodum per se facundi si cum Cicerone conferan|tur protinus obmutescunt: ita caeteri doctores cum Hierony|mo composii vix sapere, vix loqui, vix viuere videantur, vt Epist, praesix. Tom. 4. oper. Hieronymi. Erasmus script egregius ille prosopolatra: verum si co~pa|rentur vni Matthaeo, sancti spiritus Amanuensi, separatim singuli, coniunctim vniuersi, vel ipsi Ptres velut infntuli conticescunt, vt aliquando Lutherus, Ego non curo mille Augustinos, mille Cyprianos, mille ecclesias.
Im fatentur  pontificis nonnulli, Philip. Moraeus praesa. lib. de Missa. Gerson scilicet d|ctissius ille cancellarius Parisiensis,  illstrissimus Ioannes Picu Mirandulanus, amplecti se magis opinionem ho|minis laici, Idiotae, infantuli scripturam adfrentis: qum ipsius summi pontificis iudicium aut vniuersalis concilij decretum, quod nullum habeat in verbo Dei fundamen|tum. Haec veriora sunt qum vt negari possint, notiora qum vt tractari debeant. Ad reliqua pergo.
] Ista vox generatio mir doctorum exercuit ingenia: quidam enim existimant hunc non esse titulum libri, sed initium tantummodo genealogiae Christi; Alijputant esse titulum, sed vniuerso libri argmento non conuenire: Al  titulum,  totius titulum,  totam Euangelij summam in se complecti.
Negantes titulum interpretantur , narrationem, ca|talogum siue recensim, vt Gen. 5.1. Hic est liber gener|tionis Adam: id est, haec est narratio genealogiae ab A|dam ductae. Sic in  Caluinus, in annotationibus Beza, in expositione ecclesi stic super Matthaeum Augusti|nus Marloratus. Alij concedut oss titulum libri, sed ad r|tum non extend na vt Mss iscripsit pentaeuchi volu|men, Librum geneseos, cm agat de rerum generatione solo capite prim; vel, vt rectius Al, Abulensis. Beressh, qui primum erat illius libri verbum: Ita Matthaeus ebrice scribens, Hebraeorum more nomen imposuit libro ex e quod refertur in exordio, scilicet ex genealogia,  appellauit:

Maldonat. in loc. huic expositioni fauet authorum pars  maior  me|lior.
Nonnulli tamen affrmant hunc  esse titulum,  non vnam modo partm, sed inegrum Euangel argumentum de|clarare. Nam vt Lib. 2. fol. 75. Sixtus Senensis collgit e Rabins, Hebra vox qua Matthaeus vtitur hoc in loco significat non  generationem, sed etiam totum vitae rsum; vt Gen. 6.9. Noe dicitur perfectus in generationibus suis: id e, in omnibus vitae partibus Ablensis in Matth. 1. vt perinde liber si erationis  Christi, ac sidiceret, liber de vit Christi, omia illius geta ab incarnatione vs ad . Vti Lucas  nominaut historiam eor omnium quae caepit Iesus  fa|cere  docere: Actorum 1. vers. 1. Quae quidem interpre|tatio, fateor ingen  maxime placet,  quia plenor,  quia planior; in quo non tam Mldonatum, aut Alphonsum Tostatum, qum  script. vb. generatio. Illricum sequor. Faustus ita, qui nega|bat hoc Euangelium esse, quia non Euangelium, sed lber ge|erationis inscriberetur;  impius erat,  imperitus, non intelligens omnem Christi vitam generationem appell  ve|rm ego mittam infestum hunc Manichaeum, cuius ineptas cauillationes aduersus Matthaei titulum abunde satis doctis|simus pater Lib. 2. contra Fausum Mani|chaeum, cap. 6. Augustinus exagitauit, Tom. 6. editionis Frobenianae, fol. 147.
Cur atem generationis in singulari, non generationum Euangelista dixerit  nonnullis quaeritur, quorum alij re|spondent causm ese, qud cum duas Christus generationes habuerit, humanam  diuinam, de sola humana. Matthaeus ageret, vt qui de diin sciebat ese dium Esaiae 53. gene|rationem eius quis enarrabit? Alijeum Hieronymo dicunt Eangelistam enmerare generatones cert multas: at Quia propter Chsti genera|tionem indu|cntur caeterae. Thom. catenn loc. v|nam ten quaerere Iesu Christi filij Dauid, filij Abrahae. Sic enim describitur Christus x nomine  genere.

Ex nomine

Proprio: Iesus.
Apellto: Christus.


Iesus nomen proprium, Christus appellatium, Isus no|men naturae; Christus personae, siue nomen dignitatis  ssi|cij vt Theologi loquuntur. Ita Tertullianus adersus Pra|xeam

disputat Christum non esse nomen sed appellatio|nem.
At obijci solet, inconuenienter hoc diciproprium,  singu|lare nomen illud de quo propheta, Vocabitur nouum nomen, cm in veteri Testamento pluribus fuerit impositum.
Respondet Part. 3. qut. 37. art. 2. Aquinas apposit, nomen Iesu alijs conuenire secundum aliquam particularem  temporalem salutem: sed secundum vniuersalem  spiritualen hoc nomen esse proprium Christo, qui saluum facit populum suum  pec|catis corum, vt Matthaeus interpretatur, huius capituli vers. 21.
Iesus enim Naue, Iesus Sydrach, Iesus Iosedech, Typi tan|tummodo furunt huius nostri Iesu. In Iesu Naue celebra|tur potentia: in Iesu Sydrach scientia: In Iesu Iosedech bo|nitas: Iesus ergo Naue figura Christi regis: Iesus Sydrach figura Christi prophetae: Iesus Iosedech, figura Christi sa|cerdotis: Vt explicatissim doctores in tertium Zachariae, nec non Eusebius in lib. 4. de demonstratione Euangelica, cap. 29.  Augustinus lib. 12. contra Faustum Manichaeum, cap. 36. Contendunt alij, nomen hoc tiam Swarez. tom. 2 in 3. Thom. dis|putat. 15. sect. 2. materialiter ac|ceptum, aptissim Christo vnt, soli, semper conuenire: ita tra|didit Petrus Galat. lib. 3. de arcanis, c. 20.  Sanctes Pag|ninus in interpretatione nominum Hebraicoru~: Ian|senius, concordiae cap. 7. Qui quidem omnes arcte tenent, accurate defendunt, nomen Iesu Naue, Iesu Sydrach, Iesu Iosedech, non fuisse conscriptum ijsdem omnino literis: no|men enim eorum Iehosua, Christi ver Iesua; Ichosua au|tem significat, Deus saluabit;  Iesus in praesents saluato|rem; at sic vni Christo, soli Christo, semper Christo con|gruit hoc saluificum nomen, excogitatum  Deo, vocatum ab Angelo, inditum  Marta  Iospho.
Vrgent adhuc Iudaei; qud Mssiae nomen est Emmanuel, secundm illud Isaiae vaticinium, Ecce virgo concipiet  pariet filium,  vocabitur nomen eius Emmanuel.
Huic obiectiunculae Matthaeus occurrit in praesenti ca|pitulo, Vocabis nomen eius Iesum,  vt ita vocari debuisse Maldonat. in Matth. 1.21. probet, Esaeiae locum citat: vt impleretur, inquit, quod

Dominus per prophetam, vocabis nomen eius Emma|nuel, id est, nobiscum Deus. Emmanuel igitur  Iesus vt (argute Lib. 3. contra Marcion. Tertullianus) dem sensu, vtcun non idem sono. Idem enim est, Deu~ nobiscum,  esse Deum seruatorem no|strum, vt scit Paulus ad Romanos octauo; Si Deus nobis|cum, quis contra nos? Accepimus plura bona Deo rege|nerante, qum mala Adamo degenerante. Maior enim digni|tas Euangelica qum Angelica.
Intellexerat hoc qui non vidit omnia sanctus Bernardus; Alia nomina (inquit) sunt Maiestatis; at Iesus est nomen misericordiae. Nam esse Dei verbum, esse filium, esse Dei Christum, ad eius praecipue gloriam pertinet. At nomen Ie|su saluatorem sonat: quo quidem  illius gloria  saelus no|stra continetur. Ideo merit quidem ex Ecclesiae instituto ad hoc salutare nomen assurgimus,  genua flectimus; at hoc non aed syllabicam compositionem, sed ad saluificam exposi|tionem, diuini numinis maiestatem reuerentes,  pro salute nobis per sacrum illud Act. 4.12. nomen impensa gratias exhibentes: Hoc siquidem nomen est super omne nomen, ad quod omne genu flectatur caelestium, terrestrium, infernorum. Ad Philippenses 2. vers. 10.
Elegantissime Lucanus vt Erasmus in E|pist. Hiron. ad Grontiam. poeta: Quid satis est, si Roma parum? Ita quidem ego, Quid satis erit illi, cui non sufficiant ista?
Si Hieron. pist. ad Eustochium. cuncta corporis membra verterentur in linguas,  omnes artus human voce resonarent, nihil hercle dignum hoc nomine, hoc numine proferrem. I stud enim orationibus potius inuocandum qum rationibus illustrandum. Augustin. O bone Iesu! esto mihi Iesus. Noli Domine, noli sic attendere malum meum, vt obliuiscaris bonum tuum: etsi ego ad|misi vnde me damnare possis, tu non amisisti vnde me saluare soles: es Iesus, go volens; es Christus, ergo poteus: est enim vox  appellatio dignitatis  officy (sicut ante monui:) In veteri siquide~ lege reges  sacerdotes Vncti siue Christi dicebantur: Vt Esaiae 45.1. Haec dicit Dominus Christo suo Cyro. Et Psalmo 105. Nolite tangere Chri|stos meos. Iesus autem vnctus oleo laetitiae prae consortibus (vt Psal. 45.8. Psalmista loquitur:) Ioan. 10.31. , non mod Chri|stus

Domini; sed etiam Christus, Dominus, vnctus  rex  sacerdos: Illyricus in clau. script. verb. Christus. Regis munera tria, iudicare, regere, tueri suos sacerdotes item tria; docere, orare, sacrificare. Quae quidem omnia nunc in coelis; olim in terris agebat Iesus rex  scerdos noster; rex, vtpote qui filius Dauid; sacerdos, vt|pote qui filius Abraham, vbi quatuor occurrunt exami|nanda.
Primum est, cur hos potissimm duos ex tm longa paren|tum Christi serie Euangelist nominauerit? Cuius (vt Caten. in Mat. 1.  pat. 3. qu. 31. art. 2. A|quinas explicat) est ratio multiplex.
Prima, qud his potissimm promissio venturi Messiae fa|cta fuerit: Abrahamo, Gen. 22. vers. 18. In femine tuo be|nedicentur omnes Gentes terrae; quod Apostolus intellgen|dum esse de Christo clar docet ad Galatas 3.16. Abrahamo dictae sunt promissiones,  femini eius, non dicit  femi|nibus, quasi in multis, sed quasi in vno,  femini tuo, qui est Christus.
Dauidi ver iurauit Dominus: De fructu ventris tui po|nam super sedem tuam: Psal. 132.11. Vnde populus Iudaec|rum vt regem honorifice suscipientes vndij clamabat, accla|mabat; Hosanna filio Dauid: acquiescunt in hc expositio|ne Chrysostomus, Hieronymus, Ambrosius, Irenaeus.
Secunda ratio, quia Christus eratrex, sacerdos,  prophe|ta. Dauid autem rex  propheta, sacerdos Abraham, vtpo|te cui dixerat Dominus, Sume mihi vaccam triennem,  arietem annorum trium: turturem quoque  coum|bam. Gen. 15.9.
Tertia ratio; quoniam in Abrahamo prim incepit cir|cumsio: in Dauid autem maxime maifesta Dei electio: Se|cundum illud, Act. 18.22. Elegi virum iuxta cormeum. Vrius, pro|inde silius specialissime dicitur  Mtthaeo Christus, vt osten|datur esse in salute~  circumcisioni  electioni Gentilum: Ita Patres, ita scholastici docuere: verm si liceret vestra bona cum venia meam hic interponere sententiam; ego for|tasse dicerem Abrahamum  Dauidem specialiter in hoc E|uangelicae structurae frontispicio collocari, quia duae sunt prin|cipales Euangelij partes, sides  poenitentia. Einebat in

Abrahamo fides, in Dauide poenitentia: quemadmodum ita Christus secundum carnalem genarationem; ita Christia|nus secundum spiritualem regenerationem habendus est fi|lius Dauid, filius Abraham.
Si quid tu rectius istis
Candidus imperti; si non, his vtere mecum.
Quod attinet ad secundum problema: Hugo Cardi|nal. in loc. quadruplex est causa quare Matthaeus Abrahamo Dauidem antepo|suerit.
1. Quia Dauid erat regno clarior: eleganter enim Lib. ad Sca|pulam. Ter|tullianus; Imperator omnibus maior est, dum solo Deo mi|nor est.
Scriptum in Curia Worma|tiensi sicut Manlius loc. com. Astra Deo nil maius habent, nil Caesare terra.
2. Ne series genealogiae turbaretur: Hebraeorum enim mos est, vbi multa recensent, illud vnde volunt incipere vlti|mo loco ponere: vt Gen. 1.1. In principio creauit Deus cae|lum  terram, terra autem erat inanis: Ita liber genera|tionis Iesu Christi, filij Dauid, filij Abraham. Abraham autem genuit Isaac.
3. Quia Iesus in mundum venit, non Matth. 9.13. iustos vocare, sed peccatores: Euangelij proinde prologo Dauid peccator A|brahae iusto praeponitur. Et hoc solamen miseris  Euange|lium ver: nam quomodo Iesus potest esse non Iesus peccatori, cum ipse fuerit peccatoris summi filius, adulteri, homicidae, blasphemi Dauid: qui non adhuc natus liberauit parentes  peccatis quomodo tam glorificatus non liberabit filios?
Animaduertere licet omnes fer qui petebant  Christo beneficia, solere prius eum Dauidis filium appellare: Ita mu|lier Cananaea, Miserere mei Domine fili Dauid: Ita Barti|maeus, Marci. 10. Iesu fili Dauid miserere mei. Ad hunc etiam modum vnusquis considenter ad gratiae thronum ac|cedere potest  debet: O Domine Iesu Dauidis fili, miserere mei. Sum ego fateor homo peccator, at tu Iesu non hominis modo filius, sed hominis peccantissimi, filius Dauid. Auda|cius adhuc Loc. com. tit. de Christi pas|sione. Lutherus: Ignoscite quaeso; Christus omnium maximus latro, fur, sacrilegus, homicida, scilicet reputa|tiu coram hominibus, imputatiu coram Deo: quoniam ex|istens

hostia pro peccatis totius mundi portauit in corpore suo; peccata Noe, qui fuit ebrius; peccata Pauli, qui fuit blas|phemus; peccata Dauid, qui fuit homicida: non miseranda ne|cessitate, sed miserante potius volu~tate, sicut optim distinxit Augustinus ad Laurentium enchiridij cap. 49.
Portauit siquidem omnia omnium peccata, qui nullam ne minimam habuit labeculam de proprio. Mhi compatitur, mi|hitristis, mihi dolet, inquit De fide. lib. 2. cap. 3. Ambrosius; in me  pro me doluit, qui pro se nihil habuit quod doleret.
Ita mihi verbum caro factum est; verbum; quid poten|tius? in initio enim erat verbum: caro factum est, quid imp|tentius? Omnis enim caro foenum. Attamen qui fecit homi|em factus est filius hominis, impij hominis, filius Dauid. Augustin. de atebizand. rudibus, cap. 4. Magna miseria superbus homo; sed maior misericordia hu|milis Deus. Quid rependam ei pro omnibus quae tribuit mihi? Aug. serm. 115. de temp. Prim nihil eram,  fecit me: perieram, quaesiuit me; quae|rens inuenit me; inuentum redemit me; redemptum liberauit me; de hoste fecit seruum, de seruo fratrem, de fratre cohae|redem: Ille qui non nouit peccatum, pro me factus est pecca|tum,  filius nequissimi peccatoris Dauid.
4. Dauid Abrahamo, iunior seniori praefertur; quia lict vtri Messiae dicta fuerit promissio, tamen ea quae Dauidi facta,  recentior  specialior,  honorificentior; ideo Iu|daeis gratior,  omnium ore magis celebrata. Nam interro|gati a Iudaeis Pharisaei; Quid vobis videtur de Christo? in|cunctantr responde~t, filius Dauid;  ipsa Matth. 12.23. populaeris turba vifis admirabilibus Christi, dicebat illic, nunquid hic est filius Dauid? haec scilicet opinio tenaciter haerebat omnium animis, oportere Messiam esse filium Dauid; inter Iudaeos praecipu (quorum grati praesens hoc opus excogitatum) ade manifestum erat, Aug. de vera Religione. vt nulla doctorum paucitas, nulla in|doctorum turba dissentiret.
Hanc rationem afferre video, Chrysostomum, Euthy|mium, Theophylactum, alios tractatores qum plures;  hanc ego long clarissimam, eloquio sacro conuenientissi|mam esse determino.
De tertia ver quaestione: Erasmus  Maldonat. in loc. Secundus genitiuus filij co~ue|nientr

 ad Dauidem  ad Christum referri potest: ad Dauidem; erat enimille filius Abraham; ac sidiceret Euan|gelista: Liber generationis Iesu Christi filij Dauid, qui Dauid fuit filius Abrahae: Ad Christum etiam; erat enim ille vtrius filius, ac si Matthaeus ad hunc modum enucleatius, hic est liber generationis Iesu Christi filij Dauid  Abra|ham. Sed quo modo iam vltimo quaeritur,  ipse breuius for|tasse enarrabo, qum res tanta dici debeat.
Isaias sacrorum vatum Homerus (vt eum appellat Lib. 5. de asse. Bu|deus) admiranda canit sed credenda. Cap. 9. vers. 6. Paruu|lus natus est nobis, filius datus est nobis: in quem locum Hom. 1. de na|tiuit. Christi. Eusebius Emissenus apposit, Datus ex diuinitate, natus ex virgine; natus qui sentiret occasum, datus qui esciret exordium; natus qui  matre esset iunior, datus quo nec pater esset antiquior;  sic qui erat, datus est; qui no~ erat, natus est; in mundum nempe veit, qui mundum condidit: ad terrena descendit,  caelestia non dereliquit;  affuit,  inde non defuit, vt Epist. 3. Augustinus olim Volusiano: humana natura accessit, diuina non recessit: illa fuit assumpta, ista non consumpta; vel (vt Hom. 2. de natiuit. Christ. Emissenus acutissim) verbum caro fa|ctum est, non deposita, sed seposita Maiestate. Aug. confess. lib. 2. cap. 42. Oportet enim Mediatorem inter Deum  hominem, habere aliquid simile Deo, aliquid simile homini, ne in vtro homini similis long esset  Deo; aut in vtro Deo similis long esset ab ho|mine: Christus igiur Idem ibidem. cap. 43. inter mortales peccatores,  immor|talem iustum, apparuit mortalis cum hominibus, iustus cum Deo.
Quemadmodum enim flores (authore Protagora) solem habent in caelo patrem, solum in terra matrem: Ita Christus flos de Isai. 11.1. Iesse, Patrem habuit in coelo sine matre; in terris au|tem matrem sine patre; Emissenus vbi supro. non alter ex patre, alter ex virgine; sed alter ex patre, aliter ex virgine: de Deo Deus, de Deo patre Deus filius, inquit Serm. de du|plici natiuit. Christi. Fulgentius: alter in persona, non alius in natura: semper apudpatrem, semper cumpatre, sem|per de patre, semper in patre: Aug. ser. 4. de temp. filius ex ipso, cum ipso, hoc quod ipse.
Verus etiam homo de homine, Lombard. . sent. dist. 8. propter hominem, secun|dum

hominem, super homine~; vnus tamen idem Iesus Chri|stus, Emmanuel, , nobiscum Deus; eiusde~ Mariae fi|lius  parens. Ita Paulus ad Galatas quarto, Misit Deus Fi|lium suum factum de muliere. A  , Apocalyp. 1.8. id est, vt exponit Sixtu. Senen. bib. lib. 2 pa. 37. Epiphanius, homo  Deus. Nam A. quae in|fern aperitur, humanam denotat naturam: , quod supern apertum est innuit diuinam. Ipsum (inquit Hom. 1. dena|tiuit. Christi. Emissenus) san|guinem quem pro matre obtulit, antea de sanguine matris accepit:  hoc, vt exclamat Bernardus, est singulariter mi|rabile  mirabiliter singulare. Thom. 3 part. q. 31. art. 5. Secundum conditionem na|turae natus ex foemin: suprae conditionem naturae, naturae ex virgine.
Iam ver Deipara, (sicut historia sacra testatur) ex stirpe Dauidica; nec non ex Abrahamist stemmate oriunda. Chri|stus ita, secundum vsitatam loquendi consuetudinem apud Hebraeos,  filius Dauid,  filius Abraham, on Erasmus in loc. ex ijsdem prognatus, sed ex edem generis serie propagatus.
At sic ea, qua potui breuitate, quaestionibus ist is omnibus enodate respondi; quantum attinet ad contentiosos non satis, quantum ad pacatos  intelligentes plus forte quam satis; vt ad Bonifacium scripsit Epist. 23. Augustinus.
Si quis expectet vt ego subtilius aliquid adijciam de Christi genealogia, quaerat ille genealogicos fabulones; qui dum anigmata nescio quae conantur explicare, lectorum ani|mos inextricabilibus errorum labyrinthis solent implicare.

Horum duo sunt genera;

Iudaei veteres.
Iudaizantes noui.


Illi a luce veritatis Aug. cont. ad|uers. Legis. lib. 2. cap. 7. auersi,  ob hoc luci veritatis ad|uersi. Isti genealogiam Christi, Idem contra Faustum. li. 22. cap. 34. vel non intelligendo repre|hendunt, vel reprehendendo non intelligunt. Ambo (quod Contra literas Petiliani. lib. 3. cap. 6. Augustinus de Petiliano) Multa dicendo nihil dicunt, aut potius nil dicendo multa dicunt. O mirabilem insa|niam (inquit sanctissimus Idem contra Fautum. lib. 17. cap. 3. pater) aliquid de Christo nar|ranti, nolle credi Matthaeo,  velle credi Manichaeo. O cu|ras hominum! quantum est in rebus inane! Excidium Troiae post Homerum, aut , post Lucam  Matthaeum

contexere. Paulus instituens Timotheum abundare fecit eum praeceptis morum, institutis Theologiae; sed 1. Tim. 1.4. inutiles de genealogiae quaestiones,  inaniloquia, non ab auribus modo, sed ab orbis Christiam sinibus arcenda iudicauit. Odi sem|per ego Nonatores, etiam recens antiquitatem amplexus sum. Ita toto hoc sermone, quod  patribus accepi, vobis tra|didi: quorum omnium haec est summa. Liber excitat lecti|onem; Liber generationis electionem; Iesus deuotionem; Christus obedientiam: filius Dauid spem; filius Abrahae si|dem. In his siquid bene, quia nostrum non est, agnoscite; si quid mal quia nostrum est, ignoscite. Humanum enim (at Ethic. lib. 4. cap. de liberal. Ari|stoteles) im regium (vti Bucan. praef. loc. com. Plutarchus) imo Christianum (inquit Consolat. ad Pammachium. Hieronymus) idest, vestrum est, (ornatissimi viri) mgna liberaliter dare, parua libenter accipere. Gratia Do|mini nostri Iesu Christi filij Dauid, filij Abraham sit cum omnibus vobis, nunc  in saecula saeculorum. Amen.
Ad Clerum habita Cantabrigiae pro gradu Doctoratus: Anno 1605.




The Epistle. ROM. 12.1.
I beseech you brethren by the mercifulnesse of God, that you make your bodies a quicke sacrifice, c.

IT is well obserued by In 6. ad Rom. Chrysostome, that all the sacred Epistles of this Apostle stand vpon two legs especially;

to wit;

Explications: or doctrines of holy faith.
Applications: or exhortations to godly life.


The former Chapters are spent in dogmaticall con|clusions appertaining to beliefe. The Ambros. Theophylact. Melancthon. in loc. residue containe morall instructions of honest conuersation and loue: wherein our Apostle teacheth, how wee should behaue our selues to God and man; and that by Gorran. in loc. precept and pa|terne. By precept, in the 12, 13, 14, 15. Chapters: by pa|terne, in the 16. Chapter.

This scripture shewes how we must demeane our selues to Aquin. in loc. God, in

Body: vers. 1. Make your bodies a quicke sacrifice, c.
Soule: vers. 2. Fashion not your selues like vnto this world, but be yee changed by the re|newing of your mind.


I beseech you brethren] Two things induce men espe|cially to suffer the words of exhortation: opportunity, and importunity: The worth of the matter, and zealous affection of the speaker. Saint Paul makes his louing af|fection manifest in these sweet termes; I beseech you bre|thren by the mercifulnesse of God. He might haue comman|ded, as he told Philemon. 8.9. Philemon; but for loues sake, he doth ra|ther intreat.
God the Father appeared in a 1. King. 19.12. still and soft voice: God the Sonne was not a tiger, but a Ioh. 1.29. lambe: God the holy Ghost came downe, not in the forme of a vulture; but in the shape of a Luk. 3.22. doue: signifying hereby, that Prea|chers ought to vse gentle meanes in winning men vnto

God; herein resembling the good mother which hath Bernard. vbera and verbera, a teat so well as a rod: a dug to restore such as feele their sinne with the spirit of meeknesse: Gal. 6.1. but a rod to whip the carelesse and senslesse, lest they grow too wanton. And therefore Saint Paul, who doth heere beseech the Romans out of his loue; doth adiure them also by the mercifulnesse of God: that is, as Aquin. in loc. some construe it, I beseech you by mine Apostolical au|thority, committed vnto me by Gods especialll mercy, 1. Cor. 7.25. as himselfe expounds himselfe in the third verse of this Chapter: I say through the grace that is giuen to me: where the Greeke verbe Erasmus an|not. in loc. , may be translated, I command: or, By the mercifulnesse of God shewed vn|to you: for as God is more bountifull, so you must bee more dutifull. We may not sinne, that grace may abound: but on the contrary, because the grace of God, that bringeth saluation vnto all men, hath appeared, it teacheth vs to de|nie vngodlinesse and worldly lusts, and that wee should liue soberly and righteously and godly in this present world.
The mercies of God to me, the mercies of God to you, be many and manifest. I beseech you therefore by the riches of his abundant mercy, make your bodies a quicke sacrifice, c.
Thus you see the zealous earnestnesse of the spea|ker: I come now to the worthinesse of the matter; con|cerning the Romans, and in them our selues, as much as the saluation of our soules. I beseech you therefore marke what the Spirit writeth, and first obserue Pauls or|der: Martyr in loc. After iustification hee speakes of sanctification: herein intimating that good workes, as Lib. de fide  operius. Augustine said; Non praecedunt iustificandum, sed sequuntur iustificatum: Not goe before, but after iustification. Church ho|mily of good workes. As the wheele turneth round, not to the end that it may be made round, but because it is first made round, therefore it turneth round: so men are sanctified because first iustified; not iustified because first sanctified. As Aulus Fuluius when he tooke his sonne in the conspiracie with Catiline, said:

Ego te non Catilinae genui sed patriae. So God hath not be|gotten vs in Christ, that wee should follow that arch|traitor Satan; but serue him in holinesse and righteous|nesse all the daies of our life: making our selues a quicke sacrifice, c.

There are two kinds of sacrifices:

Expiatory, for sinne; which we can|not offer. See epist. Dom. 3. Qua|dragesimae.
Gratulatory, of thanks and praise, which wee can and must offer: and,



hereof there are Aquin. in loc. three kinds according to the three sorts of goods; of the

World.
hereof there are Aquin. in loc. three kinds according to the three sorts of goods; of the Mind.
hereof there are Aquin. in loc. three kinds according to the three sorts of goods; of the Body.


1. We must offer our goods of the world: Heb. 13.16. To doe good and distribute forget not; for with such sacrifices is God pleased. Prou. 19.17. He that hath mercy vpon the poore, lendeth vnto the Lord.
2. Wee must offer to the Lord the goods of our mind, by deuotion and contrition: Psal. 51.17. The sa|crifice of God, is a troubled spirit; a broken and contrite heart O God shalt thou not despise. When by diuine me|ditation and deuote praier, we beat downe the proud conceits of our rebellious hearts, we kill, and offer vp as it were our sonne Isaac; that which is most neere, most deere to vs.
3. We must offer to the Lord the goods of our body;

which are done,

Patiendo, by dying for the Lord.
Faciendo, by doing that which is ac|ceptable to the Lord.


Martyrdome is such a pleasing sacrifice, that as Am|brose said of his sister; Appellabo martyrem  praedi|cabo satis: I will call her Martyr, and then I shall bee sure to commend her enough. See Epist. on Saint Ste|uens day.
S. Paul here meanes a sacrifice by doing; Rom. 6.13. Giue your members as weapons of righteousnesse to God. For as

Christ offered vp himselfe for vs; so wee made confor|mable, should offer vp our selues vnto him. Martyr in loc. Interpre|ters obserue a great Emphasis in the word hostia, deriued, as Ouid noteth, ab hostibus.
Victima quae dextra cecidit victrice, vocatur;
Hostibus  domitis hostia nomen habet.
And therefore seeing Christ hath deliuered vs from the hands of all our enemies, it is our dutie to sacrifice perpetually to him, our selues and our soules, and so liue to him who died for vs.

Lest we should erre in our offering, Saint Paul shewes all the Gorran. in loc. causes:

Efficient: our selues.
Materiall: our bodies.
Formall: quicke and holie.
Finall: acceptable to God.



Or (as Aquin.  Martyr. other obserue) S. Paul sets downe foure properties of a sacrifice:

1. Sound and quicke.
2. Sanctified and holie.
3. Pleasing.
4. Reasonable.


First, our sacrifice must be sound and quick; not blind, not lame, not seeble, Malach. 1.8. Wee must not offer to the diuell our youthfull yeares, and lay our old bones vp|on Gods altar: his sacrifice must bee the fattest, and the fairest; he must haue both head and hinderparts: here|by signifying that we must remember our Creator in the daies of our nonage, so well as in the daies of our dotage: for if wee deferre our offering till the last houre, when sicknes the bailiffe of death hath arrested vs, and paine sicknes attendant dulled our senses; it cannot be called a quicke, but a sicke; not a liuing, but a dead offering. That our sacrifice therefore may bee quicke, let vs, I be|seech you, begin quickly to dedicate our selues vnto God.
Or quicke] That is, Martyr in lc. willing: for those things are said to be quicke which moue of themselues; and those dead which doe not moue, but by some outward violence: we may not then be stockes and blockes in Gods holie ser|uice, doing no good but vpon constraint of law, and pe|naltie

of statute: such oblations are not acceptable, be|cause they bee not quicke. The Lord loueth a cheerefull giuer and thanksgiuer. Nothing is done well, but that only which is done with our will, freely, readily, liuely.
Or quicke] That is, quickned through faith: for as the soule is the life of the body, so faith is y^e life of the soule; without which he y^t liueth is dead: Abacue. 2.4. for the iust doth liue by faith. He situs es Vacia. (said Seneca, when he passd by the ground of that voluptuous Epicure) Vacia lieth here dead and buried: and 1. Tim. 5.6. so Pal of a widow liuing in pleasure; She is dead euen while she doth liue. That our sacrifice therefore may bee liuing it must proceede from a faith that is liuely.
Or liuing] That is, a Melanct. in l. continuall sacrifice. The sacrifi|ces of the Iewes haue now their end but the sacrifices of Christians are without end. We must  Ephes. 5.20. giue thanks, and Ephes. 6.18. alaies pray. The fire on our altar must neuer goe out, our sacrifice neuer die.
In the Law beasts appointed for sacrifice were first slaine, and then offered; and that for two causes especial|ly: first, (as In loc. Ambrose notes) to put the sacrificer in mind what hee deserued by sinne: namely, death: and second|ly, because those bloodie sacrifices were types of Christs death on the crosse, which is the propitiation for our sinnes. In like manner euery Christian sacrifice must bee dead to the world, that he may liue to God; Coloss. 3.5. mortify|ing his earthly members, and Galat. 5.24. crucifying his car|nall affections, that he may become a Galat. 6.15. new creature in Christ.
As death depriues a man of naturall life, so mortifica|tion destroyes the bodie of sinne, which is the sensuall life: Moriatur ergo ne moriatur, mutetur homo ne dmne|tur: (quoth Serm. 141. de temp. Augustine) We must die for a time in this life, lest wee die for euer in the next life. Wee must rise a|gaine with Christ, saith Coloss. .1. Paul. Now a man must be dead before hee can rise againe: first Rom. 6.5. grafted with Christ to the similitude of his death, and after to the similitude of

his resurrection. Hee that liued ill, and now demeanes himselfe well, is risen againe from the death of sinne, to the life of grace; mortified, and yet a liuing sacrifice; the Luther. post. maior in loc. more mortified, the more liuing. Rom. 8.13. If ye mor|tifie the deedes of the bodie by the spirit, ye shall liue.

This killing of our beastly desires is verie fit, whether we consider our selues, Fatius de mor|tificat. cap. 4. as Men.
This killing of our beastly desires is verie fit, whether we consider our selues, Fatius de mor|tificat. cap. 4. as Ciuill men.
This killing of our beastly desires is verie fit, whether we consider our selues, Fatius de mor|tificat. cap. 4. as Christian men.
This killing of our beastly desires is verie fit, whether we consider our selues, Fatius de mor|tificat. cap. 4. as Eminent men.

As men; that we may leade our life not according to sense, but according to reason: otherwise wee should be rather sensuall beasts, then reasonable men.
As ciuill men; that we may not liue according to lust, but according to law; though not according to consci|ence, yet according to custome, that wee breake not the statutes and disturbe not the common-wealth wherein we liue. The Philosophers in old time comprehended all points of mortification in these two words, sustine  ab|stine.
As Christian men; Luke 9.23. for he that will be Christs disci|ple, must deny himselfe: abnegare suos, sua, se. Matth. 11.12. The king|dome of heauen suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force: that is, by mortification and daily fighting against the lusts of the flesh; as Consule Mal|donat. in Mat. 11.12.  Fa|tium, vbi supra. Basil, Chrysostome, Au|gustine, Hierome, Gregori, Theophylact, Euthymius ex|pound it.
Last of all, yet most of all, mortification is necessarie for eminent persons, either in the Ministerie or Magi|stracie. For great ones ought especially to be good. Their sacrifice must be most quicke, that they may be paternes vnto other; as it were walking statutes, and talking lawes to the people.
Holy] The second thing required in our sacrifice: so we reade, Leuit. 22. that vnhallowed and vncleane per|sons ought not to touch the things of the Lord. Leuit. 20 26. Ye shall be holy for I the Lord am holy; 1. Thess. 4.3. this is the will of God, euen our sanctification.
The word  is deriued, as In Craylo. Plato notes, of the priua|tiue particle  and , signifying that holie things are not infected with the corruptions and filth of the world; when our throte is an open sepulchre: when our mouth is full of cursing and bitternes; when our feete are swift to shed blood; when our bodies are sinkes of sinne, wee cannot be an holie sacrifice: for the law is plaine, Leu. 22.20.23. Yee shall not offer any thing that hath a blemish, not a beast that is scabbed, not a bullocke nor a sheepe that hath a member lacking: The drunkard then, that is , without his head, (as Clemens Alexandrinus termed him) and the coward who wants an heart, and the rotten adulterer whose bodie is neither holie nor whole, is no sacrifice for the Lord.
The Latines haue deduced the word sanctum of san|cire, Vlpian. de ver|borum signifi|cat. quasi sancitum: hereby teaching vs that our sacri|fice must be constant and continuall. That by-word, A yong Saint, an old Diuell, is a wrie word; for wee must be good in our youth, better in our manhood, best of all in our old age: wee must grow from grace to grace, till wee bee of full growth in Christ; dedicating all that is within vs, all that is without vs, all that is about vs vnto the seruice of God.
Seruius expounding the words of Aeneid. 12. Virgil; Qui foede|ra numine sancit, affrmes that sanctum is sanguine conse|cratum: and so must our sacrifice be consecrated and dip|ped in Christs blood, in whom only God is well pleased: and therefore, as it followeth in the text, if holie, then acceptable.
Now that it may bee well accepted of God, Melacton. in loc. two

things are required especially:

1. That it bee grounded vpon his word.
2. That it be performed in faith.


1. Sam. 15.22. Obedience is better then sacrifice: no sacrifice then is pleasing to God, except it bee done according to his will: inuocation of Saints, adoration of the consecrated host, administration of the Sacraments vnder one kinde,

diuine seruice in an vnknowne tongue, praying to the dead, mumbling of Masses, iumbling of beades, worship|ping of Images, and other like trash; which are the very Diana of the Romis religion, haue no foundation in holie Scripture; not built vpon the rocke Christ, but vp|on the sands of humane braines, and therefore not ac|ceptable, but abominable to the Lord. A new religion is no religion: Hilarius in Psal. 1. To deuise phantasies of God, is as bad as to say there is no God.
Againe, courses of life not warranted by Gods owne booke, such as are rather Perkins Treatise of Callings. auocations from God and goodnesse, then vocations, as ordinarie cheating, bro|theldrie, coniuring, and all other vnlawfull occupations or professions are not a sweete fauour to God, but alto|gether stinking in his nostrels: If we will haue our sacri|fice acceptable they must be first holy. So diuine In Eutyphrone. Pla|to, Whatsoeuer is good and holie, that is accepted of God.
Secondly, sacrifice must be performed in faith, other|wise though it be warra~ted by Gods own word, it is not acceptable: prayer, receiuing of y^e Sacraments, hearing of the Scriptures, c. are holy sacrifices, and yet not plea|sing God, if done without faith. As our Apostle, Rom. 14.23. Whatsoeuer is not of faith, is sinne; that is, whatsoe|uer is against our Aquin.  Gloss. in loc. conscience: so when the Recusant comes to Church against his conscience, to satisfie the law of man, not to certifie his loue to God, it is not an acceptable sacrifice. If a man be a Lawyer, a Physitian, a Merchant, a Souldier, against his conscience, though his calling be neuer so good, yet his oblation is bad.
Or as Melanct.  Caluin. in loc. other expound that text more fitly; Whatsoe|uer is not done in a good assurance, that God for Christs sake will accept of it and vs, it is sinne. Christians are 1. Pet. 2.5. Priests offering spirituall sacrifices acceptable to God by Iesus Christ. Church hom. of good works, part. 1. All good works without faith in him, are like the course of an horse that runneth out of the way, which taketh great labour but to no purpose. For vnbe|leeuing

Gentiles and misbeleeuing heretikes, albeit they be neuer so wittie, neuer so vertuous, are no sweete fa|uour to the Lord.
Reasonable] We reade in the Leuit. 2.13. Law, that euery sacri|fice was seasoned with salt: now slt mystically notes dis|cretion; as Coloss. 4.6. Let your speech be gracious al|waies and powdred with salt: that is, with wisedome and sobrietie. When Paul then exhorteth vs to giue our bo|dies a reasonable sacrifice, Aquin. in loc. his meaning is, that al things must be done in order, comely, discreetly. The prouerbe is good, An ounce of discretion is worth a pound of learning: for as zeale without knowledge is blinde, quo vehementius irruit eo grauius corruit: so knowledge with|out discretion is lame, like a sword in a mad mans hand able to doe much, apt to doe nothing: Bernard. serm. 49. in Cantic. Tolle hanc,  virtus vitium erit. Hee that will fast, must fast with dis|cretion, Gorran. in loc. he must so mortifie that he do not kill his own flesh. He that giueth almes to the poore must doe it with discretion; omni petenti, non omnia petenti, quoth Lib. 1. de. serm. Dom. in Mont. Augu|stine; to euery one that doth aske, but not euery thing that he doth aske: so likewise pray with discretion, ob|seruing place and time; Matth. 6.5. place, left thou be reputed an hypocrite; time, lest accounted an heretike, like the Augustin. hae|rs. 57. Psallianists and Euchitai.
Lther. Me|lancthon. Eras|mus, c. in loc. Other expound the word reasonable as opposite to the Iewes oblations. As if Paul should speake thus: In the Law dead beasts; but in the Gospell reasonable li|uing men are to be sacrificed vnto God. Euery Christian is a sacrificer, euery layman a priest; but the pastor is a priest of priests, one that sacrificeth his people by teach|ing and exhorting them to giue vp their bodies, a quicke and holie sacrifice to the Lord. Rom. 15.16. I am (saith Paul) the mini|ster of Iesus Christ toward the Gentiles, ministring the Gos|pell of God that the offering vp of the Gentiles might be ac|ceptable, being sanctified by the holy Ghost.
Hitherto concerning the first generall branch of Saint Pauls exhortation. Now as Musitians doe not only teach

their schollers what they shall sing, but also what they shall not sing, that they may follow that which is good, and eschue that which is euill: so Paul doth not onely shew what we must doe, but also what we must not doe: Fashion not your selues like vnto this world.
World vsed in the worse sense signifieth either the wicked men of the world; or else the vaine things of the world: the wicked men, as Ioh. 12.31. the diuell is ter|med the prince of the world, that is, of the wicked in the world, who make themselues his vassals, by yeelding to his temptations, according to that of Rom. 6.16. Paul: He is our ma|ster to whom we submit our selues as seruants. It is not Sa|tans power that hee doth thus dominere in the Church: for he was Apocal. 20.2. bound and Apocal. 12.9. cast out of the Church; but it is the weaknes and wickednes of men, who loose him and open the gate when he was shut out; admitting him as a lord of misrule, ruling and ouerruling those who are chil|dren of disobedience: Ephes. 2.2.
Secondly, the word World taken in a bad and more strict sense, signifies the pomps and vanities of the world. As 1. Epist Ioh. 2.15. Loue not the world, neither the things of the world: that is, as himselfe construeth himselfe, the lust of the flesh, and pride of life.
According to both acceptions it may be well expoun|ded in this text; as if S. Paul should say, Brethren I beseech you by the tender mercies of God, that yee fashion not your selues, either according to the wicked men, or ac|cording to the vaine things of this world.

For y^e first: 2. things oc|casion fashio~ in the world:
Multitude: for as Cyprian said; Incipit esse licitu~, quod solet esset publicum. Custome is not onely another nurture, but as it were another nature. And, as the Law|yers speake: Quod est consuetum praesu|mitur esse iustum: That which is done by many, is thought at length lawfull in any.
Greatnes: for as Lib. 2. Paterculus writes; Im|perio

maximus exemplo maior: He that is highest, hath al|way most followers. Augustus, a learned Prince, filled the Empire with schollers: Tiberius, with dissemblers: Canstantine, with Christians: Iulian, with Atheists.

So that Paul vnderstanding how prone men are to follow fashions, aduiseth vs here, not to conforme our selues according to the world.
In complements of courtesies and common ciuilities, it is not amisse to follow either the most or the best.
In matter of Church orders and Ceremonies, it is August. epist. 118. cap. 5. in|solent singularitie, not to fashion our selues according to that which is inioined by the best, and vsed by the most; yea euen in the maine points of holy religion: If the great be good, and the most, best, we may follow both.
But Saint Pauls meaning is, that wee may not follow wicked men in their wickednesse, nor worldly men in their worldlinesse, nor good men but in that they are good: as hee saith elsewhere, 1. Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ: for as in imitation oratorie, there are two sorts of examples; one necessarie to be followed alwaies in all things; as Demosthenes among the Grecians, and Tully among the Latines; another to be followed in some things, and at some times, as Poets and Historiographers: Euen so there are two sorts of examples in Christian imi|tation: the one necessarie, which is Christ the way, the truth, and the life: Bernard. ser. 2. in ascens. Dom. Via in exemplo, veritas in promisso, vita in praemio: The truth in his learning, the way for his liuing; as the Basil. de spirit. sanct. cap. 8. Leo srm. 2. de resar|rect. Cyril. in loc. Fathers vsually glosse that place. The o|ther are to be followed in some things, and at some times: as Paul, Peter, Augustine, Chrysostome, Nazianzen, and other blessed Saints of God, whose liues and lines are so farre foorth to be followed, as they swarue not from our chiefe copie Christ. In sin we may not follow the good; much lesse the wicked of the world, be they neuer so ma|ny, neuer so mightie: we may not be drunken, because it is the fashion among the most; nor liue lasciuiously, be|cause commonly great ones are wantons. In this point

the scriptures are plaine and peremptory. Matth. 7.13. The gate is wide, and way broad, that leadeth to destruction, and many goe in thereat: Ergo, we must not follow the most. Iohn 7.48. Doe any of the Rulers beleeue in Christ: Ergo, we must not fa|shion our selues according to the greatest.
In the old world many were drowned, only Gen. 7. Noah and his familie saued: in Sodome many wicked beasts de|stroied, onely Gen. 19. Lot and his house deliuered: there were two malefactors hanged, one, Christ crucified; two ex|tremes, one vertue; many thornes, one lilie. Cantic. 2.2. Like a lilie among the thornes, so is my loue among the daughters.
It is said, Apoc. 20.12. that at the last day, the bookes shall be opened, and another booke which is the booke of life. Where some note, that the booke wherein Gods elect are registred, is but one; but the bookes of the re|probate are many. The number of fooles is infinite; but Gods people, which are truly wse, a Luke 12.32. little flocke. Chri|stendome is the least part of the world: they that prosesse Christ aright, are the least part of Christendome; and of this little part, many be called, but few chosen; Tit. 1.16. profes|sing they know God in their words, but denying him in their works: arrant heretikes, as one wittily, not dispu|ting against religion; but liuing contrary to religion, mar|ching vnder Christs colours, and yet fashioning them|selues according to the world.
Here some will obiect. If I fashion not my selfe like the world, I shall be plaied vpon, and made a very Iob 17.6. Tabret. I shall become the by word and song of the people.
First, according to the rules of reason, he is base that dependeth on vulgar breath.
Scaligr.Qui pendet ab errore  opinione vulgi,
Pendet magis at arbore quipendet ab alta.
Augustine, who reckoned out of Varro, De ciuit lib. 19. cap. 1. 288. diuers opinions concerning the chiefe good; Epist. 56. affirmes not|withstanding, that no man euer was so mad, as to place his happinesse in common fame, because that is but wind,

and of winde it is said in the Iohn 3.8. scripture; that no man knoweth whence it commeth, and whither it goeth. As the childes loue, so the peoples commendation is gotten, and forgotten in an houre. Erasmus epist. praefix tom. 4. oper. Hieron. Socrates in Plato suspected euer|more that to be bad, which the vulgar extolled for good. And Plinie gaue this rule in the schoole; That hee decla|med worst, who was applauded most.
Secondly, it is an axiome in the Iames 4.4. Bible, that amity with the world, is enmitie with God. Galat. 1.10. Hee that is a parasite to men, is not the seruant of Christ. It is an vnhappy thing to co~uerse with vngodly wretches in the tents Psal. 120.4. of Kedar; Iob 30.29. to be brother vnto the Dragons, and companions to the Ostriches. Yet Noah must not follow the fashions of the old world: Lot must not follow the fashions of So|dome: Iob must not follow the fashions of Vz: we must not follow the fashio~s of our corrupt age; but, as Philip. 2.15. Paul ex|horteth, in the midst of a crooked and naughty genera|tion, wee must be pure and blamelesse, shining euen as lights in the world, striuing euermore to walk in the nar|row path, and enter in at the strait gate.
Againe, we may not conforme our selues according to the greatest: Ego  rexmeus, is no good plea, when God shall reckon with vs at the last and dreadfull day. Some men are so much at other mens seruice, that they neglect altogether Gods seruice. That thou didst follow such a Lord, and humor such a Gentleman; that there were bet|ter men in the company, when thou diddest this villanie; that vanity will not goe for a currant excuse: when Al|mighty God shall come to iudgement, then scepters and sepulchers shall be all one; Princes and pesants shall bee fellowes.
As in Chesse play, so long as the game is in playing, all the men stand in their order, and are respected according to their place: first, the king; then, the queene; then, the bishops; after them, the knights; and last of all, the com|mon souldier: but when once the game is ended, and the table taken away, then all are confusedly tumbled into a

bag, and happily the king is lowest, and the pawne vp|most. Euen so it is with vs in this life; e world is a huge theater or stage, wherein some play the parts of Kings; other, of Bishops; some, Lords; many, Knights; other, Yeomen: but when our Lord shall come with his Angels to iudge the world, all are alike. For if great men and meane persons are in the same sinne, they shall be bound together, and cast as a fagot into hell fire. And therefore let vs not fashion our selues according to the wicked, whether Prince or people.
Secondly, we must not fashion our selues according to the vanities of the world, and that for two causes espe|ciallie.
1. Because they be transitory: where note the worlds mortality.
2. Because they be not satisfactory: where note the soules immortality.
For the first, all the things of this world are of such a fashion, as that either they will leaue vs, or else we must leaue them. They leaue vs; All riches haue their Prou. 23.5. wings, and make their flight like an Eagle. We leaue them; As the Ier. 17.11. Partridge gathereth the young, which she hath not brought forth: so he that getteth riches, and not by right, shall leaue them in the midst of his daies, and at his end shall bee a foole.
The Partridge, as Ambrose writes in his 48. Epistle, maketh a nest of egges, which she laied not; but so soone as the birds are hatched, the true mother cals them all away from the stepmother. So it is, saith Ieremy, with the couetous man, incubat auro, like a brood goose, or as an hen that sits; incubo (for so the Latines terme him) hee keepes his nest, and sits as it were brooding, but when his chickens are hatched, he heares a voice from heauen; O foole, this night will they fetch away thy soule from thee: and then, whose shall these things be which thou hast prouided? Indeed many men reputed him wise while he liued; but at his end, when by the finger of God, wee see that his

goods are otherwise disposed, either excheated to the King, or restored to the true masters; or else by some small error in his will, caried away by those whom he neuer lo|ued: at his end, when euery Partridge shall call his young, then those that are wise, shall account him a very foole: Psal. 52.8. Lo this is the man that tooke not God for his strength, but trusted in the multitude of his vncertaine riches, and streng|thened himselfe in his wickednesse. And therefore loue not the world, neither the things of the world; for the world passeth away, and the lust thereof, being onely certaine, in being vncertaine.
Secondly, things of this world are not satisfactory, they doe not fill and content the mind of man. Eccles. 1.8. The eye cannot be satisfied with seeing, nor the eare filled with hearing: all things haue an emptinesse and extreme va|nity, purchasing vnto the possessors nothing but anguish and vexation of spirit: and the reason hereof, as Ludoicus vi|uadus de veri|tate contritio|nis, fol. 87. Vialdus obserues, is, because the heart of man is made like a tri|angle, and the world round as a circle. Now a circle can|not fill a triangle, but there will be some corner empty.
There is nothing can fill the mind of man, but the bles|sed Trinitie, when God the Father, the most ancient of daies, shall fill our memory; God the Sonne, who is wis|dome it selfe, shall fill our vnderstanding; God the holy Ghost, who is contentation and loue, shall sit in our will; then all the powers of our mind will be at rest, when as they shall inioy him who made them. But the things of this world afford no perfect and absolute contentment; and therefore, ne vos configurate seculo isto, fit not your selues according to the worlds figure, which is a circle; but be ye renewed in your mind, which is a triangle, re|presenting the sacred Trinitie.
Take a view with the Wise man of all worldly things: in briefe, doth any pleasure satisfie? No: pleasure is like lightning: Plutarco. Simul oritur  moritur; it is sweet but short; like hawking, much cost and care for a little sport.
The prodigall child wasted both goods and body, yet

could not haue enough, at the lest not enough Luke 15.16. hogs meat.
Horace. Virgo formosa supern
Desinit in turpem piscem malesuada voluptas.
Doth learning, that incomparable treasure of the mind, satisfie? No: The more a man knoweth, the more hee knoweth that hee doth not know: so that as Eccles. 1.18. Sa|lomon said; Hee that increaseth knowledge, doth increase sorrow.
Doth honour content a man? No: The poore labou|rer would be written Yeoman; the Yeoman after a few deare yeeres is a Gentleman; the Gentleman must bee Knight; the Knight, a Lord; the Baron, an Earle; the Count, a Duke; the Duke, a King; the King would Cae|sar bee; and what then, is the worlds Emperour con|tent? No.
Iuuenal. Vnus Pellaeo iuueni non sufficit orbis,
Aestuat infoelix angusto limine munde.
One world is not enough for Alexander, and there|fore he weepes, and is Valerius Max. li. 8. c. 15. discontent: as if hee wanted el|bow roome.
In the state Ecclesiasticall, the begging Frier would be Prior; the Prior, an Abbat; the Lord Abbat, a Bishop; the Bishop, an Archbishop; the Metropolitane, a Cardi|nall; the Cardinall, Pope; the Pope, a God: nay, that is not enough, aboue all that is called God: 2. Thes. 2.4. This made Lib. . de con|siderat. Bernard wonder, O ambitio ambientium crux: how dost thou paine, yet pleasure all men!
Doe riches content? No: the more men haue, the more men craue: and that which is worst of all, they are the greatest beggers, when they haue most of all. Eccles 5.9. He that lo|ueth siluer, shall not bee satisfied with siluer. As the poore man crieth out, Quid faciam quia non habeo? so Theophylact. in 12. Luc. the coue|tous wretch as fast complaineth, Quid faciam quia habeo? Luke 12.17.
Those drinks are best that soonest extinguish thirst; and those meates, which in least quantity doe longest

resist hunger: but here the more a man doth drinke, the more thirstie; so strange in some is this thirst, that it ma|keth them dig the pits, and painfully draw the water, and after, wil not suffer them to drinke. This, saith Eccls. 6.2. Salomon, is an euill sicknesse, and a great vanity, when a man shall haue riches, and treasure, and honour, nd want power and grace to ioy in them.
Thus you see, the world is like a butterflie with pain|ted wings; vel sequend labmur, vel assequendo laedimur: either we faile in pursuing it, or else whe~ we haue caught it, it is so vaine, that it giueth no contentment. Aug. de doct. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 38. Herein is the true difference betweene earthly things  heauen|ly things: the one are desired much, but being obtained, they content little: the other are desired little, but once gained, satisfie much: and therefore, Lay not vp treasure vpon earth, where the moth and canker corrupt, and where theeues dig thorow  steale: for these things are neithe Bernard. ve|ra, nor vestra; but lay vp treasure for your selues in hea|uen. If ye will not heare the words of Scripture, behold the works of nature: mans heart is broad aboue, narrow beneath; open at the top, close below: to signifie, that we should inlarge and spread our affections toward heauen and heauenly things, and draw them to as narrow a point as possibly we can, concerning earth and earthly things; and so by the fashion of our heart, we may learne not to follow the fashion of the world.
Be ye changed by the renewing of your mind] We are for|med by God, deformed by Satan, transformed by grace:

1. Sacramentally, by baptisme.
2. Morally, by newnesse of life; which our Apostle meanes in this place. That which followes in the text, is expounded Epist. for the next Sunday.





The Gospel. LVKE 2.42.
The father and mother of Iesus went to Hierusalem af|ter the custome of the feast day, c.

THis Gospell is a Iansen. Con|cord. cap. 12. direction how parents ought to carrie themselues toward their children, and how children also should demeane thmselues toward their parents: the one, by the practise of Ioseph and Mary: the other, by the paterne of our Sauiour Christ.

Parents care touching their children concernes their

Soule.
Bodie.


Their soule: that they bee brought vp in Ephes. 6.4. instruction and information of the Lord; Hemingius po|stil. Dom. 1. post Epiphan. that is, in godlinesse and ci|uilitie: by the one they shall keepe a good conscience before God: by the other they shall obtaine a good re|port among men: the which two, conscience and credit, must chiefly be sought after in this life.
For the bodie: Parents ought to 1. Tim. 5.8. prouide competent sustenance and maintenance; guarding their persons, and regarding their estates: all which is performed here by Ioseph and Mary toward Christ.
First, for the soules institution; they did instruct him by precept and example: precept, bringing him to the Temple, that he might be taught; and that not only this once, but often, as often as law did require. So Hist. Euang. lib. 1. vt Maldo|nat. in loc. Iuuencus expressely:
Ad Templum laetis puerum perducere festis,
Omnibus annorum vicibus de more solebant.
This should Culman. con. 1. Zepperus con. 2. in loc. teach al parents, how to teach their chil|dren; especially, that they send them vnto the publike Catechising in the Church, and that according to Can. 59. Ca|non and custome: for the common Catechisme, which Authoritie commands, is fit and full, as containing all the

vertues necessarie to saluation, and the meanes whereby those vertues are receiued and conserued.

The principal vertues of a Christian, are

Faith.
Hope.
Charitie.


The Creede is necessarie for faith; as teaching vs what wee haue to beleeue. The Pater noster is necessarie for hope; teaching vs what we are to desire. The ten Com|mandements are necessary for charitie, teaching vs what we haue to do. The Sacraments are instruments of grace, by which those vertues are conueied vnto vs, and conti|nued in vs. As to build an house, it is requisite, first to place the foundation, then to raise the walles, and last of al to couer it with the roofe: so saith Vti Bellarm. praefat. Tom. 1. controues. Augustine, to make in our soules the building of eternall saluation, we neede the foundation of faith, the walles of hope, the roofe of charitie. The tooles as it were wherewith all these bee wrought, are the sacred Word and blessed Sacraments; our Catechisme then in briefe, comprehending all these matters and all these meanes; and standing vpon the same legges especially, with the Cat. Caluin. vsed in the French and Scotish Chur|ches. Geneuian and Bellarm Cat. written in Ita|lian englished by R. Haddock. Ro|mane Catechisme cannot be distasted either of Accusant or Rcusant out of deuotion and pietie, but out of sac|tion and malice: well, or rather ill, each may say with the Martial. l. 1. Epigram. 33. Poet:
Non amo te Sabidi, nec possum dicere quaere:
Hoc tantm possum dicere, non amo te.
The father and mother] Ioseph was not the naturall fa|ther of Christ, but father

In

Opinion: Luk. 3.23. Iesus, as men supposed, was the sone of Ioseph.
Theophylact. in loc. Care: being his nurcing father appointed of God: for nurces are called mothers, and patrons fa|thers.
Law: Augustin. de consnsu Euan|gelist. lib. 2. c. 1. being husband to Mary, and nigh of kin to Christ.


But Mary was the mother of Christ; not only in opi|nion

and care, but in truth and in deed. Mater  mat|ria, the very matter of Christs bodie was of the Virgin Mary: Galat. 4.4. God sent his sone made of a woman: Se Epist. Sunday after Christmas.
Secondly, these parents instruct their child by their owne example; for they doe not send, but bring him vp to Hierusalem, after the custome of the feast day. The which is the shortest cut of teaching: Longum iter per praecepta, breue per exempla: The parents Hicro. pist. ad Laeam. tom. 1. sol. 57. good life pre|uailes more with his childe, then a good lesson.

Their deuotion is seene, in

Going vp to Hierusalem, after the custome of the feast.
Tarying there, fulfilling the daies.


S. Paul exhorts vs to pray at all 1. Thess. 5.17. times, and in all 1. Tim. 2.8. pla|ces: for the whole world is Gods vniuersal, and as it were Cathedrall Church; and euery particular Christian is as it were his priuate Chapell, and Temple; Daniel praied in the Lions dene, Ionas in the Whales bellie, Iob on the dunghill, and the theese on the crosse; yet the Lord heard their prayers, and granted their requests. It is lawful then in priuate to pray when and where we shall iudge most meete: but God for his publike worship hath in all ages assigned certaine times, and certaine places. The most speciall time is his Sabbath, and the most speciall place the Temple: so wee finde precept and practise. Precept, Esay 56.7. My house shall be called the house of praier; the which is repeated by Christ in three Euagelists.
Practise: The Publican and the Pharisie went vp into the Temple to pray, Luk. 18. Anna prayed in the Temple, Luk. 2. Peter and Iohn went vp into the Temple at the houre of prayer, Act. 3. Christ himselfe daily teaching in the Temple, Luk. 19.
After Christ, by reason of the great persecution, the Christians assembld not in the fittest, but in the safest places: in processe of time they did erect Oratories; not

in any sumptuous or stately manner, Hooker. lib. 5. sct. 11. which neither was possible by reason of the Churches pouerty, nor plausible in regard of the worlds enuie: but at length when Al|mightie God stirred vp religios Kings and Queenes, as Esay 49.23. nursing fathers and nursing mothers of the Church, that which the Christians before either could not, or durst not doe, was with all alacritie performed; in all places Tem|ples were built; no cost spared, nothing too deare which that way should be spent: sacrilegious wretches are not now more desirous to pull downe, then those deuout professors were to set vp Churches.
Now one chiefe cause why God in all ages would be serued in publke Temples, is, that his Church might be distinguished from the Conuenticles of Heretikes and Schismatikes, that all of vs acknowledge one God, and one Christ, so all of vs might haue Ephes. 4.5. one faith, and one baptisme, an vniformitie in doctrine, and a conformitie in outward ceremonies, for the better deliuering of this doctrine.
The parents of Christ did therefore well in Melanct po|stil. in loc. ioyning themselues vnto the congregation, and obseruing the publike ceremonies of the Church. At that time the tem|ple was made a denne of theeues; and yet Ioseph and Mary ioyne with the Church in the publike worship of God: Clun.  Marlra. in loc. Beauxamis harm. Tom. 1. fol. 76. whose example doth exceedingly crosse the pra|ctise of Brownists, and all other Recusants, who refuse to communicate with vs in our Temples; because some things, as they pretend, are amisse. Ioseph and Mary took part with Gods Priests and people in that which was good, and as for the rest they did not meddle further then their place required. They went this long iourney to satisfie the law; as also by their good example to stirre vp other, to reuerence the publike ceremonies and mi|nistrie.
By the Law, men only were bound to keep the general solemne feasts, as wee reade, Exod. 23. and Deut. 16.16. Three times in the yeere shall all the males appare before

the Lord thy God in the place where he shall chuse: so that Mary went not vp to Hierusalem as compelled by law, but only carried with pure deuotion to God, and vnfai|ned loue to her husband and childe.
Here then is a notable relique for women to behold; Mary free by the letter of the law, by th custome of the countrey, dwelling at Nazareth, a great way from Hie|rusalem, did notwithstanding euery yeere goe with her husband vnto the feast of the Passeouer. In our time ma|ny women vnlike this good Ladie, will be content uen on the Lords day, to toyle at home about their own bu|sinesse, and gad abroad to meddle with others businesse, rather then thy will accompanie their good husband Ioseph, and their towardly sonne Iesus vnto Gods house.
And when they had fulfilled the daies] That is, whole Exd. 23.15. seuen daies, according to the custome. They came with the first, and went home with the last. Worldly men for their honour, will ride post to the Court, to be knighted with the first; for their profit at mill and market first; for their pleasure at the play first; at hunting first; first at any mrrie meeting: but as for the Church, they thinke they come too soone, and stay too long: winter daies are too short for hunting, sommer daies too short for haw|king; yet one houre of seuen daies is thought long that is spent in Gods holy worship: as Antn. Gueu|ra. pist. one wittily; Long Samons, and short sermons please best: and yet if we looke not with the spectacles of the world, but with the eyes of faith discerning all things aright, we shall finde that there is no such honour, as to be Gods seruant, no such gaine as godlinesse, no such pleasure as a good con|science.
The congregation vnder the Law, was not dismissed without the Priests Num. 6.23. benediction and Zepperus co. 1. in loc. valediction; the which custome is reteined in the Christian Church, that no man depart out of the Temple, before the diuine prayers and sermon end: so the Canon. 24.  Concil. Agathen. cap. 47. 4. Councel of Carthage decreed, exco~municating all such as offend in this kind.
Thus you see Christ was instructed by good lessons and life: so that if Iesus had not been Iesus, to be saued, and not a Sauiour; hee might haue said of his mother Mr, which Conss. lib. 5. cap. 9. Augustine writes of his mother Moni|ca: Mori sollcitudie me parturiebat spiritu, qum car|ne pepererat; Idem. cess. l 9. cap. 8. parturiit carne, vt in hanc tempralem nas|cerer; corde vt in aeternam lucem rnascerer.
Now for his bodie; when he was missing, Ioseph and Mary sought him instantly with all diligence till he was found: Behold thy father and I haue sought thee wee|ping. Where literally note Maries humble carriage to|ward her husband Ioseph, and the care of them both ouer Christ their childe. The dutifull respect of Mar toward Ioseph is obserued Ex Augustino Maldonat. in loc.  Iansen. concord. cap. 12. ex ordine verborum; in that she saith, thy father and I, not, I and thy father; as Cardinall Wol|sees stile, Ego  rex meus, I and my king, is insupportable in the Politkes; so I and my husband insufferable in the Oeconomicks. It was Ester 1.20. Assuerus his edict, and it is Gods law that all women both great and small shall giue their husbands honour, and that euery man shall bere rule in his owne house: for the man is the wiues Ehes. 5.23. head, and the wife is her husbands subiect: Subdita eris sub potestate viri: Thou shalt b subiect to thine husband, and he shall rule ouer thee, Gn. 3.16. So that a woman murthering her husband, is accounted by the L. 1. D. ad le|gm Pmpeiam de paricidijs. Ciuill lawes a parricide, by the Raal. collct. stat. . rason. statutes of our land a traitor.
The next remarkable point is the ioynt care of them both ouer Iesus: Thy father and I haue sought thee weeping. As Paul said to 1. Tim. 6.20. Timothie so we to euery father, sera de|posium, keepe that which is committed to thee. Haue a tender eye ouer thy childe, which is a pledge of Gods goodnesse, and that happily which may moue thee more, flesh of thy flesh, and bone of thy bone; not only a liue|ly picture, but a liuing and walking image of thy selfe. Barren Sra was so glad of a childe, that she called her onely sonne, Gen. 21.3. Isack, that is, laughter. How wicked then is that parent, who neglecteth his owne flesh, his

owne childe, which is a token from heauen, and or|dinarilie the best monument of himselfe after death on earth?
As this example concernes the naturall father, so like|wise the ciuill and ecclesiasticall: for, incuria praepoiti, in|iuria deposit; Hieron. epist. ad Furiam. tom. 1. fol. 80. detrimentum pecoris, ignominia pasto|ris, c. Pastor and Prince must ske the good of such as are vnder them, as Ioseph and Mary did Christ, with carefull hearts, c. In a Iacob. de Vo|rag. ser. 3. Dom. inra octa. Epiphan. mysticall sense these words insinuate, when, where, and how Christ is to be found of vs.

1. When? On the third day.
2. Where? In the Temple.
3. How:

Socialiter; in vnitie; thy father and I.
Desidrabiliter; with an earnest desire to finde.
Lachrymbiliter; with teares; haue sought thee sorrowing.


First, Christ is to be found on the third day: vers 46. It came to passe three daies after, that they found him in the Temple. The first day was the time before the law, in which, as Luke 10.24. Christ told his Apostles, all the Patriarks and holy fathers desired to see the things which they saw, and could not see them; and to heare the things which they heard, and could not heare them.
The second day was the time vnder the law, when also the Priests and Prophets expected Christ, but they could not finde him: therefore the Prophet Esay crieth out in his 64. Chapter, Oh that thou wouldest breke the heauens and come downe.
The third day is the present time; thi acceptable time of grace; wherein Christ is to be found: Iohn 4.23. hora est nnc; The houre is now. Therefore to day, while it is to day, seke the Lord euen while he may be found; call vpon him while he is neer; for the next day, which is the fourth day, is the time after death, and Psal. 6.5. then he cannot be found or sought.
Ioseph and Mary could not finde Christ among their kinsfolke, c. Iansen. vbi supr. Non humana cognatione, nec cognitione com|prehenditur: He that wil finde Christ, must forsake friends, Psal. 45.11. forget his owne people, and his fathers house. They found him in Ierusalem, Beauxamis har. tom. 1. fl. 77. that is, in the Church among the faithfull: not among barbarous Heathens, or blasphe|mous heretikes; his dwelling is at Sion, there you may finde him among the Doctors in the Temple: Thom. in loc. ex Origen. not in the market, not in the tauerne, but in the Temple; Melanct. po|stil. in loc.  Church Hm. concerning the right vse of the Church. part. 1. for hee is to be found in his word, in his sacraments, a|mong the Doctors and Preachers. If this lesson often taught, were once learned, it would make you to fre|quent Gods house more diligently, thirst after his word more greedily, respect Christs ambassadours more re|uerently.
The third point to be considered is, how Christ is to be found: Socialiter, in vnitie, pater tuus  ego. God is loue, and his followers are the children of peace, and his Ministers the messengers of peace, his doctrine the do|ctrine of peace: and therefore if we wil finde him, we must follow the truth Ephes 4.15. in loue.
God said to the serpent; Gen. 3.15 I will put enmitie between thee and the woman, and betweene thy seed and her seed. But if wee seeke Christ in contention, all the feud is among our selues, and not betweene Satan and vs. Nyssen. epist. ad Eustat. pe Casaubonum public. Odium in nos ipsos conuertimus: all our fight is against our friends, and not against our foes.
Againe, we must seeke Christ earnestly: Quaerebamus te  nihil extrate; Iesus for Iesus: and lastly, we must seeke Christ, lachrymabilitr, sorrowing.
Now Mary did feare for three causes, as Interpreters obserue:

1. Thm. in lc. Lest Christ should leaue her, and ascend to his fa|ther in heauen.
2. Gloss. Lest he should fall into the hands of persecutors.
3. Iacob de V|rag. vbi supra. Lest he should forsake the Iewes, and goe to some other nation.



So we must seek Christ with three sorts of teares: of

Deuotion; lest he withdraw his gracious countenance fro~ vs.
Contrition; when he doth ab|sent himselfe for a time.
Compassion, when any mem|ber of his is afflicted and per|secuted.


And he went downe with them, and came to Nazareth, and was obedient to them] As the former part of this Gos|pell is a paterne for parents, how they should instruct their children; so this latter is a glasse for children, how they should obey their parents; Omnis enim actio Christi, instructio Christiani: For euery line of Christ is a copie for a Christian. In that therefore the Lord of all, submitted himselfe to the gouernment of his supposed father, and vnderling mother; as Epist. de vi|tando susect. contubern. Tom. 1. fol. 224. Hierome notably; Venerabatur ma|trem, cuius ipse erat pater; colebat nutritium, quem nutriue|rat, and that for the space of thirty yeeres, executing fi|lial and oeconomicall duties in their house; what doth he but teach obedience to superiours? especially that chil|dren should honour father and mother, albeit they be neuer so meane; for this subiection is a Non infumi|tatis sed piet a|tis. Ambros. in Luc. lib. 2. cap. 2. vertue, not a weaknesse.
If parents inioine things vnlawfull, and contrary to scripture, then, as expositours vpon this text commonly note, we must prefer our father in heauen, before our fa|thers on earth; and say with Christ, How happened it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must goe about Gods businesse? Otherwise we must not offend them so much as with Vultu saep lae|ditur pietas. Cicero. pro Sext. Ros. orat. 2. a very looke. See decalog. com. 5.
The dutifull child shall Zepperus con. 2. in loc. prosper as Christ, in fauour with God and men: but gracelesse Gen. 9.25. Cham shall be cursed; rebellious 2. Sam. 18. Absolon, disobedient 1. Sam. 4. Phinehas and Hophni shall not liue out halfe their daies. It was Det. 21.21. Gods law, that the stubborne child should be stoned to death open|ly, that all might heare and feare. By the Rasal. col. stat. tit. treason. common lawes, he that murthers his parent, is reputed a petty trai|tor

By the Lege penult. Dad legem Pompeiam de parricidijs. Ciuill lawes in old time, an offender in that kind, was sowed in a sacke, with a dog, a cocke, a viper, and an ape, and so cast into some deepe water, as vnwor|thy to reap the benefit of any element. For so Vbi supr. Tully doth excellently glosse that law. V qui eum necsset, vnde ipse natus esset, careret ijs rebus omnibus, ex quibus omnia nata esse dicuntur. Etenim quid est tam commune, qum spiritus viuis? terra mortuis? mare fluctuantibus? littus eictis? Ita viuun, dum possunt, vt ducere animam de coelo non pos|sint: ita moriuntur, vt eorum ossa terra non tangat: ita ia|ctantur fluctibi, vt nunqum abluantur: ita postrem eijci|untur, vt ne ad saxa quidem mortui conquiescant.
It is Erasmus an|not. in Mat. 13.5.  Zpperus con. 1. in loc. probable, that Christ submitting himselfe to Io|seph, vsed his occupation: but what it was, I cannot shew: you need not know. Saint Hilary thinks he was a Smith; Hugo, that he was a Mason: most Diuines, that he was a Carpenter. So In dialog. cum Tryphon. Iustin Martyr, and other ancient Doctors haue gathered out of Matth. 13.55. Marke 6.3. See Six. Sinen. bibliothc. lib. 6, annot. 62. Baron. nnal. tom. 1. an. 12. Iansen. concord. cap. 54. Maldonat.  Rhemisan Matth. 13.55.
Now then in that Christ exercised a mechanical trade, we may Zpper. vbi supra. learne that a poore man may serue God, and of|ten doe much good in an honest occupation: the text saith; Iesus prospered in wisdome, and in fauour with God and men. He was a lambe, and therefore the bigger the bet|ter: but the wicked are Mat. 25.33. goates, and Diez con. 4. Dem. 1. post. piphan. therefore the lon|ger they liue, the worse they are.
Mary kept all these sayings together in her heart] It was well she laid them vp; better that she kept them; best of all that she kept them all. Let vs also lay these things vp in our secret treasury, that being inwardly grafted in our hearts, they may bring forth in vs the fruit of good liuing.
This Gospell is well fitted to the day: for after the ce|lebration of Christs birth, circumcision, Epiphanie; what should follow but his first manifestation in the Temple,

and then on the next dominical, his first miracle wrought in Cana of Galile.
The Gospell and Epistle concord: Ferus, ser. 1.  6. Dom. 1. post. Epiphan. for what Christ doth in the one, is a paterne of that Paul saith in the o|ther. Paul doth require; first, that we should offer our selues a quicke sacrifice to God; and then, according to the measure of grace, that we should become seruiceable to men, eue|rie one among our selues one anothers members: euen so Christ here, did first dedicate himselfe to God, in cele|brating the Passeouer, in hearing the Doctors, in dispu|ting about religion, in neglecting his acquaintance, to doe the businesse of his Father in heauen: and then hee went with his parents, and came to Nazareth, and was obedient to them.
Or (as Postil. cum glossis  fiuris Epst. Dom. in|fra octa. Epi|phn. other obserue) the Gospell and Epistle both in|sinuate, that two things are requisite to saluation, humili|tas mentis, munditia carnis.
For the first, Pauls precept is, that no man stand high in his own conceit, but so iudge of himselfe, that he be gen|tle and sober, as a member helping other. And Christs pa|terne is; he became subiect to Ioseph and Mary, though he was Lord of all.
For the second, Pauls precept is; Offer your bodies a quicke sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God. And Christs paterne is; hee did the businesse of God in the Temple, neglecting the pleasures of the flesh among his friends and acquaintance. Sweet Iesus indow vs plentifully with thy grace, that we may thus preach and practise; that fol|lowing thee, who art the way, wee may come to thee which art the life. Amen.




The Epistle. ROM. 12.6.
Seeing that we haue diuers gifts according to the grace that is giuen vnto vs, c.

Postil. maior. dom. 2. ab Epi|pan. LVther is of opinion, that this Epistle should be ca|pite breuior,  sine prolixior; shorter in the begin|ning, longer at the end. For the beginning appertaines vnto the conclusion of the Epistle for Sunday before; and the end to be the beginning of the Epistle for Sun|day following: yet so, that it may be both read and ex|pounded, as a text absolute in it selfe. The summe where|of is, that wee must imploy and improue the manifold gifts of God vnto the glory of his name, and good of his people.
This exhortation is inferred vpon a familiar compari|son vsed in the words immediatly before: for as we haue many members in one body, and all members haue not one of|fice; so we being many, are one body in Christ, and euery man among our selues, one anothers members. In which, obserue foure instructions.
First, as the members are not made by their owne ver|tue, but created by Gods almighty power, before they could execute any function in the body; not members because working, but on the contrary, working because members: In like sort, Christians are not members of Christ through their owne good works, but they doe good works because they be members, and inserted in|to Christ: as the tree brings forth the fruit, and not the fruit the tree. The Papists then in their works of congrui|tie, run too much vpon the figure called ; set|ting the cart before the horse; merit before mercy. Potes  te de ficere (saith In Psal. 94. Augustine) sed teipsum reficere non potes; ille reficit, qui te fecit.
Secondly, the members are well Zancbius in Ephes. 4.16. content with their

seuerall offices and place; the foote is not grieued at the heads supremacie, neither doth the nose maligne the eye, nor eye couet to be tongue, but euery one performes his function without any faction: euen so we which are members of Christs mysticall body, must be content with our vocation and calling, 1. Cor. 7.20. neither enuying such as are a|boue, nor despising such are vnder vs. 1. Cor. 12.4. Although there be diuersities of gifts, yet but one spirit: diuersities of administra|tions, yet but one Lord: diuersities of operations, yet but one God, who worketh all in all.
Are all Apostles? are all teachers? are all workers of miracles? haue all the gift of healing? doe all speake with tongues? doe all interpret? It is God who worketh all in all; communicating indifferently spirituall life to all his members; insomuch as the least is a member of his bo|die so well as the greatest. In this respect all parts are peeres.
Albeit (I say) there be diuers gifts, and diuers measures of gifts, and so by consequence for fashion, and function an imparity; yet because they be Sarcerius in loc. donatiues, grants, and graces, as it is said here, the mighty may not scorne the meane, nor the meane enuie the mighty: no part must be prt. 1. or. 4.7. For hat hast thou that thou hast not receiued? He that appointed thee mouth or eye, might haue made thee foote or hand. Againe, no member ought to mutter a|gainst head or fellow; for the mysticall body of Christ is all fare: Cant. 4.7. Tota pulchra es amica mea: now beauty consists in variety of colours, and in a concinne disposition of sundry different parts. 1. Cor. 12.17. If all the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where were the smelling? But God hath in a most sweete order, disposed the members euery one of them in the body: first, Apostles; secondly, Prophets; thirdly, Teachers; then, workers of miracles; after that, the gifts of healing; helpers, gouernours, diuersities of tongues.
Hee then that affects in the Church an hotchpotch paritie, martyrs and marres Christs body, which is,

, c. a body fitly knit together by euery ioynt: Ephesians 4.16.
Thirdly, there is a sympathie betweene the members of the naturall bodie; 1. Cor. 12.26. for if one suffer, all suffer with it; if one member be had in honour, all the members reioyce with it. So Paul in this scripture: Be merie with them that be me|rie; weepe with them that weepe. Paine is often lessened by pitie; passion is relieued in one by compassion of many. Augustin. epist. 133. Minus fit quod patitur vnum membrum, si compatiantur alia membra: nec ipsa mali releuatio fit per communionem cladis, sed per solatium charitatis, vt quamuis alij ferendo patiuntur, alij cognoscendo compatiuntur: Communis fit ta|men tribulatio, quibus probatio, spes, dilectio, spiritus com|munis est. He that hath not this fellow feeling, may sus|pect worthily that hee is not a liuely member of Christ; for his bodie is coupled, and knit together throughout euery ioynt, wherewith one ministreth to another. If then we doe not Galat. 6.2 beare one anothers burthen, and feele one another miserie, wee are not knit together by the sinewes of loue; and if not knit to the bodie, no part of the bodie.
Fourthly, there is no dead or idle member in the body, but euery one helpes another, and is seruiceable for the good of the whole: the eye doth direct the head, and the hand guard the eye; the nose smels for all, tongue speaks for all, hand workes for all. 1. Cor. 12.21.25. The eye cannot say to the hand, I haue no need of thee; nor the hand againe to the feet, I haue no need of you: but euery part seekes anothers and not his owne good.
In like sort, the wise Counseller must see for all; the tall Souldiers fight for all; the iudicious Clerke write for all: as Trittenem. de Scriptor. in vitam Ockam. Occam said vnto the Emperour Lewis; If you will defend me with your sword, I will defend you with my pen. See|ing wee haue diuers gifts, according to the grace giuen vnto vs; if a man haue the gift of prophecie, let him haue it, c.


The duties here men|tioned are, Luther. in loc. partly

Publike; If a man haue the gift of prophecie, c.
Priuate; If a man shew mercie, let him do it with cheerfulnes.



The pub|like co~cerne things

Spiritual, for

Doctrine

Theoricall; as prophecying and teaching.
Practicall; as ex|hortation.

Discipline; let hm that ru|leth doe it with diligence.

Temporall; if any man giue, let him doe it with singlenes.


If any man haue the gift of prophecie, let him haue it agreeing to the faith] A Prophet in old time foretold things to come: but vnder the Gospell a Aquin. in loc. Prophet is hee that interprets the Prophets; he that shewes Christ is come, spoken of by y^e mouth of al his holy Prophets euer since the world began. A Preacher is a Prophet, as the word is vsed: 1. Cor. 14.1. and 1. Cor. 13. we know in part, we prophecie in part. A Preacher then must teach agree|ing to the faith; Luther.  Cal|uin. in loc. that is, according to the Scripture, which is a rule of faith: or according to the D. Fulke in loc. Creede, which is an abridgement of that rule; for 1. Cor. 3.11. other foun|dation can no man lay, then that which is laide, Christ Iesus.
He that will edifie Gods house must build vpon Christ, and square al his doctrines according to the rule of truth. 1. Pet. 4.11. If any man speake, let him talke as the words of God. It is not said here that a Prophet ought to vse no booke but the Bible; no Commentarie but the Creede; for that is too spirituall (as Praefa. in ex|posit. N. Testa|ment. Mrlorate notes.) He that will preach agreeing to the Scripture, must reade the best exposi|tors of the Scripture: for, as De domo in|terior. cap. . Bernard said, all bookes are written for the bettering of the conscience, which

is the booke of the soule: so wee must examine all bookes, especially treatises of Diuinitie, for the better vnderstanding of this one booke, which is  the Booke.
Neither is it said here, that the Prophet in the pulpit must speake nothing beside plaine text, but only that hee must exercise his gift according to faiths analogie,  teaching the wholesome words of Christ; and 1. Tim. 6.3. consenting to the doctrine which is agreeable to god|linesse: for whatsoeuer is deduced out of Gods booke by necessarie consequence, must be receiued as his word; let him that hath the gift of prophecie, haue it agreeing to the faith.
Or as Aquinas in loc. other interpret; to beget and confirme faith in vs euermore. For, if a Prophet rise among you, saying, Let vs goe after other gods and serue them, c. thou shalt not hearken vnto the words of the Prophet, Deut. 13.1. The true Prophet is he, Cuius in ore vrbum vitae, cuis in more vita verbi.
Or, as In loc. Melanct. and D. Fulk. in loc. most of the most ancient fathers, according to the proportion of faith and grace giuen. As if hee should say, Whosoeuer is called by the Church law|fully, to preach the Word, let him abide therein accor|ding to the measure of his gift: for God hath giuen to some more, to some lesse, and often blesseth him that hath lesse, more then him that hath more. Let euery man ther|fore exercise his talent with faith and diligence, to the best edification of Gods people comitted to his charge: so likewise, let him that hath an office aite on his office; let him that teacheth, take heed to his doctrine; let him that exhorteth, giue attendance to his exhortation, according to the proportion of grace. Let not any suffer his Matth. 25.18. talents to rust, but imploy them and so multiplie them vnto the Donors glorie; Ephes. 4.11. who gaue some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Euangelists, and some Pastors and Tea|chers for the gathering together of the Saints, for the worke of the ministerie, and for the edificatio~ of the bodie of Christ.
If any gi, lt him doe it with singlenes] With an Gorran. in loc. vp|right intention, not to bee seene of men, Aquin. in loc. or to gaine much by giuing a little; for that is not simplicitie, but duplicitie.
Or because Paul speakes of Deacons, publike guar|dians of the poore, such as wee call Almoners and ouer|seers; Martyr in loc. he would not haue them deale subtilly for their own benefit, but simply for the common good, distribu|ting the Churches beneuolence committed vnto their charge, without respect of persos, according to the se|uerall necessities of the Saints.
Let him that ruleth, doe it wi diligence] The slothfull and idle person is the diuels shop there he workes, euer busie when men are lasie. Wherefre Eccles. 9.10. doe that which is in thine hand with all thy power; especially, take heed that thou doe not the worke of the Ierem. 48.10. Lord negligently. That which Christ said of our redemption, euery Christian must say of his particular vocation: It is meate and drinke for me to doe my fathers will. Vnto diligence there are two maine motiues.

1. In regard of God, who bestowes his gifts for this end, that they may be well imployed in his holy ser|uice.
2. In respect of our selues: for Matth. 25.29. vnto euery one that hath, it shall be giuen, and hee shall haue abundance; and from him that hath not, euen that hee hath, shall be taken away.



The pri|uate du|ties are

Generall: Hate that which is euill, cleane to that which is good.
Particu|lar, con|cerning our

Faith: Be feruent in spirit: continue in prayer.
Hope: Reioyce in hope, be patient in tribulation.
Cha|ritie, in

Giuing due re|spect to

Superiours; In gi|uing honor go one before another.
Equals: Be kind one to another with brotherly loue.
Inferiours: Distri|buting to the ne|cessity of y^e saints: harboring the di|stressed: equalling our selue to the~ of the lower sort.

Forgiuing: Blesse them that persecute you, c.





All which offices are to be performed

Freely.
Fully.
Fitly.


Freely, with cheerefulnes and compassion: Be merie with the merie; weepe with such as weepe.
Fully, without sloth or dissimulation; Let loue be with|out dissimulation.
Fitly: Applie your selues to the time: for there is a time for all things: and , doth Ambros. in loc. fit the place better, then . See Luther. postil. Erasm. Mar|tyr. in loc.
His meaning is not, that we should alter our manners and religion according to the time; like the Polypus and Camelion: for in the beginning of this chapter hee doth aduise the contrarie: Fashion not your selues according to to the world. But that we should apprehend the best hint

to doe good in the Church, euermore redeeming the time: Ephes. 5.16. so shall we be sure to serue God in ob|seruing the time.



The Gospel. IOHN 2.1.
There was a mariage in Cana, c.


MAriage is honorable (saith Heb. 13.4. Paul.) Honoured of God the

Father.
Sonne.
Holy Ghost.


Father, instituting it at the purest time, in the best place: for it was his Gen. 2.28. first ordinance in Paradise, when man was innocent.
Honoured of God the Sonne by his presence and first miracle, wrought (as the text saith) at a wedding.
Honoured of God the holy Ghost, who did ouersha|dow the betrothed virgin Mary Christs mother.

Honoured of the whole blessed Trinitie, both in

Deede: for in the worlds vniuersall deluge, ma|ried persons and couples onelie were deliuered: Gen. 7.
Word: comparing it to the kingdome of heauen; and holinesse, to a Matth. 22.12. wedding garment: calling it a Ephes. 5.32. great mysterie, representing the spirituall vnion betweene Christ and his Church.


Honoured by the primitiue fathers as a fruitfull semi|narie, which fils earth with men, and heauen with Saints. Honoured of Iewes, honoured of Gentiles; honou|red of all, except Taciani: Au|gun. haer 25. Saturnini:ren. lb. 1. ca. 2. heretikes and Papists: herein appea|ring rather like diuels, then Diuines, as Paul tels vs, 1. Tim. 4.
The Papists in making mariag a sacrament, seeme to commend it more then wee: but in affiring, that holy Presthood is prophaned by this holy sacrament, Doctor Fulk, in Heb. 13.4. is to

honour it as the Iewes honoured Christ, in clothing him with a purple robe.
Mariage is a sacrament, and yet a sacrilege. So Orat. habit. Rom. Tom. 3. cntrouers. in fine. Bellar|min plainly, Coniugia post solennia vota, non co~nubia, sed sa|crilegia: so the rest of that vnchast generation generally, such as vow, first chastity, then marry; begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh: mad men (saith Com. in Gal. 3.3. Luther) not vnder|standing what is the spirit, or what is the flesh. For in sin|gle life to burne with lust,  when one concubine wil not serue, to commit villany with many strumpets, are mani|fest workes of the flesh: on the contrary, for a man to loue his owne wife, to gouerne his family, to bring vp his chil|dren in instruction and information of the Lord, are fruits of the spirit.
We might rather say, that in heat of youth (as Confes. lib. 2. cap. 3. Au|gustine speakes) inquiet adolescentia, to vow single life, were a sinne: for whatsoeuer is not of faith, is sinne. Rm. de re|lg. lib. 2. cap. 9. Sed de talibus perpetuae virginitatis votis fides nulla, nulla in sacris literis est litera.
In 2. Cor. 11. Saint Ambrose writes peremptorily, that all the twelue Apostles had wiues, except Saint Iohn: and al|most all the Romish Postils obserue, that Iohn was the bridegroome at this wedding. If this annotation bee true, why doe they condemne mariage in Priests? If false, why doe they suffer it for currant, as well in their Pontan. bi|blithec. con. tm. . fol. 217. Diez con. 1. Co|ster. con. 2. in loc. accurate new writers, as in their olde fustie Dormisecure in loc. Anton. Beotin. quast. 17 super. Euang. dominical. Friers.
If any desire to be further satisfied in this curiositie, let him reade Maldonat vpon the first of Saint Iohn in the preamble; and Cardinal. Baronius. annal. Tom. 1. fol. 94.


In this historie foure things are re|garda|ble.

1. The occasio~ of the miracle; want of wine at a wedding, de|scribed by cir|cumstances of

Time: the third day.
Place: in Cana, a town of Galile.
Per|sons,

Guests, inuited, as Christ and his disciples.
Luther. maior postil. in loc.  Ldol hus de vit Christ. part. 1. cap. 25. Gossips, comming of their owne accord, to further and helpe the businesse:


2. Certaine passages of speech vpon this oc|casion, betweene Christ and his mother: vers. 3.4.
3. The miracle it selfe. vers. 6.7.8.9.
4. The consequent and effect of the miracle. vers. 11.


And the third day] These circumstances of time, place, persons, are set downe to confirme the truth of the mi|racle. The time was the third day: Thom. ex Beda in loc. mystically there are three daies of the world: the first, before the law: the se|cond, vnder the law: the third, after the law. The world was instructed before the law by the Patriarks example: by the writings of the Prophets vnder the law: but in the third day, which is the gospels acceptable time, by Christ and his miracles; or literally, the third day from his be|ing in the wildernes, as Euthymius; or, the third day after his conference with Nathaniel, as Haeres. 51. Epiphanius; or, the third day after he came into Galile, as Iansenius. I like the conceit of Com. in Iohan. lib. 2. Rupertus, affirming, that the coniunction And, doth send the reader to that which is said before, to wit, in the first Chapter, vers. 35. The next day Iohn stood, and two of his disciples, c. This is the first day. The se|cond day is mentioned in the 43. verse; The day follow|ing Iesus would goe into Galile. Now the third day this marige was in Cana. So Iasen. soone then as Christ had called his disciples, he presently begins to manifest him|selfe, both in his words, and in his works: and because this was his first miracle, we Caluin. should giue the greater at|tention to it.
There was a mariage] Beauxamis in loc. This insinuates, it was a solemne meeting, not a clandestine mariage; done not in a cor|ner secretly, but after a publike fashion, with consent of parents and friends openly. Such was the custome in old time: Tobith. 7. Iudges 14. where Samsons mariage feast is said to continue seuen daies: and it is well retained in our age; the Canon. 62. Church appointing that al mariages ought to bee performed with the good will of friends in the most publike  place, at the most publike time, betweene eight and twelue in the forenoone; the which is a renew|ed old canon of the Councell of Cap. 6. vt Pet. Crabbe, Tom. concil. fol. 632. Arls, and of Caus. 3. quaest. 5. vt Crabbe vbi supra. fol. 66 Euari|stus, Bishop of Rome, writing thus vnto the Prelates of Africa: Non fieri legitima matrimonia, nisi ab his qui super ipsam foeminam dominationem habent;   quibus custodi|tur, petatur;  parentibus autem sponsetur, legibus dotetur suo tempore, sacerdotalitr cum precibus benedicatur: alitr praesumpta non coniugia sed adulteria, c.
In Cana a Citie of Galile] There were Hieron. in loc. Hebraic. Tom. 3. fol. 278. two Canaes, one called Cana the greater, neere the coasts of Tyrus and Sidon, Iosua 19.28. from whence the good Cananite wo|man came: Matth. 15.22. This other was Cana the les|ser, neere Nazareth, from whence Simon the Cananite: Matth. 10.4.
Cana signifieth zeale; Galile, transmigration. Beda vbi supr. Hereby signifying typically, that Christ delights in their com|pany who bee feruent in deuotion, and are willing to passe from things earthly, to things heauenly: or insinua|ting, that matrimoniall loue shall onely continue but in this our pilgrimage; for in heauen, wee shall neither marrie wiues, neither haue wiues bestowed in mariage. Matth. 22.30.
Some note that Galile signifieth rotation: intimating the mutable changes and chances in this estate. Concer|ning this, and the like, I send the reader to Bibliothec. con|cion. Tom. 1. fol. 217.
If I durst venture vpon any mysticall exposition, it should be this; A mariage ought to be made in Cana of

Galile that is, in an honest desire to flie fornication, and to possesse our vessels in chastitie, to passe from Sodome to Cana.
The mother of Iesus] Not as other writers vsually, the virgin: or as other Euangelists, Mary; but the mother of Iesus. Because the seedes of Apollinarists, Valentinians and other heretikes, denying Christs humanitie, were sowen in S. Iohns age.
Was there] Cana was neere Nazareth, and it is thought probable by most interpreters as well old as new, that either the bridegroome, or the bride, was cosen to Ma|ry; Chrysost. hom. 20 uper Iohan.  Bucer. apud Marlorat. in loc. so that vpon neighbourhood and affinitie she came to this wedding, as a fauourer, and furtherer of the busi|nesse: Frequentis videri in pub|co displicebat. Ambros. in Luc. lib. 2. otherwise Mary was no busie bodie, no prat|ling idle gossip 1. Tim. 5.13. gadding from house to house. We reade only that she visited her cosen Luke 1.40. Elizabeth, and here was present at the mariage feast of another especall friend, who was deare in blood, and neere in place.
And Iesus was called also and his Disciples] Ferus ser. 7. in loc. This ex|ample may teach all inuiters, especially parents, to bid such ghests vnto their childrens mariage dinner, as are modest and religious. At such meetings vsually wilde wantons are best welcome. Graue persons are for a fune|rall, mad merrie people for a wedding: if Christ preach, or sober Mary be present, all the sport is spilt. These are spots in your loue-feasts, as S. Iude speakes: inuite such men, as Christ, such women as Mary, who may bee pa|ternes vnto the new married of lowly and louely ca|riage.
Secondly, this example of Christ, of the Virgin, of the Disciples, is a sufficient Musculus  Marlorat. in loc. warrant for men to call, and for men to come vnto neighbourly meetings, and friendly feasts, as occasion is offered. It is written of Philip Camerarius in eius vita, pag. 37 Me|lancthon that great Diuine, that he was exceeding cour|teous in this kinde; often inuited, often inuiting. Reioyce with them that reioyce, saith Paul. We may be merie (saith Loc. com it. de pus conuiuijs. Luther) at a feast, and recreate our selues with pleasant

talke; which may feede the minde, as meate doth the maw. See Luther. postil. aior. in loc.
But wee must auoid in our meriments all drunkennes and surfetting. Acosta con. 2. in loc. There was so little wine prepared for this feast, that the pots were emptie, before the pates were full: such a necessarie want, as that Christ miracu|lously supplied it.
Cap. 10.16. Ecclesiastes hath pronounced a woe to that land whose Princes eate in the morning: Diz con. 1. in loc. that is, by surfetting and riot deuoure their estate so soone as it comes into their hands; euen in the morne of their youth, and afterward liue by base courses in their afternoone. What a woe then hangs ouer that countrey, where both Princes and people too rise vp early to follow drunkennes? when a man of meane qualitie wil waste so much vpon his wed|ding dinner, as might haue fed him and his al the yeere; and so much vpon his wedding garment, as happily might haue clothed him all his life. Surely the diuell danceth at such a mariage, Christ is not present.

Christ is inuited vnto a wed|ding Coster. con. 2. in loc. two waies: by

Prayer.
Good intentions in that enterprise.


First by prayer, as yong Tobith and Sara, who being together in the bride chamber, and, as the Tobith 8. storie saith, in the bridebed, rose againe to beg a blessing of God af|ter this sort: Blessed art thou O God of our fathers, c. and she said with him, Amen.
Euerie regenerate man is Heb. 3.6. Gods house; and Gods house is called the house of Esay. 56.7. prayer. I know that text is expounded by Mat. 21.13. Christ of the Temple materiall; yet it may not vnfitly be construed of the Temple Bellarmin. de bonis operibus in particular. lib. 1. cap. 10. mysticall. If then euery good man be a priest, as S.  Epist. 2.9. Peter cals him; a Church, as S. 1. Cor. 3 16. Paul termes him, it is meete hee should vndertake no businesse, especially such a maine matter as mariage, without often and heartie prayer.


Secondly, Christ is called to our wedding by good in|tentions, in this enterprise; which are principally three:

1. Auoyding of fornica|tion: 1. Cor. 7.2.
2. Procreation of children: Gen. 1.28. to be brought vp in instruction, and in|formation of the Lord: Ephes. 4.6.
3. Mutuall consolation and comfort: Gen. 2.18.


If a man in the feare of God vndertake this honorable estate, for these good ends, he calles as it were Christ, and God to his wedding: but he that marrieth vnaduisedly, lightly, wantonly, like bruite beasts hauing no vnderstan|ding, doth inuite Satan and his reuellers, and then no maruell if that which was ordained for his helpe, turne to his hurt. For in this the Philosopher truly: Corrptio optimi pessima.
And his Disciples] Maldonat. in loc. Christ was inuited for his mo|thers sake, the Disciples for Christ. They went but inui|ted.
Here I might remember S. Epist. de vit clericorum. om. 1. fol. 15. Hieromes aduice to Ne|potian: Conuiuia tib sunt vitanda secularium;  maxim eorum qui honoribus tument. Facil co~temnitur clericus qui saepe vocatus ad prandium, ire non recusat: nunquam peten|tes, rar accipiamus rogati.
Haeres. 78. Epiphanius is of opinion that Ioseph was dead before this time, because there is no mention made of him in the Gospel, after his going vp to Hierusalem at the Passe|ouer, Luk. 2. therefore no maruell, if hee were not bid with Christ and his Disciples.
Diuines haue rendred sundrie reasons, why Christ and his companie being inuited came to this wedding.
First (as our Com. Booke, tit. Matrimonie. Church doth speake) to beautifie with his presence this holy calling: Augustin. tract. 9. in an. Confirmare voluit, qud pse fecit, nuptias: Costerus vbi supra. and it was exceeding fit that Christ should worke his first miracle, for the confirmation of Gods first ordinance.
Secondly, to manifest his Theophylact. in loc.  Augustin. ser. 41. de tem|pre. humilitie, vouchsauing to visite the meanest.
Thirdly, to certifie the spiritual mariage betweene the Church and himselfe: Seuerus Antiochenus orat. 119. vt citatur in Graec. caten.   Maldonat in loc.
Fourthly, that he might act this miracle at this solemne celebritie: Cyril. in loc. Miraculi potis quod acturus erat, quam con|uiuij grati profectus.
We cannot now feast Christ in his person; but we may feede him in his ministers, in his members. Inuite there|fore the good man, and the poore man; as Iob 31.17. Iob saith, If I haue eaten my morsels alone, and the fatherlesse haue not eaten thereof. As Amos 6. Amos complained of the rich glut|tons in his time, deuouring the lambs of the flocke, and calues out of the stall; drinking wine in bowles, and anoynting them|selues with the chiefest oyntments, and singing to the viole: but no man (saith the Prophet) is sorrie for the affliction of Ioseph. If thou wilt feast Christ, inuite the Disciples, in|uite Mary, the fatherlesse, the widow: for hee protests openly; Matth. 25.40. whatsoeuer is done vnto the least of my brethren, is done vnto me.
And when the wine failed] Want at a wedding, Acosta. con. 2. in loc. doth intimate the discontentment and vanitie of earthly plea|sure, that euen in laughing the heart is sorrowfull, and the end of mirth is heauinesse: Prouerbs 14.13. Ecclesiastes 2.1.
Wee neede not dispute curiously Marlorat. ex Msculo. in loc. whether this want was occasioned either by the pouertie of the parties in|uiting, or by the riotous intemperance of the guests in|uited, or by the lauish negligence of the seruitors, or by the multitude of acquaintance, who came not called, as it is vsuall at such meetings: it is enough for vs to know that it came to passe by Gods all-seeing prouidence, that our Sauiour might manifest his glorie. For, as it is said of him that was borne blinde, Iohn 9. Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents, but that the workes of God should be sheed on him: so neither the master of the feast, nor the guests, nor the seruants offended in that the wine

failed; onely this happened for our good, and Christs glorie.
They haue no wine] Iansen. con|cord. cap. 18. This speech is grounded vpon faith, hope and charitie. Faith, in that she beleeued Christ was able: hope, being throughly perswaded Christ was willing miraculously to supplie this want. Her words are but three: vinum non habent: an indicatiue short narra|tion; not an optatiue long oration. Hereby teaching vs, that albeit in regard of our miserie, nothing can be said too much; yet in respect of Christs mercie, one word is enough, as being more willing to relieue then we to re|quest.
Lastly, this is a demonstration of her charitie; Zepper. con. 1. in loc. being solicitous for her good friends, accou~ting their want her woe. 1. Cor. 12.26. For if one member of Christs mystical bodie suffer, all suffer with it: and therefore the good Virgin out of Caluin. in loc. sympathie, perceiuing the wine would faile, cried vnto her sonne, they haue no wine.
She could not but be full of pitie, who carried in her wombe nine moneths the God of compassion. If a man hold an apple in his hand all the forenoone, he will smell of it all the afternoone. Mary did inwombe the father of mercies: her bowels therefore must needes be very compassionate. Bernard. ser. 1. Dom. 1. post octau. Epiphan. Nam  ant mentem repleuit qumven|trem,  cm processit ex vtero, non recessit ab animo. As Mary to Christ, they haue no wine; so I to you, the poore haue no corne. For their supplie (God be thanked) as yet we need no miracle, but only your mercie. Acts. 3.6. S. Peter said to the begging creple: Siluer and gold haue I none, but such as I haue, that giue I thee. In the name of Iesus Christ, rise vp and walke. But our Hieron. epist. d Eustochium: tom. 1. fol. 146. liues, if not our lips, vtter the contrary; compassion and pitie haue we none; but goods and corne which we haue, giue we not.
Augustin. epist. 5. Iulius Caesar gloried in nothing so much as in pardo|ning his enemies, and gratifying his friends. Hee did be|leeue as a Pagan, but worke as a Christian: but I feare Gueuara. epist. many beleeue like Christians, but liue like Pagans.
The subtill disputant presseth his aduersarie with two premisses, that hee may bring him to an absurd conclu|sion. Satan is the most cunning sophister, he doth prae|mittere do delicias  diuitias. Now wee must denie the first proposition flatly, and distinguish of the second. And this distinction must bee a diuision, and this diuision Christ diuision: Mtr. 10 21. Diuide pauperibus, Giue to the poore.
Master In the life of Tyndall before his workes. Tyndal being a diligent Preacher, and a great student, allotted two daies in euery weeke, monday, and saturday, to visit the sicke and to relieue the poore, which he tearmed his owne daies of pastime; a sweete recreati|on (as Orat. de obitu Theodosy. Ambrose speakes) in alieno remedio vulnera sua curare: To benefit our selues in helping other. In our time wee want such women as Mary, such men as Tyn|dal c.
If any shall demaund how Mary came by this faith, hope, charitie? how she beleeued Christ to be God, and able to doe wonders? Answere is made, first, that she might vnderstand this by Maldonat. in loc. diuine reuelation: for Gabriel an harbinger of heauen told so much vnto her: Luke 1.32. He shall be great, and shall be called the Sonne of the most high: and hee shall reigne ouer the house of Iacob for euer, and of his kingdome shall be no end.
Secondly, Theophylact. in loc. by the preaching of Iohn the Baptist, open|ly proclaming Christ to be the Lambe of God who takes away the sinnes of the world.
Thirdly, by the diligent obseruation of Christs doc|trine both abroad and at home: for the text saith in the second of S. Luke, that Mary kept all those sayings and pon|dred them in her heart. Where by the way note what an excellent thing it is to marke the words of the Preacher, and safely to lay them vp in our heart as in a treasure house, that as occasion is offered at any time, they may be readie for our vse.
What haue I to doe with thee?] Rhemists  Maldonat in loc. There is some diffe|rence betweene the Protestants and Papists about this answere, which seemes exceeding hard and harsh. I will

therefore follow Saint Tract. . in Ioan. ac de fide  symb. cap. 4. Augustines exposition, as an in|different Iudge betweene both: Operaturus facta diuina non agnoscit viscera humana.
What haue I to doe with thee?] To wit, in this businesse. I had mine humane weaknesse from thee: but to worke miracles, is a diuine power; and therefore why should I respect my mother in matters appertaining to the co~mis|sion of my father? as it is in this daies Epistle; Let him that hath an office, wait on his office. Hence we may learne, that respect of kindred ought not to be the principall motion in doing our duty, but Gods glory; neglecting Luke 14.26. father and mother, wife and children, brethren and sisters, and our owne life, to doe the will of our heauenly father. Hieron. epist. Marcel. tom. 1. fol. 155. Pi|etatis genus est impium esse pro domino.
Secondly, this doth shew that Mlanct. in loc. God defers our suits vntill his good houre.
Thirdly, Christ answered roughly, lest we should ac|count his mother our mediatrix and aduocate. For Zepper. in loc. hee foresaw the superstition of popery, making Mary the Queene of heauen, and assigning greater dignitie to the mother, then to the Sonne. For whereas Gods kingdome consists of his iustice and mercy, the Bil. exposit. can. missae. lect. 80. D. Rey|nold. idolat. lib. 1. cap. 1.  Cas|sander consult. art. 21. Papists attribute the greatest part, which is mercy, to Mary, making her high Chanceller, and Christ, as it were, chiefe Iustice: so that a poore Client may well Bernardin. in Mariali. appeale from the tribu|nall of God, to the court of our Lady. The whole Church doth sing,
Cassander vbi supra. ube filio  foelix puerpera nostrapians scelera: iure matris impera redemptori.
Behold their new Pater Noster, answerable to Bona|uentures Psalter. It is their owne for the matter, albeit as yet they are in my debt for the maner.
Postil. cathol. con. 2. Dom. 3. post. natiit. Mater nostra quae es in coelis] O Ribea com. in 6. Michae. Num. 15. veram matrem, quae semper monstrat se esse matrem: melior qumdecem matres,

ita te matrem laudamus; vti Bonauentura in psalterio vir|ginis ad hymnum Ambrosij.
Sanctificetur nomen tuum] Nomen tantae virtutis (in|quit D. Morton. apolog. lib. 1. cap. 67. ex Vg. co. in. Apoca|lyp. 12. Idiotus) vt ad eius inuocationem coelum rideat, infer|nus conturbetur: ineffabile suo modo nomen, vt in nomine tuo flectatur omne genu, coelestium, terrestrium,  infer|norum.
Adueniat regnum tuum] Es enim regina coeli,  domina mundi, sicut in eo doctorum paucitas,  indoctorum turba consentit.
Fiat voluntas tua] Nam tu potes iubere filium, quipotest omnia: sicut Bonauentura dicit,  D. Fulk. i 1. Tim. 2. Ecclesia docet: Psalter. vir|gin. Psal. 127. beati, qui timent dominam nostram,  beati omnes, quisciut fa|cere voluntatem suam. Panem nostrem quotidianum da no|bis hodie.) Erasus col. de peregrinat. religiois erg Nam ab vn matre petuntur omnia, quasi filius Christus semper infans esset. Psalter. vir|gin. Oculi nostri sperant in te do|mina, mitte nobis cibum  escam.
Dimitte nobis debita nostra] Es enim mater Bellarmin. de beatitudin. sanct. cap. 17. gratiae  misericordiae; regina misericordiae, c. Bonauentura, ser. 2. de Maria.
Et ne nos inducas in tentationem] Es enim Lexicon theo|log. Altenstaig. in verb. Maria. exordium salutis nostr, Bnauent. tom. 3. pag. 390. quapropter in omnibus pressuris respice stel|lam maris: voca  clama Mariam. Ipsa enim est anchora qu nauis in marifirmatur,  est nauis qu homo  tentatio|num fluctibus liberatur.
Sed libera nos  malo] Tu nos ab hoste protege, ac hor mortis suscipe; vt habet ecclesia Bellarmin. vbisupra. cantus. Bonauent. s|cut Chemnitius 3. part. examin. pag. 149. Ad eam venite omnes qui laboratis,  tribulatiestis,  refrigerium dabit animabus vestris. Te Hortulus ani|mae. pag. 163. precor mitissima~ virginum gemmam, vt in tremendo  terribili iudicio me liberes  protegas  poenis inferni.
Quia tuum est regnum, potentia,  gloria] Laus Deo virgini matri; sicut communiter in librorum epilogo, papi|colae, virginicolae.
Cum adulatorie quidam scripsisset de Papa Adriano: Tra|iectum plantauit, Louanium rigauit, Caesar autem incre|mentum dedit: lter homo lepidus subscripsit, Deus interim

nihil fecit. Ita quidem ego, si Maria mater nostra, domina nostra, regina nostra, mediatrix nostra, patrona nostra, salua|trix nostra; Christus interim Consule Me|lacthon. apo|log. confess. Au|gustan. Tt. de sanct. inuocat. vnicus mediator Dei  homi|num nihil pro nobis fecit. Ille mediator est mediatus, media|tor dimidiatus; in illius locum Maria successit; illa, illa vocata; inuocata velut aduocata.
O woman] Hence the Montanists and Valentinians ab|surdly gather, that Christ was not the Sonne of Mary: yet (as Tract. 8. in Ioan. Augustine notes) euen the same Euangelist in the same place, calles her againe and againe, the mother of Iesus. Our Sauiour happily called her woman, not mo|ther, Marlor. in loc. to signifie that he was greater then her child; that his elect people might acknowledge him to be the Son of God; as they knew he was the sonne of Mary: or Maldonat. in loc. wo|man, because then a widow.
Mine houre is not yet come] Greg. Nyss. bom. in Apost. verba, Tuncipse filius subijcie|tur ei, c. Some reade this clause with an interrogation; Is not mine houre yet come? am I not yet of sufficient yeeres and discretion to manage my businesse without your direction? The houre is now come, wherein you must obey my commands, as I haue submitted my selfe heretofore to yours.
August. vbi supra.  Ru|pertus in loc. Other interpret this of his passion, according to that of our Euangelist, Chap. 7.30. No man laid hands on him, because his houre was not yet come. As if Christs meaning were this: In miracles acted by the finger of God, I haue nothing to doe with thee: but when my weake flesh, which I tooke from thee shall be crucified, in that houre I will acknowledge you to be my mother. And so wee reade, Iohn 19.25. Then stood by the Crosse of Iesus, his mo|ther: and when Iesus saw his mother, and the disciple stan|ding by, whom he loued, he said vnto his mother; Woman, be|hold thy Sonne.
But it is expounded most aptly, that it was not as yet an Theophylact. in loc. opportune time to worke the miracle, Chrysost. hom. 21. in Ioan. because the want of wine was not generally perceiued and manife|sted. It is Gods houre when we most need. Marlorat. ex Brent. in loc. Cm omne carnale consilium  auxilium cessauerint: When all men

and meanes are wanting, Psal. 46.1. God is a present helpe in trouble.

This one clause then Pontanus in loc. in|sinuates our Sauiours

Power.
Prouidence.
Wisdome.
Pitie.
Pietie.


Power] For no man hath an houre. Act. 1.7. Times and seasons are put in Gods owne power onely. Whereas therefore Christ saith, Mine houre; he doth euidently demonstrate, that he is creator of yeeres, and eternall Dubartas 1. day. 1. weeke. clock-keeper of time.
Prouidence] For it came not to passe by fate or fortune, but by disposition diuine; Act. 4.28. determining from all eter|nitie, both what, when, and where Christ should suffer and doe.
Wisdome] Performing this act of wonder in the right quand, when it might procure the greatest good to men, and glory to God.
Pitie] For hereby the new maried conceiued hope, that he would relieue their want in his good houre.
Pietie] Toward his mother, not absolutely denying, but onely deferring her suit for a time. Nondum venit: It shall come, though as yet not come.
His mother said vnto the ministers, whatsoeuer he saith vnto you, doe it,] She was not offended or discouraged with Christs answer, but belieued his word, and submitted her selfe to his will: a notable president of Bullinger. faith and Caluin. obe|dience; teaching vs in all afflictions of body and soule, wholly to stay our selues vpon his gracious promises. In a word, it is Zepprus. a good rule to be followed in all things; heare him; in all the works of thy calling, whatsoeuer he saith vnto thee, doe it; not onely belieue, Pontanus. but doe.
And there were standing there six water pots of stone] The relation of the miracle it selfe, containes in it a most liue|ly Melan. postil. in loc. picture of the Church militant, subiect euen in her greatest happinesse to much want and woe: but Christ that keepes Israel doth neither slumber nor sleepe; hee

knowes her workes, and in the midst of her wants, euen when she thinks her selfe forsaken, heres her praiers, and turnes her water into wine, giuing her a garment of glad|nesse for the spirit of heauinesse.
The Fathers and Friers abound with other allegories. He that list may reade August. tract. 9. in Ioan. Bernard. ser. 2. post octau. Epiphan. Rupert. comment. in Ioan. lib. 2. Lu|ther. postil. maior. Dom. 2. ab Epiphan. Ferus. ser. 9. Dom. 2. post Epiphan. Pontanus bibliothec. con. tom. 1. fol. 222. 223. c.
I did alway thinke of glosses, as Desanct virginitat. cap. 46. Augustine of gra|ces: Alter aliquando fructuosus est donis paucioribus sed po|tioribus, alter inferioribus sed pluribus: One man edifieth his hearers with many, though meane notes; another, with few, but fit; short, but sweet. I passe therefore from the miracle, to the consequent and effect.

The which is twofold:

1. The manifestation of Christs glory.
2. The confirmation of his Disciples faith.


Christ in his morals instructed vs to liue well; in his mi|racles to belieue well. And therefore this fact increasing the Disciples faith, and illustrating his honour, Omne tu|lit punctum, quia miscuit vtile dulci.



The Epistle. ROM. 12.16.
Be not wise in your owne opinion, c.

SAint Paul exhorts vs in this Epistle, not to hurt, but ra|ther helpe our enemies.

Not to hurt by

Concealing that which is good; as,

Wisdome: Be not wise in your owne opinion.
Sanctimony: Prouide things ho|nst in the sight of all men.

Rendring that which is euill: vers. 17. Recom|pence to no man euill for euill: and vers. 19. Auenge not your selues, c.




But to help by preseruing

Peace: vers. 18. If it be pos|sible, liue peaceably with all men. Vers. 20. If thine enemy hunger, feed him.
Patience: vers. 21. Bee not ouercome of euil, but ouer|come euill with goodnesse.


Be not wise] Not in your selues, nor onely wise to your selues: not in your selues and Prou. 3.7. Esay. 5.21. owne conceit: 1. Cor. 3.18. If any man among you seeme to be wise, let him be a foole, that hee may be wise. Pro. 29.20. Seest thou a man hastie in his matters an haughty; there is more hope of a foole, then of him. It is See the life of Co|minaeus be|fore his works in English. re|corded as a great fault in Charles, Duke of Burgondie, that he seldom asked, neuer followed the cou~sel of other. On the contrary, Moses, a man Acts 7.22. learned in all wisdome of the Egyptians, and mighty both in words and deeds, obeied the voice of his father in law Iethro, doing according to his aduice: Exod. 18.24. Saul hearkened vnto the coun|sell of his seruant: 1. Sam. 9. Agamemnon in Homer, wi|shed for ten Nestors. Reusner. in symbois. Alexander Seuerus neuer determi|ned any thing of moment, without twelue or twenty iu|dicious Lawyers. It is a great part of wisdome, yea the first entry to knowledge, Fulgetius lib. 1. mytholog. scire quod nescias; not to be too wise; or in our opinion so wise, that wee neglect others helpe. The Pope in this respect (as In secul. vitae human. lib. 2. cap. 3.  Vig|nier answere to Baron. pag. 39. Roderigo, Bishop of Zamora well obserues) is most vnfortunate. For though he hath all things at command, yet euermore stands in need of one thing, to wit, a faithfull counseller.
The Romans at this time being Lords of the world, were puffed vp exceedingly with the greatnesse of their gifts, and largenesse of their Empire: Paul therefore did often (as Chrysostome notes) inculcate this exhortation; in this Chapter twice, that it might be remembred once.
The men of England, yea the women of England abu|sing the great light of the Gospell, and long peace, are growne so wise, that many will take vpon them to teach euen their most learned teachers: and therefore we must

againe and againe preach and presse this one lesson: Be not wise in your owne opinion. Let no man presume to know more then is meete for him to know; but so iudge of himself that he be gentle and sober, according as God hath dealth to euery man the measure of faith.
Or as Ambrs.  Goran. in lc. other expound it; Be not wise to your selues: but as Prouerbs 5.16. Salomon speakes, Let thy fountaines lw foorth, and the riuers of water in the streets: according to the mea|sure of grace, proceeding from the fountaine of good|nesse, communicate thy wisedome to other, hide not thy talent.
To one is giuen by the Spirit y^ word of wisedom, Augustin con|fss. lib. 13. c. 18. tn|qua~ luminare maius; vnto another y^e word of knowledge, tnquam luminare minus; vnto another prophecie, vnto another faith, vnto another diuersity of language, tanqa~ stelle, as starres in the firmament of the Church. Our light then must shine before men, and we must waste our slues for the good of such as are in Gods house. The Matth. 5.15. candle must not be put vnder a bshell, but on a candlestick. Scire tuum nihil est, nisite scire hoc sciat alter. If thou wilt onely be wise to thy selfe, thou shalt at last turne foole. For as water standing still is soone puddle: Plutarch. de nm latndo. so the gifts of the minde not employed are empaired. A . Gl. lib. 13. cap. 8. Afaniu said truly that vse begate wisedome:
Vsus me genuit, mter peperit memori.
Let not vs then inclose truth and the knowledge ther|of, it is common. If we make it priuate, wee shall be de|priued of it. As Confess. lib. 12. cap 25. Auustine sweetly: Non licet here priuatam, ne priemure. Ephs. 4.8. When Chist asended vp on high, he gaue gifts to men, among othr the gift of 1. Cor. 12.8. wis|dome, for the gathering together of the Saints, for the worke of the ministerie, for the building vp of his mysti|call bodie. Wisedome then is not giuen only for thy self, but for other, among the rest Psal. 68.18. euen for thne enemies, that the Lord God might dwell among them.
Secondly, we may not conceale our sanctimonie. Pro|uide things honest in the sight of all mn] as Pal expounds

Paul. 1. Cor. 10.32. Giue none offence neither to the Iewes, nor to the Gre|cians, nor to the Church of God. Marorat.ex Caluin. n loc. For as a man must haue care of his conscience before God; so likewise of his cre|dit before men.

Some prouide thinges honest

Before men, but not before God, as the vaine-glorious hypocrites, Herod within, Iohn with|out, painted tombes, as Christ aptly: Sepulchra quasi semipulchra, exteris nitida, interius foe|tida.
Before God, but not before men; as the male-content and vndiscreet professor, by whose euill example the name of God is often Rom. 2.24. blas|phemed.
Neither before God nor men: as the shamelesse ruffins and Atheists of the world, whose Philip. 319. glory is their shame, Prouerbs 2.14. delighting in doing euill, and boa|sting of iniquitie; reputing dishonestie no dis|honour; but the top of their gallantrie. So Saint Confess. lib. 2. cap. 3. Augustine writes of himself before he was a saint: Vbi non suberat qu admisso aequa|rer, perditis, fingebam me fecisse, quod non fece|ram, ne viderer abiector, qu eram innocen|tior.
Both before God and men; as Luke 1.6. Elizabeth and Zaharie, who were iust before God, and vnreproueable before men: so must euery Christian abstaine, so farre as hee can, 1. Thess. 5.22. from all appearance of euill: Theophylact. in loc. yet this honest care of our cariage must not be to please men, but only to praise God. As S. 1. Epist 2.12. Peter interprets S. Paul: Haue your conuersation honest, that they which speae euill of you, as of euill doers, may by your good workes, which they shall see, glo|rifie God in the day of the visitation. Let your light (saith Christ) shine before men; not onely that they may see your good workes, but also that seeing, they may glorifie your father which is in heauen. Augustin. lib. 1 de ser. Dom. i mont. Vt hoc ipsum, quod homo per bona opera placet hominibus, non ibi finem constituat, vt hominibus placeat, sed referat hoc ad audem Dei,  prop|terea

placeat hominibus, vt in ill glorificetur Deus.


As wee may not conceale from our enemie wisedome and knowledge which are good: so much lesse render euill. Recompence to no man euill for euill] A Magistrate may punish a malefactor, and so pro malo clpae, render malum poene. Aquin. in loc. But this is not to recompence euill for euill, but good for euill: because corrections are dire|ctions as well to the seer as sufferer: 1. Cor. 5.5. the flesh is de|stroyed, that the spirit may be saued. A Magistrate then may render euill for euill: but a priuate man out of a pri|uate grudge, may not auenge himselfe, but rather giue place to wrath.

The which may be construed of our owne wrath.
The which may be construed of aduersaries anger.
The which may be construed of Gods iudgement.

Of our owne wrath, as Osic. lib. 1. c. 21 Ambrose: Resiste irae, i potes, cede si non potes. An hastie Bonauent. di|t salutis, cap. 5. cholerick man is like one that dwels in a thatched house, who being rich in the morne, through sudden fire is a begger ere night. It is ex|treme folly to doe any thing in furie; but wisedome to giue place and space to wrath. It was an excellent decree of Reuser in symbolis,  Ti|lman. in loc. Theodosius, enacted by the counsell of S. Ambrose, that execution after a seuere sentence should be deferred thirtie daies: vt ira decocta, durior emendari possit senten|tia, that all heate of contention allaied, if need require, the seueritie of the censure might bee qualified and mo|derated.
Secondly, this may bee construed of our Aut fugiendo aut permitten|do: Hicron. in loc. aduersaries anger: for as Martyr. in loc. thunder and gunnes hurt not any thing which yeelds vnto their fury, but only that which is hard and stiffe; so the raging and roring of our foes are best quelled by patience. Turne to the brauling curre, and he will be more fierce; but ride on neglecting him, and he will soone be quiet. You may turne the prouerbe:
Veterem iniuriam feres do vitas nouam.
Thirdly, this may bee construed of Gods iudgement, and that Theophylact. Aquin. Luther. in loc. most fitly: for to God onely vengeance be|longs,

and he will auenge our cause. The malitious man in reuiling thee, doth Rom. 2.5. treasure vp wrath against the day of wrah, and therefore giue place to Gods wrath: 1. Pet. 5.7. Cast all your care on him, or he reth for you.
Ya but may we not coplaine to the Magistrate for redresse of iniurie? yes surly: for he i Gods lieutenant on earth, and therefore the vulgr Latine vsmtipss d|fendetes, is inuficient, Whitker a|gaints Rynods the Papist. as our Diuines haue well ob|serued: and the Rhemist haue well mnded it rading as we doe, reuenge; or,  not our slue. For we may be so wise as serpents in defending our slues; howsoe|uer so innocent as doue in ffending other. Auin.  Ti|leman. in loc. Hee that commits his cause to the Magistrate, giues place to di|uine iudgement: for all superiour powers are Rom. 13.1. Gods ordinance: but whosoeuer auengeth his owne quarell, steps into the Princes chaire of estate, yea Gods owne seate dethroning both, and so disturbes heauen and earth.
Here then is no place for duell; a fault (as it is vsed in England, the Low Countries, especill Where with|in ten yeeres sixe thouand gentlee~ haue been slaine, as it appeares by the Kings par|dons: vide lis mbres des de|uncts sieuts de Villmor  de Fontaines, pa. 46. France, for eury punctilio of honor falsely so called) against not only the rules of reason and religion (as Exhortat ad milites Templ, cp. 2. . 401. Bernard notably: Quis hic tm stupendus error? quis furor hic tm non ferendus, nullis stipenijs militare nii aut mortis aut criminis? Nam occisor lethter peccat:  occisus aeternlier perit) but euen gainst the first principles of that art.
As a Christian may warre in Agstin. pist 5. loue, so a Christian must iarre in loue; so contend with his aduersarie before the lawfull Iudge, that the partie cast in the site may bee bettered, if not in his money, yet in his manners, and Sa|tan onely conquerd: Baro.  Tom. 9 ol. 5. Vt qui vincitur  incat  vnus tatummoo vincatur dibolus. Malorat ex caluin. in oc. Otherwise when wee sue for our rigt out of rancor and malice, we com|mit not our case to God and his deputie the Pince, but make them both our deuties, our instruments of re|uenge; the which is such an horrible crime, that Paul calles it a msterie of iniquitie, 2. Thess. 2.7. I say, this se|cret

exalting of our selues aboue all that is called God, vsing Soueraignes as seruants in our priuate quarels, is to play the diuell and the Pope.
We may not then dissemblingly, but simply giue place to wrath. An hard saying, and therefore Paul doth Erasmus  Martyr in loc. sweeten it with a louing tearme, , dearely belo|ued: as if hee should speake thus, It is my loue, that I write so much against malice: not for your hurt, but for your eternall good. If you will not beleeue me, beleeue God himselfe, who saih in his holy Deut. 3.35. Heb. 10.30. word, Vengeance is mine, I will repay sith the Lord.
God doth reunge the quarell of his children vpon the wicked in this, and in the world to come. In this life, so the children who mocked his Prophet E, were rent in peeces with beares, 2. King. 2. So when Hie|rusalem had killed the Prophets, and stoned such as preached vnto her, Almightie God was woth, and sent foorth his warriers, and destroyed those murtherers, and burnt vp their citie: Matth. 22.7.
Euseb. histor. lib. 6. cap. 8. Three shamelesse ruffins accused Narcisss, a reue|rend and holie Bishop, of a most hainous crime, confir|ming their accusation with imprecation: the first wished if it were not so, that he were burnt: the second, that he might dye of the iandise: the third, that he might lose his eyes. And afterward in processe of time, the first had his house set on fire in the night, and he with all his fa|milie was burnt: the second had the iandise from the crowne of his head, to the sole of his foote, whereof he died vncomfortably: the third, seeing what was befal|len these twaine, repented, and confessed the conspira|cie; yet for all that he lost his eyes.
Lanquet on. fl. 196. Earle Godwin swearing at table before the King, that hee did not murther Afr, after many words in excusing himselfe, said; So mought I safely swallow this morsell of bread, as I am guiltlesse of the deede. But so soone as he had receiued the bread, foorthwith he was choked.
What need we looke so farre: the confounding of the Spanish Armado; the defeating of so many cruell treasons against our late Queene of blessed memory; the frustrating of that hellish Gunpowder Treason, are plaine demonstra|tions that vengeance is Gods, and that hee will repay; that hee doth Psal. 35.1. plead the cause of his seruants, against such as striue with them, and fight against such as fight against them.
Againe, God rewards the wicked in the world to come; Depart from me ye cursed into euerlasting fire, prepa|red for the diuell and his angels. For I was an hungred, and ye gaue me no meat; I thirsted, and ye gaue me no drinke, c. Augustin. de fide  operibus. cap. 15. If they shall be punished who did no good, how shall they be tormented who render euill to the members of Christ? If negligent Diues be tortured in hell, for omit|ting onely the works of mercy, what shall become of vio|lent Diues, for committing the works of cruelty?
Theophylact. in Matth. 12. Some sins are punished only in this life; as poore La|zarus, and that incestuous Corinthian. Other only in the life to come, as the rich Glutton, who while he liued, had the world at will. Other are both tortured in this life, and tormented in the next; as the filthy Sodomites, who for their burning lust, had here sulphureum ignem, and shall haue there, gehennalem ignem. Or as Saluianus, lib. 1. de gu|bernat. Dei, God sent vpon them in this life, Gehennam  coelo.
Wherefore seeing Almighty God doth reuenge our quarell, either immediatly by himselfe, or mediatly by his ministers, and wariers, euen all his creatures in heauen and earth; it is both faithlesse and fruitlesse for our selues to right our selues. It is faithlesse not to belieue that the Lord wil deale with vs Luke 2.29. according to his word, who pro|mised by the mouth of his holy Psal. 91.8. Prophet: With thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the vngodly. Fruitlesse, for as much as it is a Heb. 10.31. fearefull thing to fall into the hands of the liuing God, whose little finger is heauier then our whole hand.
If it be possible, so much as in you is, liue peaceably with all men] We must seeke peace, yet vnder these conditions; If it be possible, and as much as in vs is. For we cannot haue peace with some men; and wee may not haue peace in some matters. See Gospell on all Saints, and ser. on the first Lesson for the next Sunday, ioined to the Gospel and Epistle.
If thine enemie hunger, feed him] There are degrees of loue; Galat. 6.10. Doe good to all men, especially to them which are of the houshold of faith. Among the faithfull, the neerest ought to be dearest vnto vs; a wife, father, child, ally, neighbour, friend, is to be respected more (caeteris pari|bus) then a stranger or an enemy: yet in case of necessitie, thou must feed thy foe, blessing him that did curse thee. By the ciuill lawes, he that bequeathes a man nourish|ment, intends he should haue bed and boord, apparell and dwelling. Lege, quos nos hostes. 234. de verb. signific. Alimentis legatis, cibaria  vestitus  habitatio debentur. Martyr in loc. In like sort, God inioining vs in his Testament and last will, to feed our enemies, includes also, that we must harbour them, and cloath them, and according to their seuerall necessities, euery way relieue them.
In so doing, thou shalt heape coales of fire vpon his head] I finde Theophylact. Aquin.  Tile|man. in loc. two constructions of these words; one bad, ano|ther good. It is a senslesse sense to say by well doing, thine enemie not deseruing it, thou shalt hepe coales of fire vpon his head; increase Gods heauy iudgements a|gainst him. Our Apostles intent is to moue men vnto charitable works euen toward their enemies: hereby to doe them good, and to purpose the same. But if that were the meaning, Paul should teach vs how to be reuenged; and in shew of doing kindnes, to worke mischiefe, pre|tending good, intending euill.
The better construction is; In so doing thou shalt ei|ther confound, or conuert thine aduersary. Caluin. in loc. Confound him in his conscience, making him acknowledge, that thou art more religious, and more nobly minded then

himselfe. So when Saul vnderstood of Dauids honest and honourable cariage toward him, instantly brake forth into this ingenuous confession; 1. Sam. 24.18. Thou art more righteous then I, for thou hast rendred mee good, and I haue rendred thee euill. Or else thou shalt Hieron. in loc. conuert him to thy selfe. For Cant. 8.6. loue is strong as death, the coales thereof are iery coales, and a vehement flame. There is no greater prouocation to loue, then preuention in loue. Aquin. ex Au|gustin. in loc. Nimis enim durus ani|mus, qui dilectionem, ersinolebat impendere, nolit rependere. Kind respect to thy foe, shall blow the coales of his affe|ction, and inflame his loue toward thee.
Be not ouercome of euill] We must haue patience, when we cannot haue peace; so we shall be Rom. 8.37. more then conque|rours, ouercomming without resistance, which is the Martyr in loc. most noble kind of victory: or ouercome euill with goodnesse; that is, make the wicked good by thy good example. Theophylact. in loc. Probum ex improbo redde. For as Epist. 54. Augustine from Seneca, diligendi sunt mali, vt non sint mali. We must manifest our loue to the wicked, in winning them to God, not in fostering or flattering them in their folly.



The Gospel. MATTH. 8.1.
When he was come downe from the mountaine, c.

DOwne from the mountaine] Haymo apud Thom in loc. From the mount of hea|uen, into this valley of earth; as a Physitian to cure our leprosies. Coster. con. 3. in loc. Or from the mount of the law, to the plaine of the Gospell. Ferus, ser. 4. in loc. Or from the mount of contem|plation, vnto the field of action. Origen. hom. 5. in Mat. Or he came downe from the mountaine, first instructing his disciples, and af|ter, descending to the capacities of the people. Hamo vbi sup.  Asta con. 2.  loc. Teaching all teachers hereby, to deliuer high points vnto the lear|ned, and plaine principles to the simple. Doctores ascen|dunt in montem, vbi perfectioribus excellentia praecepta; de|scendunt autem, cm inerioribus luiora demonstrant.
Behold a leper] In Christ, preaching and practise meet together. So soone as he had said well, Chrysost.  Hieron. in loc. he proceeds for the confirmation of his doctrine to do well. Acting good works and great works: good works of mercy; great works of miracle. Of mercy, in helping; of miracle, in hea|ling a leprous man present, and a palsie man absent. In|timating hereby, that it is not enough to talke of Gods waies, except we walke in his paths; and manifesting him|selfe to the world, that he was the Messias of the world. As if he should argue thus; If you belieue not my words, Iohn 5.36. yet credit me for my wonders. Mat. 11.5. I make the blind to see, the deafe to heare, the lame to goe. I cure all kind of diseases, euen with the least touch of my finger, and least breath of my mouth. I heale the leper, I heare the Centurion.
The leper was a Iew, the Centurion a Gentile; the le|per poore, the Centurion rich; the leper a man of peace, the Centurion a man of warre. Culman.  Hemingius in loc. Insinuating heereby, that God is no Acts 10.34. accepter of persons; but that his be|nefits indifferently belong to men of all nations and all fashions.
I Gal. 3.28. Christ there is neither Iew nor Grecian, neither bond nor free] Yet Christ did first cure the Iew, then the Gen|tile. For saluation was offered, Act. 13.46. first, to the Iewes; he tou|ched the Iew, but cured the Gentile with his word. Rupertus. in loc. He visited Ierusalem in his owne person, but healed other na|tions by the Preachers of his Gospell.

In the le|per, 2. things are remark|able: the

Weaknesse of his body: sicke, and sicke of a leprosie.
Vertues of his mind:

Faith.
Adoration.
Wisdome.
Patience.
Confession.




In Christ also two things are to be considered: his

Mercy; that would so rea|dilie.
Might; that could so easily cure this distressed Lazer.


Aleper] All weaknesse originally proceeds from Iohn 5.14. wic|kednesse; Tom. 3. part. quaest. 4. art. 4. either from some defect in our conception, or disorder in our conuersation: as Mephiboseth had 2. Sam. 4. his lamenesse by falling from his nurse; so euery man his sick|nesse by falling from the Lord. Christ, who was free from sinne, was also free from sicknesse: but vnto men, carying about them bodies of sinne, diseases are as it were a Hemingius in loc. ser|mon from heauen, wherein Almighty God accuseth of sins, and shewes his wrath against sinners.
But the condition of a leper, as we reade in the Leuit. 13. law, was of all other sicke, most insupportable. First, he must liue alone, separated from the fellowship of Gods peo|ple, as vnworthy to come into cleane company. Second|ly, he did weare foure markes to be knowne by; his gar|ments torne, his head bare, his mouth couered, and he must cry; I am vncleane, I am vncleane. For griefe where|of, assuredly some pined away; being forlorne in their sorrow, destitute of all good comfort and company. Yet this leper indued with a liuely faith, is not hopelesse, howsoeuer haplesse. For he comes, and saith vnto the great Physitian of the world; Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me cleane: though he knew that his sicknesse in the worlds eye was incurable, yet he did beleeue that vnto God nothing is impossible. He felt his owne misery to be great, yet hoped Christs mercy was more great: and therefore comes vnto him (as De vit Chri|sti. part. 1. cap. 41. Ludolphus aptly) Non tm passibus corporis qum fide cordis: If thou wilt, thou canst. A strong faith in a weake body.
Faith comes by Rom. 10.17. hearing and the reason why this le|per extraordinarily desired to heare Christ, and heare of Christ, was his vncleane disease: Ferus ser. 4. in loc. so that the weaknesse of his body, brought him vnto the Physitian of his soule. Note then here with Rom. 8.28. Paul, that all things happen for the good of such as are good. It was good for Dauid that he was in trouble; good for 2. King. 5. Naaman that he was a leper; for his vncleannesse brought him vnto the Prophet, and the Prophet brought him vnto the sauing knowledge of

the true God. It was good for Paul that he was buffeted by Satan, for otherwise peraduenture through abun|dance of reuelations he would haue buffeted God.
Of all herbes in the garden (as one wittily) Rew is the herbe of grace. Many times our woe doth occasion our weale: for as pride doth breed sores of salues, so faith on the contrarie doth often make salues of sores, altoge|ther renouncing her owne merit, and wholly relying vp|on Christs mercie. Tanto desiderantis ad Christum con|tendit, qud suam indignitatem  immunditiam prob sen|tiret: as Postil. maior. in loc. Luther and Vbi supra. Ferus accord in this; and that so truly, that as a Papist said; If Bonauentura had not been a Romish saint, he would haue been reputed an asse: So the Protestant, if Ferus had not been a Romish asse, he might haue proued in the Church a renowned saint.
The second vertue to bee considered as a fruite of his faith, is adoration; Thomas ex Chrysost. in loc. a spiritual fee for a spirituall physi|tian: as the bodily Doctor must be paied, so the ghostly prayed. He therefore worships Christ, and that with all

humblenes of Thought.
humblenes of Word.
humblenes of Deede.

He comes to Christ as a vassall to his Lord: Domine, non tanquam ad dominum titularem, sed tanquam ad domi|num tutelarem: If thou wilt thou canst. Out of the abun|dance of the heart the mouth speaketh: and therefore beleeuing in his heart that Christ was the Lord, willing and able to helpe, confesseth it also with his mouth: If it be for my good, I am sure thou wilt: and I beleeue thou canst; attributing all to Christs might and mercie, no|thing to his owne either worth or woe.
Vttering this also with humble gesture. For, as S. Cap. 1.40. Mark reports, hee kneeled, and as S. Cap. 5.12. Luke, he fell on his face: teaching vs in prayer to fall down and kneele before the Lord our maker. Hee that worships God irreuerently, shewes himselfe not a Christian but a Diez con. 1. in loc. Manichee: Augustin. b|res. 46. who thought God made the soule, but not the bodie.
Thirdly, note the lepers wisedome, who did obserue

Circumstances of Chrysostom.  Thplylact. in loc. Place: not pressing to Christ on the mount, but expecting him in the valley.
Circumstances of Time: not interrupting Christ in his sermon, or disturbing his auditory.
Circumstances of Person: speaking in a succinct stile:

Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me cleane. Giuing vs to vnderstand, that in suing vnto men which are wise, and in praying to God who is wisedome, we need not vse many but pithie words. See Gospel. Dom. 2. quadrages.
The fourth vertue is his patience, who was content, notwithstanding his extreame miserie, to stay Gods lei|sure, and Christs pleasure. Matth. 6.33. First, seeking the kingdome of God, and then desiring that other things might be cast vpon him. Ferus ser. 5. in loc. In y^e first place giuing God glory, Lord if thou wilt, thou canst. In the second, praying for his own good: Make me cleane; not as I will, but as thou wilt O Lord: prescribing neither the time when, nor place where, nor manner how, but referring all to Christ, possessing his soule with patience.
The last vertue to be regarded in this leper, is cones|sion. He knew the Pharisies hated and persecuted al such as confessed Christ: yet he calles him Lord, and worships him as a Lord, and proclaimes him in the presence of much people to bee the Lord. It is well Zepper. in loc. obserued, that Gods omnipotent power and infinit mercies are the two wings of our deuotion, whereby faith in the midst of all trouble mounts into heauen. Here the leper acknowled|geth openly Christs omnipotencie: Chrysosto.  Theophylact. in loc. for hee saith not, intreate God, to make me cleane; but, if thou wilt, thou thy selfe canst; and therefore thou art the very Christ: neither doth he Ambros. l. b. 5. in Luc. doubt of his mercie, Ludolphus vi supra. for he saith not, make me cleane, but, if thou wilt make me cleane. Coster. expli|cat. in loc. It is enough to shew my need, I co~mit the rest to thy cure, to thy care. Thou canst doe whatsoeuer thou wilt, and thou wilt do y^ which shall be most for my good  thy glorie.
This may teach vs how to confesse our wickednesse to God, as also to professe his goodnesse vnto men. Our wickednesse vnto God: for as Seneca truly, Prma sanita|tis pars est velle sanari: The first step vnto health is to be desirous of helpe. Augustin. epist. 18 Ipse sihi denegat curam, qui suam me|dico non publicat causam. Our sinnes are a spirituall vn|cleannes and leprosie, defiling the whole bodie, making our eyes to lust, our mouth to curse, our tongue to lie, our throte an open sepulchre, our hands nimble to steale, our feete swift to shed blood. It is therefore necessarie we should manifest vnto Christ our sores, that he may see them, and search them, and salue them.
Againe, by this example wee may learne to professe the faith of Christ openly, Though Psal. 2.2. the kings of y^e earth stand vp, and the rulers take counsell against the Lord, and against his anointed. Other happily thinke so, but dare not say so. Some peraduenture say so, though they thinke not so: but I beleeue as I speake, and speake as I beleeue: Lord if thou wilt, thou canst make me cleane.
Hitherto concerning the patient: I come now to the physition, in whom two things are obseruable:

1. His mercie, who would so readily.
2. His might, who could so easily cure such an incu|rable leprosie.

And Iesus put foorth his hand] He granted that cheere|fully, which the leper desired earnestly. The leper said, if thou wilt, and Christ answereth, I will; and as I will, I say, be thou cleane; and as I say, I doe. His leprosie was imme|diatly cleansed: hee spake the word and it was done; hee commanded and it was effected, euen with a little mo|uing of his lips, and touch of his finger.
Here then is comfort for the distressed soule: the le|per calles, and Christ heales him; the Centurion comes, and Christ helps him. Other Physitions are deceiued of|ten themselues, and often deceiue others; and therefore we venture much, when we trust them a little. The best physicke (as one said) is to take no physicke: but if wee

commit our cause to this heauenly Doctor, our venture is without all peraduenture: for hee cureth all that Psal. 50.15. call vpon him, and Matth. 11.28. easeth all that come vnto him.
Iesus put foorth his hand and touched him.] Ludolphus vbi svpra. Extendens manum suam] quod fuit liberalitatis contra auaros: tetigit eum] quod fuit humilitatis contra superbos: dicens volo] quod fuit pietatis contra inuidos: mundare] quod fuit pote|statis contra incredulos.
It was vnlawfull to touch a leper, as we finde, Leu. 14. In that therfore Christ touched here this leper, he shewes himselfe to be greater then Moses aboue the law. When Elisha cured Naaman, hee did not put his hand on the place, because hee was subiect vnto the law; but Christ touched this leper as being Soueraigne of the law. So Chrysostome, Ambrose, Theophylact, Ludolphus: and almost all other vpon the place.
Secondly, note with Postil. in loc. Melancthon, that morall duties are to be preferred before ceremoniall offices: and ther|fore Christ neglects a ceremonie to saue his brother, and that according to Gods owne commandement, Osee 6.6. I will haue mercie, not sacrifice. The best glosse vpon the Gospel is faith: and the best exposition of the law is loue. Thomas ex Chrysost. in loc. Christ therefore did offend the sound of the law, but not the sense.
Thirdly, this intimates that Christ was homo verus, and yet not homo merus; a very man in touching, but more then a meere man in healing with a touch. Lib. 5. in Luc. cap. 1. Ambrose pithily: Volo dicit propter Fotinum, imperat propter Arium, tangit propter Manichaeum: He did touch the leper to confute Manichaeus, denying him to be very man; he did vse the imperatiue moode, be thou cleane, to confound A|rius, denying him to be very God.
Fourthly, obserue with Maldonat. in loc. Cyrillus of Alexandria, the preciousnes of Christs humanitie, the which vnited vnto the Godhead, is the sole salue of all our sores; his rags are our robes, his crying our reioycing, his death our life, his incarnation our saluation.
Fifthly, with Ex Chrysost.  Iansen. concor. cap. 44. Aquin, to demonstrate, that himselfe and none other cured him, because himselfe and none other touched him.
Sixthly, with In loc. Caluin and Marlorat, Christs hu|mility, who did vouchsafe not onely to talke with the le|per, but also to touch the leper. Origen. According to this exam|ple, we must learne not to loath any Lazarus, as the rich Glutton in the Gospell, but rather (at it is reported of Postil. cathol. con. 1. in loc. Elizabeth, the Kings daughter of Hungary) to make me|dicines for his maladies, and plaisters for his wounds: in humanity to relieue the distressed; in humility to kisse the very feete of the poore. As Christ stretched out his hand to the leper, Prou. 1.20. so we should put forth our hand to the needy. Let not thine hand (saith the Eccles. 4.31. Wise man) be stre|ched out to receiue, and shut when thou shouldest giue.
Lastly, with Lib. 4. contra Marcion. Tertullian and Thomas  Chrysost. in loc.  Ludolphus vbi supr. other, how Christ in this action respected not the letter, but the meaning, which is the soule of the law. The scriptures are not Hieron. expo|sit prior. in c. 1. ad Galatas. in superfi|cie, sed in medulla; non in verborum folijs, sed in radice ra|tionis.
Now the reason of the law forbidding the cleane to touch vncleane, was, lest hereby they should be polluted. But Christ could not be thus infected; he therefore tou|ched the leper, not to receiue hurt, but to giue helpe: so the text of 2. Tim. 3.5. Paul is to be construed; hos deuita.
The Nouice may not be familiar with an old subtill fox; but a iudicious Diuine may confer with an heretike, not to peruert himselfe, but to conuert his aduersary: Christ may touch a leper, if it be to heale him; and the Minister of Christ may teach an heretike, if it be to win him, and not to wound the truth.
I will, be thou cleane] I will. (Iames 4.15. If God will) is the stile of man: our will being subordinate to Gods eternall de|crees; in Act. 17.28. whom we liue, and moue, and haue our being. But, I will, is the stile of God only, who doth whatsoe|uer pleaseth him in heauen, in earth, in sea: Ps. 135.6. The commanding terme then, I will, and imperatiue moode,

be thou cleane, (except we reade the text with the specta|cles of Arius) Iustin. Martyr. Athanas.  re|liqui sere patres, vti Maldonat. in loc. euidently proue, that Christ is God Al|mighty.
And immediatly his leprosie was clensed] This amplifi|eth exceedingly Christs greatnesse and goodnesse: first, in that he cured this vncleane person thorowly, then in that he cured him quickly; for in all our suits vnto men, we desire two things especially, that they deale soundly and roundly. Christ dealt so soundly with this leper, as that he did expose his cure to the censures euen of his ad|uersaries the Priests, of all, most ready to cauill at his ca|riage, and mocke his miracle: so roundly, so speedily, that whereas ordinary physicke must haue time for opera|tion; his extraordinary medicine wrought, as the text saith, immediatly, instantly.
Iesus said vnto him, tell no man] Saint Cap. 1.45. Marke reports, that this leper instantly published the matter, and that in such sort, that Iesus could not openly enter into the Ci|tie, but was without in desert places; and yet people came to him from euery quarter. Here then a question is made, whether it was a fault in the leper or no, thus to diuulge the miracle? For Cap. 12.4. Esay would haue men declare Gods works among the people. Psal. 107. Dauid wished often, O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodnesse. And Christ himself said vnto another, whom he cured, in the 5. of S. Marke; Goe thy way home to thy friends, and shew them what great things the Lord hath done to thee. Vbi supr. Ludolphus answers by distinction, affirming that there is,

triplex praeceptum, Cautelae.
triplex praeceptum, Probationis.
triplex praeceptum, Obedientiae.


Or as Helmetius in loc. other Obligationis.
Or as Helmetius in loc. other Tentationis.
Or as Helmetius in loc. other Instructionis.

All the positiue lawes of God are obligatory; the com|mandements affirmatiue bind semper; and the negatiue semper, and ad semper. The probatory precepts are to try vs

onely. So God Gen. 22. commands Abraham to kill Isaac; inten|ding hereby not to destroy the sonne, but to try the fa|ther; admonitory precepts; as here, Christ commanded the leper to tell no man: hereby teaching vs in him to shun vaine glory; for so most interpreters expound it.
This distinction is insufficient; as hauing no firme ground in the Bible. For when almighty God inioines a particular command, for the triall of his people, contrary to the generall scope of his law, he doth at that instant Perkins treat. of cons. cap. 2. dispense with the generall, and the particular onely binds; as in the sacrificing of Isaac; Offer thy sonne, was an exemption at that time from the law, Thou salt not kill.
And as for admonitory precepts, how did this leper in|fallibly know, that Christs command, Tell no man, was ra|ther an instruction for other, then a prohibition vnto himselfe? Wherefore seeing all Christs iniunctions bind, I subscribe vnto their opinion, Caluin.  Marlor. in loc. who thinke this leper offended in publishing abroad Christs benefit, notwith|standing he did it affectionately, and zealously. For we must giue thanks vnto God, not as we will, but as he will: Deut. 4.1. Iohn 2.5.
Hence we may learne to temper our zeale with know|ledge and obedience: for 1. Sam. 15.22. obedience is better then sa|crifice.
If any demand, why Christ would haue this miracle concealed: I answere with Rom. 9.20. Paul; O man, who art thou which disputes against God? Iob 9.3. If thou dispute with him, thou canst not answere one thing of a thousand: but he can render a thousand answeres vnto this friuolous obie|ction. As first, that there is a time for all things; a time, wherein Christ would be thorowly knowne, and a time wherein he would not be knowne, because his houre was not yet come.
Secondly, Hieron. in loc. Non erat necesse, vt sermone iactaret, quod corpore praeferebat: It was needlesse to publish the mira|cle, seeing his whole body made cleane, was as it were turned all tongue to tell it.
Thirdly, it was absurd, that the leper should boast he was cleane, before he was iudged to be cleane. Therefore Christ saith in the next clause, Goe and shew thy selfe vnto the Priest: and then being adiudged cleane, tell whom thou wilt.
Shew thy selfe vnto the Priest] Interpreters obserue di|uers reasons of this command. First, to Marlorat. in loc. confirme the truth of the miracle, when as the leper according to law, shall be iudged cleane.
Secondly, that the leper might inioy the Theophylact. in loc. benefit of his cure: for hee might not enter into the City, Leuit. 14. before the Priest had pronounced him cleane.
Thirdly, to Hieron. in loc. condemne the Priests, who taught, that Christ was not an obseruer, but rather a transgressor of the law.
Fourthly, that as the law doth witnesse of Christ; and all the sacrifices are types of Christ: Idem ibidem. so likewise the Priests, expounders of the law, might also witnesse, that Christ is the true Messias of the world; that seeing this miracle, they might belieue; or in not belieuing, be left inexcusable.
Fifthly, to Melancthon. in loc.  Ludol|phus vbi supra. magnifie the calling and office of the Priests, howsoeuer they were wicked wretches. Here|by teaching vs, not to vilifie that holy profession for the faults and infirmities of some Iudas crept in among the twelue.
Lastly, by this example, instructing vs to doe the grea|test right vnto those who doe vs the most wrong. Goe to the Priests, albeit they bee my mortall enemies, and doe that respect, which is incident to their places and persons.
Here the Gospell and Epistle meet. Christ did not ren|der euill for euill, but ouercome euill with goodnesse: prouiding things honest, not onely before God, but also in the sight of all men; auenging not himselfe, but giuing place to wrath, hauing peace so farre as might be with all men.
The Coster. con. 3. Acost. con. 2. in loc. c. Papists vpon this clause build auricular particu|lar confession vnto the Priest. The leper ought to shew himselfe vnto the Priest of the old Testament: Ergo, the sinner infected with spiritual leprosie must confesse him|selfe vnto the Priest of the new Testament.
Answere is made, that an argument drawne from alle|gories and similitudes, is of little or no force, except it be seconded by some other euident text, whose naturall and proper sense is agreeable thereunto: but there is no such place, which ether expresseth or implieth auricular po|pish confession, and therefore quod non lego, non credo.
Master Iewel defence of Apolog. fol. 151. Harding saith that auricular co~fession is Gods ordinance: but when he comes vnto the point, his onely confirmation is his owne bare affirmation. We tell them that confession is an institution of God, and not of man: as if his tale should stand for Gospel, in whom are found so many legends, and legions of lies.
Melanct. tom. 2 fol. 161. Panormitan confesseth honestly, that it is not a diuine constitution, but an humane tradition: and Sum. quaest. 18 art. 4. vide Mer|ton. Apolog. part. 1. cap. 64. Idem ser Peresius de tradit. part. 3. consid. 3.  Ian|sen. concord. cap. 147. Maldonate writes plainly, that many Catholikes are of the same opi|nion, as namely Scotus among the schoolemen; and the expounders of Gratian among the Canonists.
If then a tradition, of what antiquitie? Beatus Rhena|nus a popish Doctor auoweth in his Argument. in libel. Tertullian. de poenitent. notes vpon Tertul|lians booke de Poenitenti, that this kinde of confessing was vnknowne in the daies of Tertullian, who liued a|bout three hundred yeeres after Christ: and it is noted in the glosse vpon the De poenit. di|stinct. 1. Petrus in gloss. Iewel. vbi supr, fol. 155. Decrees; and by Senten. lib. 4. distinct. 17. cap. cum ergo. Peter Lom|bard, that it was not vsed in S. Ambrose time, who liued foure hundred yeeres after Christ. Schol. in epist. Hieron. ad Ocea|num de obitu Fabiolae, tom. 1. fol. 201. Erasmus an indiffe|rent man, affirmes peremptorily, that this manner of con|fessing to the Priest secretly, was not as yet ordained in Hieroms age. The Greeke Church, as Melancthon.  Iewel. vbi supr. Theodorus writes, hath no such custome. Master Idem ibidem, fol. 148. Harding himselfe is con|strained against his will, to confesse that the termes of au|ricular and secret confssion are seldom mentioned in the Fathers; Rhenanus vbi supr,  Eras|mus annot. in At. 19. vti Bel|larmin. fatetur de poenit. lib 3. cap. 1. a greater clerke the~ he, saith neuer in old time.
We may then iustifie Caluins challenge, lib. 3. Institut. cap. 4 sect. 7. that auricular popish Confession was not practised in the Church vntill twelue hundred yeeres af|ter Christ, instituted first in the Lateran Councell, vnder Innocentius the third.
We reade that there was in the Communion booke, tit. Com|mination. Primitiue Church a godly discipline, that such persons as were notorious sin|ners, were put to open penance, and that by the direction of the Bishop or Pastor: Rhenanus  Iewel, vbi su|pra. and such as voluntarily desired to make publike satisfaction for their offences, vsed to come vnto the Bishops and Priests, as vnto the mouth of the congregation. But this confession was not constrai|ned, but voluntarie; not priuate, but publike: yet hence the priests abusing the peoples weaknes tooke their hint, to bring in auricular confession vpon perill of damna|tion. A cunning inuention to discouer the mysteries of all states, and all men, and to inrich that couetous and ambitious sea: for Confessions euermore make worke for Indulgences, and Indulgences are a great supporter of the triple crowne.
The Papists in this case, flie from the Scriptures vnto the Councels, from the Councels vnto the Fathers, and from the Fathers vnto their last starting hole, miracles. Auricular Confession is Gods ordinance (saith De Poenitent. lib. 3. cap. 12. Bellar|mine) because God hath wrought many miracles at au|ricular Confession. It is answered aptly, that Dauid saith not thy wonder, but thy word is a lanterne. Scripture without miracles are a good warrant; but miracles with|out text, are insufficient: for they were wrought by false prophets in Deut. 13.1. old time, by false teachers in Matth. 24.24. our daies.
It is obserued by Tully, that bad Orators in stead of reasons vse exclamations: and so Bellarmine, for want of arguments is faine to tell a tale or two related by Bona|uentura, Antoninus, and our good countriman Alanus Copus; all which is no more, but aske my fellow whether I be a theefe.
That priuate confession, as it is vsed among the Pa|pists,

is neither necessarie nor Quod sine nu|mero est, quomo|do numerabo? Bernad. rm. de quadu lici debito. possible; see Calum. In|stitut. lib. 3. cap. 4. Iewel. defence Apolog. part. 2. cap. 7. di|uision. 2. D. Morton, Apolog. catholic. part. 1. cap. 64. Ma|ster White, way to the true Church, pag. 157.226.227.
Offer the gift] For the Luke 10.7. labourer is worthie of his hire. This is a witnesse to the Priests, Melancthon. com. in loc. that is their right and due by law. Yea though the Priest doe not labour, yet wee must giue vnto Caesar the things which belong vnto Caesar, and vnto God the things which appertaine to God: the publike Ministerie must bee maintained, al|though the Ministers bee neuer so weake, neuer so wicked.
And when Iesus was entred into Capernaum, there came vnto him a Centurion] This miracle doth second the first.

In it obserue the

Fact of Christ,

Performing that fullie, which the Centurion desired faithfullie; his seruant was healed in the same houre: vers. 13.
Promising further also that other Gentiles, euen from al the quarters of the world, shall come vnto him, and rest with Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, in the kingdome of heauen: vers. 11.

Faith of the Centurion,

Perswading Christ to cure his seruant: vers. 5.6.
Disswading Christ to come into his house, because it was

vnfit.
vnne|cessary.




Vnfit: I am not worthie that thou shouldest come vnder my roofe. Surely this Captaine was a man of great worth, a deuout man, Luke 7.5. for hee builded a synagogue; a good man to the Common-weale wherein hee liued, one that loued the nation of the Iewes, a man of such a faith, as that Christ found none so great in all Israel, vers. 10. a louing master to his seruants, as this act declares a man

of command and authoritie, vers. 9: yet this great Wor|thie confesseth himselfe vnworthie; like the wheat eare, which hangs it head downe lowest, when it hath most corne. By this example, learne lowlines of minde. When the Sunne is right ouer our heads, our shadowes are most short; euen so when we haue the greatest grace, we must make the least shew.
Vnnecessarie; because Christ can helpe the distressed only with his word, Maldonat. in loc. euen one word; which hee proues  minori ad maius: Zepper. in. loc. I am a man vnder the authoritie of ano|ther, c. I am a man, but thou art God; I am vnder ano|ther, but thou art Lord of all; I haue souldiers obedient to me. For albeit vsually men of that profession are rude, yet I say to one, goe, and hee goeth; vnto another, come, and hee commeth; and therefore Sicknes, which is thy Theophylact. in loc. souldier, if thou speake the word onely, will depart: say to the palsie, goe, and it will goe; say to thy seruant, Health, come, and it will come.
I haue not found so great faith] He might haue remem|bred in this noble Captaine, bountie, loue, deuotion, hu|militie; but he commends faith most of all, as being in|deede the ground of all; without which one vertue the rest are sinne: Rom. 14.23. Heb. 11.6.




The Epistle. ROM. 13.1.
Let euery soule submit himselfe, c.


THis Epistle consists of three parts; a

Proposition: Let euery soule sub|mit himselfe to the authority of the higher powers.
Reason: for there is no power but of God, c.
Conclusion: wherefore yee must needes obey, giuing to euery man his duty; tribute to whom tribute, c.


The proposition is peremptory, deliuered not narra|tiuely, reporting what other hold meete; but positiuely, importing what God would haue done, not aduised on|ly by Paul, but deuised euen by Christ, as a command, in imperatiue termes expresly; Let euery soule bee sub|iect. In which,

obserue the quality of this duty, To submit our selues.
obserue the equality of this duty, Belonging indiffere~t|ly to all; Let euery soule, c.

First of the last, according to the words order in the text.
Let euery soule] Aquin.  Gorran in loc. That is, euery man: putting the princi|pall part for the whole. So Gen. 46.27. All the soules of the house of Iacob, which came into Egypt, are seuenty: that is, as Moses expounds himselfe, Deut. 10.22. seuenty per|sons. If any demand, why Paul said not; Let euery body, but euery soule; Gualter in loc. Diuines answere fitly, to signifie, that we must obey, not in outward shewes onely, but in truth and in deed: Omnis anima, quoniam ex animo: Colos. 3.22. Not with eye seruice, but in singlenesse of heart.
This vniuersall note confutes as well the seditious Pa|pist,

as the tumultuous Anabaptist: The Papist exemp|ting Clergy men from this obedience to secular powers: a doctrine not heard in the Church a B. Bilson a|gainst the Iesuites, pag. 128. thousand yeeres after Christ.
Epist. 42. ad archiepisc. Senon. Bernard out of this place reasoneth thus with an Archbishop of France: Let euery soule be subiect: if euery, then yours: I pray, who doth except you Bishops? Si quis tentat excipere, conatur decipere. So Chrysostome, Theodo|ret, Oecumenius, Theophylact, vpon this text expresly: Clergy men ae not excepted; Ergo, not exempted.
Epist. lib. 2. epist. 100. Gregory the Great, one of the most learned Popes, alleageth this glosse; Power (saith he) ouer all men is gi|uen to my Lord Mauritius the Emperour, from heauen: and lest any should imagine Priests exempted, he saith in the same place, to the same Prince; Sacerdotes meos tuae mnui commisi: and epist. lib. 2. epist. 103. Christ hath ap|pointed Mauritius to be ruler, not ouer souldiers onely, but ouer Priests also.
Cod. lib. 1. tit. 3.  Nullus.  in authent. de sanct. pisc.  Sed neque pro qua|libet. Iustinian, who fauoured the Church, and of all other Emperors inlarged most the priuiledges of Church men, inacted this law; Let no Bishop be brought or presented against his will, before the Captaine or ciuill Iudge, vn|lesse the Prince shall so command.
Our Sauiour Christ, the best Interpreter of Gods law, doth shew both by precept and practise, that Clergy men owe subiection and loialty to the ciuill Magistrate: so Vbi supr, Bernard writes; Howsoeuer you Bishops hold your selues free, yet Christ, alitr iussit, aliter gessit. He taught otherwise, Luke 20.25. speaking vnto Priests; Giue to Caesar the things which are Caesars. He wrought otherwise; for being a Priest and a Prophet, he submitted himselfe to the Roman Magistrate, Iohn 19 11. confessing the Presidents power to be from heauen.
His Apostles did tread in their Masters steps: Acts 25. Paul appealed vnto Caesar, and appeared before Caesar, as his lawfull gouernour. Saint Iude detested them for false Prophets, who despised gouernment, and spake ill of those that

are in authority. 1. Epist. 2.13. Saint Peter exhorted all men to submit themselues vnto Gods ordinance, whether it be to the King, as to the superior, or vnto gouernours, as vnto them that are sent of him for the punishment of euill doers, and for the praise of them that doe well.
I will not write Iliads after Homer, nor dispute this point after those reuerend fathers of incomparable iudgement and industry, Iewel, Bilson, Andrewes; in dispari genere par laus. Each of the~ hath fought the battell of the Lord valiantly: the first with a sword; the two latter haue stabbed the Popes supremacie with a dagger, euen to death.
Secondly, Libertines  Anabaptists are confounded by this vniuersalitie, Bullinger ad|uersu Ana|baptist. fol. 95. who thinke themselues free from all lawes. In Germany they would haue framed a poli|tike body, like the body of Polyphemus, without his eye; or like the confused Chaos in old time, when height and depth, light and darknes were mingled together. Our Apostle teacheth here, that some must be subiect, other soueraigne; some low, some high; some rule, some obey. Popular equality is the greatest inequalitie, void of all name, nurture, and nature of a common weale.
The ground on Rhemists an|not. in Iam. 2.1. which Anabaptists haue framed their anarchie, is Iames 2.1. My brethren, haue not the faith of our Lord Iesus in respect of persons. If no respect of persons, no distinction; if no distinction, why should there be dif|ference betweene bond and free, Prince and people? An|swere is made, that Saint Iames saith not; Haue no respect of persons; but, Haue not the faith of Christ in respect of per|sons; as he doth interpret himselfe in the verse following; he speakes of grace, not of place. All men are fellowes in regard of the common faith, and spirituall grace: but all men are not fellowes in respect of authority and place; for some be parents, other children; some masters, other seruants; some commoners, other commanders.
Beasts and Diuels obserue order. yprian. de vanitat. Idol. Rex vnus est apibus,  dux vnus in gregibus. Among Bees there is one master;

among flockes of sheep, one belwether. The Cranes haue their Captaine; Hieron. epist. ad Rusticum. Quem ordine literato sequuntur. Albeit the Grashopper hath no king, Prou. 30.27. yet goe they forth all by bands. In hell, which is the kingdome of confusion, there is distinction of persons and order; otherwise Luke 11.15. Belzebub could not be chiefe of diuels.
The Libertines haue wrested also that text of Paul, 1. Tim. 1.9. The law is not giuen vnto the iust or righteous man: Ergo, good men are exempted from obedience to lawes. Theophylact. in 1. Tim. 1. It is answered aptly, that the iust man doth well, not for feare of punishment, as compelled by law, but of grace and meere loue toward God and goodnesse: Virtu|tis amore. Iusto lex non est posita, Melanct. in 1. Tim. 1. ne ad condemnationem, ne ad coactionem: Albeit there were no king, nor law to command him, he would be a king and a law to himselfe, obeying higher powers of his owne accord, with all his heart and soule. Thus euery person, as well Christian as heathen, ecclesiasticall as laick, must submit himselfe to superior powers.
Submit himselfe] To be subiect, is to suffer the Princes will to be done, aut  nobis, aut de nobis, either of vs, or on vs: of vs, when he commands for truth; on vs, when he commands against the truth: either we must be patients, or agents: agents, when he is good and godly; patients, when he is tyrannous and wicked. Wee must vse not a sword, but a buckler against a bad Prince. Saint Paul heere doth not say; let euery soule be subiect to Chri|stian and vertuous gouernours, but Aquin. in loc. indefinitly to Po|tentates, in that they bee Potentates; as Saint 1. Epist. 2.18. Peter expresly; not onely to the good and courteous, but also to the froward.
If Peter and Paul inioined all men in their time, to submit the~selues vnto gouernours, albeit they were wor|shippers of diuels, and cruell persecuters of Christians; how much more should we now respect and honour re|ligious kings, which are defenders of the faith, and nur|sing fathers vnto the Church? as Praesat. tom. 11. annal. Caesar Baronius hath

well obserued against the bloody practises of turbulent statizing Iesuites.
I haue read and heard, that the Iesuites are desirous to purge Saint Pauls Epistles, especially this to the Ro|mans, as being herein more Lutheran then Catholicke. This text of all othr, Omnis anima potestatibus subli|mioribus subdita sit, is so much against their humor and honour, that it is neither read in their Missale, nor ex|pounded in their Postils. How Pope In extraua|gant. vnam san|ctam. Boniface 8. and See Peter Martyr in loc. other Papists haue wronged this Scripture, both in their precepts and practices, is seene of all Christian peo|ple, felt of all Protestant Princes.
Higher powers] Marlorat. ex Hyperio in loc. Not highest onely, for we must obey the 1. Pet. 2.14. subordinate magistrate so well as the supreame. So that this proposition hath three large extensions; euery soule, in euery thing, must submit himselfe to euery supe|riour. Bee wise now therefore, O yee Kings: vnderstand yee that are Iuges of the earth, how the Church of Rome doth lessen all this extent.
Clergy men are exempted; Ergo, not euery soule. Cau|ses ecclesiasticall are excepted; Ergo, not in euery thing. The Pope may depose what higher powers he list; Ergo, not to euery superiour, but only to those whom his Ho|linesse doth not curse. Thus some Princes only may com|mand some men onely, in some matters onely: whereas Paul here; Let euery soule submit himselfe to the authority of the higher powers, c.
For there is no power] The reason is threefold, drawne from the threefold good.


Ab

honesto, which Paul shewes,  Gorran. in loc. bonitate

ordinantis; there is no power but of God.
ordinationis; the powers are ordained, or or|dered.

vtili, for, to

resist, is euill: malum

culpae; whosoeuer resisteth power, re|sisteth the ordi|nance of God.
poenae; they that re|sist, shall receiue to themselues dam|nation.

submit our selues is good, be|cause the Magistrate is the minister of God for our good, for the good of peace, prote|ction, iustice, religion,  the like. For this cause we pay tri|bute, quia ministri Dei sunt in hoc ipsum seruientes.

iucundo, wee must obey for conscience: the which vnto the disobedient, is a perpetuall hell; but vnto such as obey Gods ordinance, is a continuall feast.


No power but of God] An argument from the Au|thor of authority; all higher powers are from the highest power, vnto whom all creatures must be subiect. It hap|peneth often, that potens, the ruler, is not of God: Osea 8.4. Ipsi regnauerunt  non per me: They haue set vp Kings, but not by me; they haue made Princes, and I knew it not. Aquin. in loc. And the maner of getting kingdomes is not alwaies of God. Balaeus in vi|l Alex. 6. Alexander 6. obtained the Popedome by giuing himselfe to the diuell. Tileman. in loc. Phocas by sedition got his Em|pire. Polydor. Vir|gil. hist. Aglic. lib. 25. Richard 3. came to the crowne of England by but|chering his Nephewes, and other of the blood Royall;

yet the power it selfe is euer from God: Prou. 8.15. By me Kings reigne. Iohn 19.11. Thou couldest haue no power (saith Christ to Pi|late) except it were giuen thee from aboue.
The powers that be are ordained of God.] Marlor. in loc. Insinuating that the Magistrate is not from God, after any common manner as all things are, but after a more speciall fashion ordained. The Lord is the God of order, and order is the good of euery creature, with whom it is better not to be, then to be out of order.
Whosoeuer therfore resisteth] If there be no power but of God, and nothing done by God but in order; he that re|sisteth authoritie, resisteth Gods ordinance. So the Lord himselfe said to 1. Sam 8.7. Samuel: They haue not cast thee away, but they hau ast me away, that I should not reigne ouer them. And hee might haue said of Princes, as hee doth of Preachers, Luke 10.16. He that despiseth you, despiseth me. For hee said of both; Psal. 82.6. Ego dixi, dij estis. As God is a great king, so a king is as it were a little God. He therefore that re|sisteth the Prince, resisteth him that sent him, almightie God the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: 1. Tim. 6.15.

There are Perkins Treat. of conscience. cap. 2. two binders of the conscience:

1. Proper, Gods law.
2. Improper, mans law.


Gods holy word hath absolute and soueraigne power to binde the conscience, for God is Lord of conscience, creating it, and gouerning it, and only knowing it.
The lawes of men improperly binde conscience, not by their owne vertue, but by the power of Gods law, which here and elsewhere commands obedience to prin|ces. He therefore that willingly with a disloyall minde breakes any wholesome lawes of men, is guiltie of sinne before God: Caluin. in 1. Cor. 14.  In|stitut. lib. 4. cap. 10. . 30. Non enim habendae sunt pro traditionibus humanis, quandoquidem fundatae sunt in generali mandato,  liquidam habent approbationem, quasi ex ore Christi. So S. Epist. 166. Augustine notably: Hoc iubent imperatores, quod iu|bet  Christus, quia cum bonum iubent, per illos non iubet nisi Christus.
They that resist shall receiue to themselues damnation] It may be construed Aquin.  Gor|rn in loc. either of temporall punishment, or eternall iudgement. Of temporall, Prou. 20.2. for the wrath of a King is like the roring of a lion: he that prouoketh him vnto anger, sinneth against his owne soule.
By the Stanford peas of the Crown, lib. 3. cap. 19. lawes of England a traitor conuicted and at|tainted, hath his iudgement to be drawne from his pri|son to the place of execution, as being vnworthie to tread any more vpon mother earth; and that backward with his head downward, for that hee hath been retro|grade to naturall courses; after hanged vp by the necke betweene heauen and earth, as deemed vnworthie of both: his priuie parts are cut off, as being vnprofitably begotten, and vnfit to leaue any generation after him; his bowels and intrals burned, which inwardly had con|ceiued and concealed such horrible treason; then his head cut off, which imagined the mischiefe: last of all, his whole bodie quartred and made a prey for the birds of the ayre, as one said of a Romish treacherous Iesuite:
Sic ben pascit aues, qui male pauit oues.
How Rebels haue ruinated vtterly themselues, and their families, all histories are full of Consule Tile|man.  Mar|tyr. in loc. tragicall exam|ples: acquirunt sibi damnationem, as it is in the vulgar; they doe not only receiue, but pull vpon themselues hea|uie iudgements.
Againe, this may be construed of eternall damnation, as is manifest in Numb. 16.3. Chore, Dathan, and the rest of that conspiracie, who went downe quicke to hell. If murther be fitly termed a crying sinne, then treason may well bee called a roring sinne. For as he that robs a scholer, is said to rob many; so the traitor that murthers a Prince, kils many; sometime the whole State, the which assuredly cries aloud to the Lord in such sort, that it awaketh him, and often calles him to speedie iudgement.
He is the minister of God for thy wealth] D. Buckeridge ser. vpon the fist verse of this chapter. If hee be a good Prince, causa est, he is the cause of thy good, tem|porall and eternall; if an euill Prince, he is an ocasion of

thine eternall good, by thy temporall euill. Augustin. ser. 6 de verbis Dom. secundm Mat. Si bonus, nutritor est tuus; si malus, tentator tuus est: If a good king, he is thy nurse, receiue thy nourishment with obe|dience; if euill, he is thy tempter, receiue thy triall with patience. So there is no resistance, either thou must obey good gouernours willingly, or endure bad tyrants pa|tiently.
Magistrates are Gods ministers: ergo, subordinate to God. If then higher Powers enioyne things against him, Ecclesiast. 5.7. who is higher then the highest, It is better Act. 4.19. to obey God then men. Hic (saith Vbi supr. Augustine) contemne potesta|tem, timendo potestatem: In that thou fearest Gods po|wer, feare not mans power: as Iulians souldiers would not worship Idols at his command, yet when he led them against an enemie, they obeyed most readily: Augustin. in Psalm. 124. Distin|guebant dominu~ temporale~  domino aeterno,  tame~ subditi erant propter dominum aeternum. As al power is from God, so for God: and therefore when the Prince commands against truth, it is our dutie to be patient, and not agent.
For this cause pay ye tribute] Subsidies are the Kings sti|pend or pay: for he is the minister of God, and great ser|uant of the State. So S. Paul expressely, Seruing for the same purpose; not to take his owne ease, Plutarch. com. ad Principem indoctum. but to wake when other sleepe; taking such care, that al men else may liue without care. Magnaseruitus est magna fortuna: Seneca conso|lat. ad Polybiu~. nam ipsi Caesaricui omnia licent, propter hoc ipsum multa non li|cent. Manlius in loc. com. Erasmus wittily: Miserosesse principes, si intelligant sua mala, miseriores si non intelligant. A Prince must be like Iob, Iob 29.15. eyes to the blinde, and feete to the lame. Psal. 2.10. Be ye wise therefore, ye Kings, Intelligte Reges. Intelligere est intus legere; they must not altogether hang vpon the almes basket of their Counsell, but vnderstand of themselues in some measure those things which concerne their places: Erudimini qui, quia indicatis.
Wherefore yee must needs obey] Because all powers are of God; because they bring with them the good of or|der; because it is a sinne to disobey; because iudgement

temporall and eternall accompanie this sinne; because gouernment is the meane of our weale; because Kings are hired by tribute to serue their seruants, and care for their subiects. It is necessarie wee should obey, both ex necessitate finis  praecepti: for hereby wee shall doe that which is acceptable to God, and profitable to our selues: acceptable to God, enioining obedience; profitable to our selues, enioying the good of gouernment, 1. Tim. 2.2. that we may lede a quiet and peaceable life in all godlinesse and ho|nestie.
Not onely for fere of vengeance, but also because of con|science.] Thus all must obey, bad men for feare, good men for loue. The Kings Bench compels the one, for he bea|reth not the sword in vaine; but the Chancerie moues the other: and therefore the Papists and Schismatikes are not good men, in pretending conscience for their disobe|dience to the Ciuill Magistrate. For as a learned Tortur Torti. pag. 70. father of our Church obserues excellently: Tut conscienti praestari possunt, quae propter conscientiam praestanda sunt: A man may doe that with a safe conscience, which he must doe for conscience.
Tribute to whom tribute.] Soueraigne Sublimities on earth are Gods among men in respect of their attri|butes and tributes. Customers Al|phabet by M^r. Thomas Milles. Almightie God himselfe expects and receiues at our hands his immediate rents, as prayer and thanksgiuing; the rest as tithes and tributes hee doth accept, being faithfullie paied vnto his Stewards and Vicegerents. It is very remarkable that our Sauiour ne|uer did any miracle about honour or money, Matth. 17.27. except that one for giuing tribute to Caesar. Matth. 22.21. For e must giue to Caesar, the things which appertaine to Caesar, honour to whom honour, tribute to whom tribute: but how much, is not defined by Christ or Paul. They leaue that (as Serm. at Stan|ford. Bi|shop Latymer obserues) to Caesars Counsell for to de|termine. Wherefore let all such as are in Commission for the subsidie, remember that excellent speech of Lib. 5. de gu|bernat. Dei. Saluia|nus: Illd indignius  poenalius, qud omnium onus non om|nes

sustinent, im qud pauperculos homines tributa diui|tum premunt,  infirmiores ferunt sarcinas fortiorum, res diersissimas dissimilimas patiuntur inuidiam  egesta|tem; inuidia est enim in solutione, egestas in facultate.



The Gospel. MATTH. 8.23.
 
And when he entred into a ship, his Disciples followed him, c.

SAint Matthew reports in this scripture two miracles, one wrought by Christ in the water, another on the land.

The first is both an Historie.
The first is both an Mysterie.

The word of God is a Heb. 4.12. two edged sword; hauing one edge, saith Lib. contra Praxeam. Tertullian, in the sense of the matter; and an other in the sound of the words; or (as In Augustin. lib. 14. de Ciuit. cap. 12. Ludouicus Viues obserueth) being sharpe in a literall exposition, and sharp in an allegoricall sense. Most Interpreters therefore note that the ship heere mentioned, is a type of the Consule Luther. Melancth. Laty|mer. Culman. in loc. Church militant, tossed in the world, Vide Pontan. in loc. which is most like the sea with stormes of persecution, vntill Christ the Master of the ship (who seemes to sleepe for a time) doth awake by the prayers of passengers, and makes a calme.

In the storie two things are to be considered especially: the shipping of Christ
In the storie two things are to be considered especially: the sailing of Christ.


In his shipping two points obseruable:

1. That he entred himselfe.
2. That his Disciples followed him.



In the sailing two princi|pall occurrences are to bee noted also: the

raging of a tempest.
stilling of a tempest.




The tempest is said here to be Sudden; Behold there arose.
The tempest is said here to be Great: so that the ship was couered with waues; and Christ (who was to com|fort, and help all) was asleepe.


In the stilling of the tempest, foure things are regardable:

1. Christ awaketh: His Disciples came, and awoke him, saying, Master saue vs, c.
2. The Disciples are rebuked: Why are ye fearfull, O ye of little faith?
3. The tempest calmed: He rebuked the windes and the sea.
4. The beholders of this miracle won|dred, saying, What manner of man is this, c.


Iesus entred into a ship.] As the superstitious D. Fulk in 1. Tim. 2.5. Papists in latter daies, assigned seuerall Saints for seuerall seruices; as Apollonia for the toothach; for hogs, S. Anthony; for horses, S. Loy; for Souldiers, S. Maurice; for Seamen, S. Nicholas, c. so the grosse idolatrous Heathen in old time, marshalled their gods into seuerall rankes, allot|ting Heauen for Iupiter, Hell for Pluto, the Sea for Nep|tune.
Christ therefore to shew their Grant. Dom. 3. post. octau. Epiphan. con. 2. vanitie, and to mani|fest himselfe to be the sole Commander of the world; so soone as he had wrought miracles on the land in healing the leper, vers. 3. in curing the Centurions seruant, vers. 13. in casting out diuels, vers. 16. in helping al that were sick, vers. 17. he comes now (saith Hom. 6. in di| script. loc. Origen) to shew wonders on the sea.
Wee neede not then exhibit supplications either vnto the no gods of the Gentiles, or moe gods of the Papists, importuning the virgin Mary for euery thing, Erasmus col|loq. de peregri|nat. Religionis erg.as if her sonne Iesus were still a babe, not able to helpe. For if we be schollers, he is our saint Gregorie the God of Dan. 2.20. wisedome; if souldiers, he is our Mars the God ofEsay. 3.1. hosts: if wee desire to liue in quietnesse, he is the God of Heb. 13.20. peace: if mariners, he is our Nicholas and Neptune, that enters into the ship,

and calmes the tempest. Psal. 139.7. If we ascend vp into heauen, hee is there; if we descend downe into hell, he is there also; if wee take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the vtermost parts of the sea, yet thither shall his hand lead vs, and his right hand hold vs: hauing all power ouer all things in all places, and doing whatsoeuer hee will in heauen, earth, sea. Psalm. 139.6.
Saint Mat. vers. 18. of this chapter, and saint Marke, cap. 4. vers. 36. intimate another reason why Christ en|tred into the ship; namely, to shun the multitudes of peo|ple; for as the sunne, though a most glorious creature, Onid. oculus mundi, the worlds eye, is regarded little, because it shineth euery day; so ministers, the Matth. 5.14. light of the world, are eclipsed much by the grosse interposition of earth. It is true that familiaritie breeds contempt, and as true, Bernard. ser. 2 de Resurrectio|ne Domini. cuius persona despicitur, eius praedicatio contemnitur; and therefore Soarez tract. 3. in 8. Matth. clergie men, as Christ heere, must vpon occa|sions often withdraw themselues  turb turbulent.
Bartholomaeus Angicus mentioneth a lake in Ireland, in which if a staffe be pight, De proprita|tibus erum, lib. 15. cap. 80. and tarieth any long time therein, the part that is in the earth, is turned to iron, and the part in the water to stone, onely the part aboue the water remaines in his own kind. So it is with Aarons rod, and with the crozier staffe; if it sticke long in the common puddle, it will not diuide the waters aright, but become so rusty as iron, so stonie as flint; onely that rod is like it selfe which is aboue the waters, aboue the streame, aboue the people. The vulgar is like tapestrie, the further, the fairer, but the neerer you come, the worse they are. He that is pinned as a cognosance to the towne coate, and depends vpon the common sleeue, Scaliger. pendet ma|gis, arbore quam qui pendet ab al, is as base as a signe that hangs on a painted maypole. Paul then had good cause to desire that he might be deliuered from Thess. 3.2. . vnreaso|nable men; and Christ here to decline troublesome troopes, entring into a ship with his disciples.
Our Sauiour Christ could haue walked on the water, as

he did, Mat. 14. or else drie vp the water, as hee did for the children of Israel, Exod. 14. but he did neither, for if hee should haue vsed his omnipotent power in euery thing, as God, no bodie would haue beleeued him to bee man; hee did therefore take this course in the whole course of his life to manifest both. If hee were not God, whom did Luk. 1. Gabriel call Lord? If not man, whom did Mary beare in her wombe? If not God, whom did the Matth. 2. wisemen worship? If not man, whom did Luke 2. Ioseph cir|cumcise? If not God, who promised Luke. 23. Paradise to the thiefe? If not man, who hanged on the crosse? Origin. vbi supra,  Ludol|phus de vit Christi, part. 1. cap. 46. If not God, who rebuked the windes and the seas? If not man, who slept in the ship? If not God, who raised the tem|pest? If not man, who went into this barke?
His disciples followed him. A ship, as In Matth. cap. 13.  postil. ca|tholic. Dom. 5. post. at. co. 1. Hilary notes, doth fitly resemble the Church of Christ; for as a ship is small in the foredecke, broade in the middle, little in the stearne: so the Church in her beginning and infancie, was verie little; in her middle age flourishing, but in her old age, her companie shall be so small, and her beleefe so weake, that when the sonne of God shall come to iudge the sonnes of men, he shall scarse finde any faith on earth: Luk. 18.8.
It is Pontan. in loc. obseruable, that Christ and his Disciples failed all in one ship: he did enter in first, and his Disciples fol|lowed. Athanagoras orat. pro Chri|stianis. Vnus mundus docet vnum esse Deum: The world being but one teacheth vs that there is but one God; one God, that there is but one Church; one Church, one truth: and therefore as the Church is called by 1. Tim. 3.15. Paul, Columna veritatis; so by Salomon, Columba vnitatis. Cant. 6.8. My doue is alone.
Noes Arke represents the Ambros. ser. 11  Cyprian. epist. lib. 1. ep. 6. Church: all in the Arke were saued, all out of the Arke perished. All that conti|nue with Christ, in his ship are secure, though the Sea make a noise, and the stormes arise: but hee that vtterly forsakes the ship, and swims either in the cockboate of heretikes, or vpon the windie bladders of his owne con|ceits,

shall neuer touch the land of the liuing. As in Salo|mons Temple there were three roomes, the porch, the body, the sanctum sanctorum; so likewise in Christianitie, we cannot enter into the holiest of holies, but by the Church, nor into the Church, but by the porch of bap|tisme. First, there must be shipping; then, sailing; last of all, arriuing. First, wee must be shipt with Christ in bap|tisme; after, saile with him in the Pinnisse of the Church, or else wee shall neuer anchor in the hauen of hap|pinesse.
Saint Matthe doth vse the word follow, signanter; in|sinuating, that all Christs disciples ought to follow him, as himselfe saith: Matth. 16.24. If any will be my disciple, let him forsake himselfe, and take vp his crosse, and follow me.
Some in their high towring thoughts and immoderate zeale, run before Christ, as Luke 9.54. Iames and Iohn: other goe cheeke by iole with him, as Pelagians, and all such as mingle their merit with Christs mercy, making him but halfe a mediator, mediatum dimidiatum mediatorem. Other follow Christ, but a far off, as Peter, Matth. 26.58. Other follow Christ neere, but not for Christ, not for loue, but for loaues, as the people, Iohn 6.26. Few follow him in a troublesome sea, as the disciples here.
Diez. con. 1. in loc. The people followed him in the plaine, not vp to the mountaine, nor into the sea: but Christ leauing the mul|titude, would haue his company tossed in the waues of affliction, Thomas ex Chrysost. in loc. lest they should be puffed vp with presump|tion and pride.
In mirabili|bus historys. Apollonius writes of certaine people that could see nothing in the day, but all in the night. In like maner, ma|nie men are so blinded with the sunshine of prosperity, that they see nothing belonging vnto their good; but in the winter night of misery, Zepper. in loc. schola crucis, schola lucis; no such schoolehouse as the crosse house. The Mat. 9. Palsiman lying in his bed, desired to be brought vnto Christ. Alexander ab Alexando, l. 1. cap. 2. Pto|lomaeus Philodelphus, being so sickly, that hee could not follow worldly delights as he was wont, gaue himselfe

to reading, and builded that his renowned Library. The disciples here seeing the wonders of the deepe, and dan|gers of the sea, were humbled in feare, and raised vp in faith.
And behold there arose a great tempest] Vntill Christ was in the ship, there was no storme. While men haue pillowes sowed vnder their elbowes, all is peace; Luther. postil. ex Culman. con. 1. in loc. but so soone as Christ rebukes the world of sinne, Esay. 57.20. the wicked are like the raging sea, that cannot rest, whose waters cast vp dirt and mire.
Iohn Baptist raised such a storme by preaching against Herod, that it cost him his head. When Paul preached at Athens, Corinth, Ephesus, c. there followed alway tu|mults and vprores among the people. When Luther first preached the Gospell, instantly there was great thunde|ring fro~ Rome, a great tempest in Germany, France, Eng|land, Scotland, and in the whole Christian world, which all the Popes Buls and calues too, could not appease.
This storme was not by chance, but raised by Aquin. Ludol|phus, Beauxamis in loc. Gods prouidence, who brings the winds out of his treasures, Psal. 135.7. and the tempest was Origen. in cat. Thom. in loc. great, that the miracle might be great: the greater the tempest, the greater was the triall of the disciples faith.
In so much that the ship was couered with waues] The Church is often in danger, Ludolphus  Pontan. in loc. but it cannot be drowned; Matth. 16.18. hell gates cannot ouercome it. Tertuian. Robur fidei concussum, non excussum. Albeit Satan goe about daily like a roaing lion, seeking whom he may deuoure, yet there shall be some still, whom he shall not deuoure.
He was asleepe] Psal. 121.4. He that keepeth Israel doth neither slumber nor sleep. He did sleep as man, but watch as God. Cant. 5.2. I sleep, but mine heart waketh. Thomas ex Origen. in loc. He seemes onely to sleep, that we might wake: Emissenus hom. in loc. Nobis dormit Iesus, nobis surgit  somn. Ludolphus in loc. Christus videtur non attendere, patientiam bonorum, poenitentiam impiorum expectans. He doth as it were neg|lect vs for a time, for the greater manifestation of his Zpperus in loc. power, and our patience.
His disciples came to him, and awoke him] Almighty God likes in our necessity this importunity: Psal 50.15. Call vpon me in the time of trouble. Psal. 91.15. He shall call vpon me, and I will heare him. And therefore learne by this example, Luther. postil. maior. in loc. to come to Christ, to cry to Christ in all extremity, renouncing your selues, and relying vpon him onely; Master, saue vs, or else we perish.
He said vnto them; Why are ye fearfull; O yee of little faith?] Culman. con. 1. in loc. It was great faith in that they followed Christ into the ship; but little faith in that they feared.
Theophylact. in loc. See B. atymer ser. in loc. He saith not, O ye of no faith, but O ye of little faith. It was impossible to come vnto God, and call vpon Christ without faith; in saying, we perish, they shewed infidelity; but in praying, saue vs, they manifested faith.
Againe, he doth not say; Pontanus in loc. yee of little courage, or ye of little charity; but ye of little faith: because faith is the ground of all other vertues, and in Melancthon. in loc. aduersity most vse|full. If we belieue that Christ is our Captaine in the ship with vs, who can be against vs? And therefore Paul, Ephes. 6.16. Aboue all, put on the shield of faith, wherewith ye may quench all the fiery darts of the diuell.
Then he arose and rebuked the winds and the sea] Christ reprehends the disciples a little, but instantly grants their requests; his reprehensions had not so much sting as Zepperus in loc. ho|nie, for a great calme followed a little chiding: Psal. 107.25. at his word the stormy wind ariseth, which lifteth vp the waues of the sea: They are caried vp to heauen, and downe a|gaine to the deep: their soule melteth away because of the trouble. They reele to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits end. But when they cry to the Lord in their trouble, he deliuereth them out of their distresse: for he maketh the storme to cease, so that the waues thereof are still.
A great calme followed a great tempest; Thomas in loc. Decet enim magum magna facere. Christ spake but one word to the violent windes and vnruly seas, and they both obeyed his command. Heb. 1.1. He doth at sundry times, and in diuers ma|ners

speake to vs, and yet wee will not hearken vnto his voice. Origin. hom. 6. in diersos scripturae locos. The spectators of this act might therefore won|der to see the senslesse water and weather obey more then man, indued with reason and religion.
The men maruelled:] Ludolphus ex Augustin. Ideo premantur iusti, vt pressi cla|ment; clamantes exaudiantur, exauditi glorificent Deum; A great storme caused in the disciples a great feare; great feare, great deuotion, great deuotion occasioned Christ to worke this great miracle; this great miracle moued this great admiration; What is this man that commands as a God?
And when he was come to the other side.] Two points are

to be considered in this miracle principally; the

Gratiousnesse of Christ, in curing two possessed of diuels.
Vngratiousnesse of the Ger|gesites, preferring a peece of bacon before the Gospell, hogs before Christ. Such as respect their tithe pig, more then their Pastor, are Gergesites, and deserue that Christ should depart out of their coasts.


I will not in particular examine these, but in stead thereof, insert a few notes, vpon the last verse of the first Chapter, appointed to be read at morning praier this Sun|day; preached at Pauls Crosse. Ian. 29. 1608.




ESAY 57.21.
There is no peace to the wicked, saith my God.

This text is a proclamation of warre against the wic|ked, enemies to God and his Gospell, wherein, ob|serue

the

thing proclaimed: No peace to the wicked. An heauy doome, whether we consider the time, the mat|ter, or the men: for there is no time, no peace, no wicked, if impenitent, excepted.
person pro|claiming: the

Prophet, as Herald.
Lord, as chiefe Co~|mander,

able to make this war, because God.
willing to maintaine this war, because my God.




This sentence would not be so grieuous, if it were not so generall, if any wicked man at any time could inioy any kind of peace: but the proposition is an vniuersall ne|gatiue; non est pax impis.
Our and other translations haue it not in the time past, non erat, there was no peace; nor in the future, non erit, there shall be no peace; but in the present, there is no peace. Or as it is in the originall, indefinitely without a verbe, naming no time, that wee might feare this iudge|ment at all times: Lipsius de consianti. l. 2. cap. 13. Cognatum, im innatum omni sceleri sce|leris supplicium. In the words of Saint Rom. 6.23. Paul, the wages of sinne is death; as the worke is ready, so the pay present, nec aufertur, nec defertur, if impiety, no impunity; When sin is Iam. 1.15. finished, it hath his hire; Seneca in Hip|polyo. scelus aliquis tutum, nemo securum tulit.
If we consider a wicked man out of Hugo Cardi|nal. in loc. Christ, he hath neither here peace of grace, nor hereafter peace of glory; but as he passeth from sinne to sinne, he goeth as it were from diuell to diuell, euen from hell to hell, from the

flashes to the flame, from hell internall, to hell eternall.
As this includes all time, so likewise excludes all peace. For albeit Reioyder. pag. 163. Harding found a great difference between no bread,  not bread; yet Interpreters here make no diffe|rence betweene not peace, and no peace. For the wicked haue no peace with man, no peace with God, no peace with themselues. None with man: for as it is said in the verse before my text, The wicked are like the raging sea, whose waters cast vp dirt and mire. They are of their owne nature turbulent; but if we stir them a little, then they fume and some like the sea, both actiue (saith In loc. Mus|culus) and passiue, being neither peace makers, nor peace takers.
For nature and scripture tell vs plainly, that righte|ousnesse is elder sister to peace. So said Ethic. lib. 8. cap. 3.4.8. Aristotle na|tures chiefe Secretary, that agreement in euill is not loue, but conspiracie. So Dauid, a man after Gods owne heart, and a penner of Gods owne will, Psal. 85.10. iustitia  pax osculatae sunt; righteousnesse and peace haue kissed each other. As Augustine vpon the place, fiat iustitia,  habebis pacem, if thou wilt haue peace, worke righteousnesse; first es|chew euill, and doe good, then seeke peace, and insue it: Psal. 34.13. Nay, you need not seeke it, for it will finde you; peace will come of it selfe to kisse righteousnesse. On the contrary, no truth, no mercy; where there is no loue of good, there can be no good of loue; no true friendship, except it be Hiron. epist. Paul. Tom. 3. fol. 1. Christi glutino copulata, glew|ed together in Christ; a man can hardly be true friend to any, that is not first truly friend to truth it selfe.
It was an excellent speech of Euseb. de vita Constant. lib. 1. cap. 13. Constantius, how can they be faithfull vnto their Prince, who are persidious and vnfaithfull vnto their God? I tell thee, saith Au|gustine to Martianus,Epist. 155. albeit you were mine old acquain|tance, yet neuer my friend, vntill you were my louer in Christ.
And therefore when 2 King. 9. Iehoram said vnto Iehu, Is it peace? Iehu replied; What peace, whil the whordomes

of thy mother Iesabel, and her witchcrafts, are yet in great number?Cor. 6.14. What fellowship hath righteousnesse with vn|righteousnesse? what communion hath light with dark|nesse? what concord hath Christ with Belial? As Ismael that was borne after the flesh, persecuted Isaac that was borne after the spirit, euen so it is now, saith Paul: Galat. 4.29. The Apoc. 12.7. Dragon and his armie, will fight against Mi|chael and his Angels.
It is then an idle phantasie to dreame of an vnity with the Papists, of an vniformity with the Schismatikes: for so long as the one is an enemy to truth, and the other an enemy to peace; so long as both are set on mischiefe, combined in faction, howsoeuer different in faith, I must tell you from Esay, and Esay from the Lord, There is no peace to the wicked.
Paex nostra bellum contra Satanam (saith Lib. ad Mar|tyres. Tertullian) our peace is a continuall warfare against Satan and his complices. As Christ, so the Luther. loc. com. Tit. de conciliatoribus. Church must suffer and ouercome in medio inimicorum, in the midst of all our ene|mies: Psal. 110.2. The builder of Gods house must haue a trowell in one hand, and a sword in another. Nehe. 4.17.
And here let not the carnall Gospeller hold himselfe exempted, in being of no side: for pax, (as the Thomas, 22. quaest. 29. art. 1. schoole speaks) is tranquilltas ordinata: Goodnesse is  wic|kednesse, : where there is no order, there can be no peace, but a Babell of confusion: howsoeuer worldlings account the drunkard a good fellow, the fornicator a kind man, the flatterer a louing soule; yet the truth is, there is no peace in things that are wicked, and therefore no peace with men that are wicked. And as they can haue no peace with the godly, so but little agreement among themselues: Esay 9.21. Ephraim is against Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim, and both against Iuda. The Pharises a|gainst the Sadduces,  the Sadduces against the Pharises; both against Christ. The Pelagians against the Mani|chees, and the Manichees against the Pelagians; both against the Catholikes. The Pope against the Turke, the

Turke against the Pope, and both against the truth.
All the vices are iarring in extremity, couetousnesse fighting against prodigalitie, basenesse against pride, rashnesse against dastardy;Esay 19.2. nay, many times, Egyptians are set against Egyptians; and birds of a fether doe not alway flie together; for the Esay 21.2. transgressor is against the trans|gressor, and the destroier against the destroier: a drunkard will stab a drunkard, a theefe rob a theefe, a traitor proue false to a traitor, proditoris proditor, one wicked wretch is executioner of another.
They be so far from the peace betweene man and man, as that they want the loue which is betweene beast and beast: for if one sheep be faint, the rest will stand between it and the Sunne, till it be comforted; if one hog hunted, the whole heard will muster together to reuenge it. Of Bees it is reported, aegrotante vn lamentantur omnes, if one sicke, all sory: yea some beasts are more kind to man then mankind. In humane story we reade of gratefull Li|ons, of kind Eagles, of trusty dogs, qui mori pro dominis,  commori cum dominis parati; saith Ambrose in his Lib. 6. cap. 4. Hex|ameron.
In holy Bible, we finde that 1. King. 17. Eliah was fed by rauens, and Dan. 6.22. Daniel not hurt among hungry lions. yprian. ser. de orat. dominic. O dete|standam humanae malitiae crudelitatem! aues pascunt; ferae parcunt; homines saeuiunt. O hatefull cruelty! the birds feed, the beasts fauour; but one man is a woolfe, yea a di|uell to another. In this the wicked resemble Psal. 121.4. God, that they neither slumber nor sleep, but like the Iohn 10.10. diuell, in that they watch as the theefe to spoile and destroy, see|king whom they may deuoure: 1. Pet. 5.8. For to render good for euill, is the part of a Saint: to render good for good, the part of a man: to render euill for euill the part of a beast, but to render euill for good onely, the part of a diuell. And yet such is the fashion of the wicked, Psal. 140.. imagi|ning mischiefe in their hearts, and stirring vp strife all the day long. Their throat is an open sepulcher; the poison of Asps is vnder their lips. Their mouth is full of cursing and bitter|nesse,

their feet are swift to shed blood, their teeth are speares and arrowes, and their tongue a sharpe sword. More sharpe (quoth Ser. de triplici custodi. Bernard) then the speare which pierced our Sa|uiours sweet side. For this doth not only wound Christs mysticall body, but also dismember it, in the Common|weale making so many factions, as there are functions; in the Church, so many Creeds, as heads: as the same Father sweetly; Non iam exanime fodit, sed facit exanime fodiendo: Longius thrust thorow a body that was dead, but the wicked a body that is quicke. Psal. 14.7. Destruction and vnhap|pinesse is in all their waies, and the way of peace haue they not knowne: in their bed appointed for rest, they plot how to be turbulent, (as the Psal. 7.15. Prophet speakes) they trauell with mischiefe, and bring forth vngodlinesse. In a word, these are the troublers of Israel, thornes in our eies, pricks in our sides, bellowes  brands of sedition, hating the good, not louing the bad; crossing themselues, at war with all: There is no peace to the wicked saith my God.
The second kind of peace is betweene God and man, our reconciliation to God by the mediation of Christ, who is our Ephes. 2.14. peace. So the glosse interlinal, and other ex|positors generally, there is no peace, that is, no Christ to the wicked. The scripture tels vs, how that we were the sonnes of wrath, enemies of God; fire brands of hell, ali|ants from the Common-wealth of Israel, and strangers from the couenants of promise. But Christ God and man; and therefore most fit to be the Mediator Augustin. confess. lib. 10. cap. 43. betweene the mortall sinner, and immortall Iudge: dying for our sinnes, and rising againe for our iustification, is peace to them that are far off, and peace to them that are neere, saith the Lord in this Chapter. That is, as the Fathers Hieron. in loc. ex Paul. Ephes. 2.17. ex|pound it; peace to the Gentiles a far off, and peace to the Iewes that are neere.
This one blessed Peacemaker hath made attonement for both, and appeareth in the sight of God daily, to plead our pardon as a faithfull intercessor and aduocate, in whom onely God is well pleased; and without whom,

God is no hearing God, no helping God, no sauing God, no louing God to vs at all.
And without faith the Gospell is no Gospell; the sa|craments are no sacraments; Christ is no Christ. Faith is Church hom. of saluation. part. 2. Iohn the Baptist, shewing the Lambe of God, which ta|keth away the sinnes of the world: yea Saint Thomas, first handling, then applying the wounds of Christ; euen the spirituall hand that puts on Christs robe of righte|ousnesse.
The wicked then hauing no true faith, haue no true Christ; and hauing no true Christ, they can haue no true peace with God; the grace of our Lord in redeeming, the loue of God in electing, the fellowship of the holy Ghost in comforting is far from them; so long as they continue in their sinnes and vnbeliefe, so long they be traitours, enemies, rebels vnto the King of all Kings; he proclaimes war, and they can haue no peace.
Thinke on this, ye that forget God. Esay 5. Yee that ioine house to house, and lay field to field, till there be no place for other in the land: ye that rise vp early to follow drun|kennesse, and are mighty to powre in strong drinke. Ye that speake good of euill, and euill of good; which put light for darknesse, and darknesse for light, c. Matth. 5.25. Agree with your aduersary quickly, while you are in the way: Esay 55.6. seeke the Lord while he may be found, and call vpon him while he is nigh. Matth. 23.37. O Ierusalem, Ierusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent vnto thee. Heb. 13.22. Suffer the words of exhortation; Psal. 95.8. harden not your heart, but Luke 19.4. euen in this day heare the voice of the Iohn 1.23. Crier; confesse thy rebellion, and come in to the Lord thy God: Ioel 2.13. for he is gentle, patient, and of much mercy: desire of him to create in thee a Psal. 51.10. new heart, and to giue thee one drop of a liuely faith, one dram of holy deuotion, a desire to Mat. 5.6. hunger and thirst after righteousnesse. Suffer not thine eies to sleep, nor thine eie lids to take any rest, vn|till thine Psal. 32.1. vnrighteousnesse is forgiuen, and sinne coue|red; vntill thy peace be made with God, and thy pardon

sealed. O pray, pray, that thou maist haue this peace. O pray, pray, that thou maiest feele this peace: for it is the third kinde; the peace of conscience betweene man and himselfe.
There are foure kinds of conscience, as Lib. de con|scienti, sect. 2. fol. 1784. Bernard hath well obserued.

1. A good, but not a quiet.
2. A quiet, but not a good.
3. Both good and quiet.
4. Neither good nor quiet.

The two good belong properly to the godly; the two bad vnto the wicked, whose co~science is either too too quiet, or else too too much vnquiet; in neither peace: non est gaudium impijs, as the Translators of the Septuagints reade: non est Em. Sa. notat. in loc. gaudere impijs, There is no ioy to the wic|ked. Somtime their conscience is too too quiet, as 1. Tim. 4.. Paul speakes, euen feared with an hot iron, when habit of sin takes away the sense of sinne, when as men are past fee|ling, in a reprobate sense, giuen ouer to worke all vn|cleannes euen with greedinesse: Ephes. 4.19.
This is no peace but a numnesse, yea a dumbnesse of conscience. For at the first euery mans conscience speaks vnto him, as Matth. 16.22. Peter to Christ; Master looke to thy selfe: Her prick-arrowes, as the shafts of 1. Sam. 0. Ionathan forewarne Dauid of the great Kings displeasure: but if wee neglect her call, and will not lend our eares while she doth spend her tongue, this good Cassandra will crie no more.
Now it fareth with the maladies of the minde, as it is with the sicknes of the bodie. When the pulse doth not beate, the bodie is in a most dangerous estate: so if con|science neuer prick vs for sinne, it is a manifest signe our soules are lulled in a deadly sleepe. That schoole will soone decay, where the monitor doth not complaine; that armie must necessarile be subiect to surprise, where watches and alarums are not exactly kept; that towne is dissolute, where no clocks are vsed: o likewis ur little citie is in great peril, when our conscience i ill and

sleepie, quiet but not good; tunc maxime oppugnaris, si t nescis oppugari, saith Tom. 1. fol. 2. Hierme to Heliodore. None so desperatly sicke, as they who feele not their disease. Saint Confess. lib. 1. cap. 13. Augustine notably: Quid miserius misero non miserante seipsum? and Epist. 2. Bernard; Ideo dolet charitas mea, qud cm sis doledus, non doleas;  inde ma is miseretur, qud cm miser sis, miserabilis tamen non es: and Tom. 1. fol. 231. Hierome to Sabi|nian; Hoc plango, qud te non plangis.
Luke 11.21. When the strong man armed keepes is hold, the things that are possessed are in peace. Where Diuines obserue, that vngodly men already possessed with Satan, are not a whit disquieted with his temptations. As God is at open war, so the diuell is at secret peace with the wicked: but yet, saith Ad Heliodor. de vita Eremet. Hierome, tranquillitas ista tempestas est. This calm of conscience will one day prooue a storme. For as God said vnto Gen. 4.7. Cain; If thou doest ill, sinne lieth at the doore. Where wickednesse is compared to a wilde beast, which dogs a man wheresoeuer hee goeth in this wildernesse. And albeit for a time it may seeme harmlesse, for that it lieth asleepe, yet at length except men vnfainedly re|pent, it will rise vp and rent out the very throte of their soules. A guiltie conscience being once roused and awa|ked thoroughly, will make them like those who lie on a bed that is too strait, and the couering too short, who would with all their heart sleepe, but cannot; they seeke for peace of minde, but there is no peace to the wicked, sih my God.
As the co~science was heretofore too too quiet, so now too too much vnquiet. As godly men haue the first fruits of the Spirit, and certaine asts of heauenly ioyes in this life: so the wicked on the contrarie feele certaine flash|ings of hell flames on earth. As there is heauen on earth, and heauen in heauen; so hell on earth, and hell in hell: Cartbusian. in 3 sent. dist. 22. an outward hell, and an inward; outward, in outward darknesse mentioned in holy Scripture, where there shall be Matth. 25.30. weeping and gnashing of teeth; at this feast (as Bi|shop Scr. ad clrum to the Conuoca|tion. Latymer wittily) there can bee no mirth where

weeping is serued in for the first course, gnashing of teeth for the second.
Inward hell is an infernall tormenting of the soule, void of hope, faith and loue: this hell the diuels haue al|waies in the~, and reprobate forlorne people carrie about the~, insomuch that they can neither disport themselues abroad, nor please themselues at home; neither comfor|ted in companie, nor quited alone, but in all places and times, Erinnys conscietiae, (so Comment. in . Cor. 11. Melanchon calles it) hellish hags and infernall uries affright them.
Tom. 8. sol. 286 Auustine in his narration of the 45. Psalm, thus liue|ly describes the wofull estate of a despairing sinner: F|giet ab agro ad ciuitatem,  publico ad domum,  domo in cubiculum: He runnes as a mad man out of the field into the citie, out of the citie into his house; from the com|mon roomes in his house to his chamber, from his cham|ber into his studie, from his studie to the secret closet of his own heart:  ecce hoste~ suum inuenit, quo confugerat, seip sum qu fugiturs est: and then last of all, he is content least of all, himselfe being greatest enemie to himselfe.
The blinde man in the Mark 8.4. Gospel newly recouering his sight, imagined trees to be men; and the Burgundians (as Lib. 1. cap. 11. Comiaeus reports) expecting a battell, supposed long thistles to be launces: so the wicked in the darke, conceit euery thistle to be a tree, euery tree a man, euery man a diuell, afraid of uery thing they see; yea many times of that they doe not see.
Anglican. hi|stor. ab. 25. Polydore Virgil writes that Richard the 3. had a most terrible dreame, the night before Bosworth field, in which hee was slaine: hee thought all the diuels in hell halled and pulled him in hideous and vgly shapes. Id cre|d non fuit somnium, sed conscientia scelerum: I suppose (saith Polydore) that was not a fained dreame, but a true torture of his conscience, prsaging a bloodie day both to himselfe, and all his followers.
The penner of the Latine Chronicle, de vitis Archie|piscoporum Cantuariensium, in the life of Archbishop Hu|bert,

records a will of a couetous oppressor in this forme. Lego omnia bona mea domino regi, corpus sepulturae, animam diabolo: The godly mans will alway runnes in this stile:
Terram terra tegat, daemon peccata resumat,
Mundus res habeat, spiritus astra petat:
I bequeath my bodie that is earthly to the earth, my sins which are diuellish vnto the diuell, my goods that are worldly to the world, my soule that is heauenly to hea|uen: but this vnhappie wretch in great despaire yeelded vp his coyne to the King, whom hee had deceiued, and his soule to the diuell, whom he had serued.
It is written by Lanquet. chron. fol. 146. Procopius that Theodoricus, as he was at supper imagined he saw in a fishes head the visage of Symmachus a Noble man whom hee had vniustly slaine; with which imagination he conceiued such terror, as that he neuer after enioyed one good houre, but pining away ended his vnfortunate daies.
Cardinall Sleidan. com. lib. 23. in fine. Crescentius the Popes Vicegerent in the Chapter of Trent, on a time writing long letters vnto Rome, full of mischiefe against the Protestants and cause of Religion, had a sudden conceit that the diuell in the likenesse of a huge dogge, walked in his chamber, and couched vnder his table, the which affrighted him so much, as that notwithstanding the counsell and comfort both of friends and Physitians, hee died a disconsolate death.
To conclude this argument, the diuell Iudas out of the hell of his conscience, was Bailiffe, Taylor, witnesse, Iurie, Iudge, Sheriffe, deaths-man in his owne execution.
Thus as you see, the wicked haue no peace with man, no peace with God, no peace with themselues. The very Clc. name of peace betweene man and man is sweete, it selfe more sweete, Psalm. 133. like the pretious ointment vpon the head of Aaron, that ranne downe vnto his beard, and from his beard to the skirts of his clothing. Yet the peace of con|science is farre sweeter, a Prou. 15.15. continual feast, a daily Christ|mas vnto the good man; as the rich Epicure, Luke 16. so

the godly fareth deliciously euery day. The man that tru|steth in the Lord is fat, saith Prou. 28.25. Salomon, he feedes himselfe on the mercies of God, and merits of Christ. And so the peace of God passeth all these: for it passeth all vnder|standing, without which one gift all other are rather cur|ses then blessings vnto vs. As Cyril. Alexand. in loc. Cyril excellently, Domin priuante suo gaudio, quod esse potest gaudium? It is the Luke 2.25. con|solation of Israel and solace of the Church: Zachar. 9.9. Reioyce greatly  daughter Sion, shout for ioy  daughter Hie|rusalem, for behold thy King commeth vnto thee. That God is our God, that Christ is our Christ, that the King of all Kings is our King, that he is reconciled vnto vs, and we to him, is a ioy surpassing all ioyes, a iubilation as the Scripture termes it, which can neither be suppressed, nor yet expressed sufficiently.
How wretched then are the wicked in being debar|red of all this sweete? of all this exultation, of all these iubilees of ioy? for if they can haue no peace abroad, no peace at home, no peace with themselues, no peace with other, no peace with man, no peace with God; assuredly the proposition is most true, There is no peace to the wic|ked.
Yea but you will say, Mark 10.18. there is none good except God, all of vs are gone astray, if we say wee haue no sinne, the truth of God is not in vs. Of what kinde of wicked is this then vnderstood? Answere is made, that this onely concernes incorrigible, malicious, impenitent, senselesse sinners. For when once men feele their sinnes, and re|pent for their sinnes, grieuing much because they can grieue no more; then in such as Rom. 5.20. sinne aboundeth, grace superaboundeth, Rom. 8.28. all things worke for their good; euen sinne which is damnable to other, is profitable to them, occasioning 2. Cor. 7.10. repentance, neuer to be repented. Luthr. loc. com. tit. d vul|neribus consci|ntiae. Re|member the speech of God to Rebecca; The greater shall serue the lesser. Albeit our spirituall enemies are stron|ger, and our sinnes greater then we; yet they shall serue for our good, the greater shall serue the lesse. God who

can bring sweet out of sower, and light out of darknesse, shall likewise bring good out of euill.
Such offenders haue peace with men, so far Rom. 12.18. as is possi|ble with all men, Ephes. 4.3. indeuoring to keep the vnity of the spirit in the bond of peace.
Secondly, being iustified by faith, they haue peace to|ward God in Christ: Rom. 51.
Lastly, Christ dwelling in their heart, they want not peace of conscience, but abound with ioy in the holy Ghost: Rom. 14.17.
When sinners are rather passiue then actiue in sinne; when it is rather done on them, the~ of them; albeit their conscience accuse them of the fact, yet it doth not con|demne them of the fault: and so there is all kind of peace to the penitent; no kind of peace to the wicked impni|tent, saith my God.
Hitherto concerning the thing proclaimed. I come now to the person proclaiming, in these words, saith my God. The subordinate proclaimer is Esay; the principall, God himselfe.
As heretofore the Prophet, so now the Preacher is not onely the mouth of God, as Luther cals him: but as Iohn 1.23. Iohn Baptist said of himselfe; The very voice of God. For albeit we speake, yet it is Christ who by vs, and in vs calleth vn|to you: 2. Cor. 5.20. See Epist. dom. 3.  Gospel. dom. 1. and 4. in Aduent.
If then the Lord hath said it, Bullinger. in loc. let no man doubt of it; Heauen and earth shall passe, but not a iot of his word shall passe: he is not like man, that he should lie, or like the Sonne of man, that he should deceiue. Yea, that we might the better obserue it, Almighty God hath spoken once and twice, as it is in the 62. Psalme. For the Lord had made this proclamation once before in the 48. chap|er, at the last verse. So that as De adulterinis coniugijs ad Pollentium. lib. 2. cap. 4. Augustine in the like case, verba toties inculcata, vera sunt, viua sunt, sana sunt, plana sunt. One text repeated twice, pressed againe and againe, must needs be plaine and peremptory. And assuredly (be|loued)

if we further examine the person of this Chiefe, we shall finde him able to make this war, because God, and willing to maintaine this war, because My God. He is stiled elsewhere the Lord of hosts, and therefore all crea|tures as his warriours, are ready pressed to reuenge his quarrels, and to fight his battels. His souldiers against the wicked, are either celestiall, or terrestriall, all the Crea|tures in heauen and on earth. In the beginning God crea|ted the heauen and the earth, Gen. 1. and all that therein is, Exod. 20. And in this acception, according to the Bi|ble, which is a lantern vnto our feet, and a guide vnto our paths, I finde three heauens, as Paul saith, he was taken vp into the 2. Cor. 1.2. third heauen:

the

1. Airy.
2. Starry.
3. Glorious.


Airy heauen is all the space from vs vnto the firma|ment: so the birds which flie betweene vs and the starres, are called in holy writ; the fowles of Gn. 1.28. heauen. In this hea|uen are meteors, haile, wind, raine, snow, thunder, lighte|ning, all which are at Gods absolute command, to serue such as serue him, and to fight against them that fight a|gainst him. As when the wicked old world was filled with cruelty; The windowes of Gen. 7. heauen were opened, and the raine was vpon the earth forty daies and forty nights; inso|much, that this one souldier of the Lord, destroied all his enemies, euery thing that was vpon the earth from man to beast; onely Noah, Gods holy seruant, remained, and they that were with him in the Arke, whom the raine did not hurt, but rather helpe: for the deeper the flood, the safer the ship; the water had peace with Noah and his company, but open warre with all the rest of that old world.
So likewise the Lord out of heauen, rained fire and brimstone vpon the Gen. 19. Sodomites; and hailestones out of heauen vpon the cursed Amorites at Bethoron, and they were moe, saith the Iosua 10. text, that died with the haile, then

they whom the children of Israel slew with the sword.
But what need we looke so far? the great wind Decem|ber 30. this yeere, the From 2. December, to lan. 15. great frost the last yeere sensibly demonstrate this point. What a wracke on the sa, what a worke on the earth occasioned by the one? what a dearth, and so by consequence, what a death ensued vpon the other? If God cast forth his ice like morsels, who is able to abide his frost? Psal. 147.17.
To step higher, the second heauen is the firmament, coelum quasi coelatum, because it is ingrauen,  as it were enameled with glorious lights, as Moses in the first of Genesis, God made two great lights, the greater to rule the day, the lesser to gouerne the night: he made also the stars, and placed them in the firmament of heauen.
Now this heauen Psal. 19.1. declares the glory of God, and the fir|mament shewes his handy worke: though they want vnder|standing and are dumbe, yet they trumpet forth his wor|thy praises in such sort, that there is neither speech nor language, but their voice is heard among them. And as they speake for God, as schollers, so they fight also for God as souldiers; for the starres in their course fought against Sisera: Iosua 5.20. and when Duke Iosua fought against the wicked Amorites, he said in the sight of Israel; Sunne, stay thou in Gibeon, and thou Moone in the val|ley of Aialon; and the Sunne abode, and the Moone stood still, vntill the people of God auenged themselues vpon their enemies; the Sunne abode, and hasted not to goe downe for a whole day: Iosua 10.13.
Psal. 8.1. O Lord our gouernour, how excellent is thy name in all the world! When I consider the heauens, euen the works of thy hands, the Sun and the Moone which thou hast ordained, what is man that thou art so mindfull of him? or the son of man that thou shouldst thus regard and gard him? The third heauen is called by Philosophers, empyreum: by Diuines, the glorious heauen: by 1. King. .27. scrip|tures, heauen of heauens, or heauen aboue the visible hea|uens. In this heauen Almighty God hath two sorts of tall


wariours:

Angels.
Saints.


Angels are Luke 2.13. heauenly souldiers, ministring spirits of God, instruments of his mercy toward the good, execu|tioners of his iudgements vpon the bad. When Iosua was about to sacke Iericho, an Iosua 5. Angel appeared vnto him as a Captaine with a drawne sword to fight for his people. When Zenacherib and his innumerous host came against Israel, the Angel of the Lord in one night slew one hun|dred, eighty, and fiue thousand: 2. Kings 19. The first borne of Egypt, slaine by an Angell: Exod. 12. blasphe|mous Herod smitten with an Angell: Acts 12.23. To con|clude this argument, Angels at the last and dreadfull day shall binde the Mat. 13. tares, that is, make fagots of the wicked, and cast them into hell fire. As they pitch their tents a|bout Gods elect, being the Saints guard and nurses, as it were, to Psal. 91.12. carry them in their armes, lest at any time they hurt their foot against a stone: so contrariwise, speedy messengers and Ministers of Gods anger vnto the re|probate.
Now for Saints, albeit they be milites emeriti, (as the Consule com. Godes. Stewchij. ad Veget. lib. 2. cap. 3. Romans speake) souldiers discharged the field, past figh|ting, past sighing, for all teares are wiped from their eies; euen so saith the spirit, they rest from their labours, and their good works follow them: Apocalyp. 14.13. The be past warfare, and now liue in eternall welfare, crow|ned as conquerors in heauen, where there is neither mi|litia, nor malita.
Though, I say, their fight be ended, and they rewarded with an immortall crowne of glory, yet for as much as there is a communion of Saints, a fellowship betweene the triumphant Saints in heauen, and the militant Saints on earth; the blessed soules departed and deliuered out of the miseries of this sinfull world, howsoeuer they be se|cure for themselues, yet are they carefull for vs: as D. Reynold de Idolat. lib. 1. cap. 1. our Churches in their Harmonie speake, de foelicitate su se|curi, de nostr salute soliciti: they wish well vnto vs, and

pray still for vs in generall, albeit they know not our wants in particular. Howsoeuer they fight not any longer against Gods enemies with pen or pike, with paper or powder, yet they continually fight against them with push of praier, as Saint Apocl. 6.10. Iohn expresly; The soules of them that were killed for the word, cried with a loud voice, saying; How long Lord, holy and true! dost not thou iudge and re|uege our blood on them that dwell on the arth? Albeit they contend not with earthly weapons, yet they maintaine Gods quarrell with heauenly wishes in generall against Satan and his kingdome, out of zeale and heat to Gods cause, not out of any spleene or hate to any of the wicked in particular; I dare not say so: for whee the spirit hath not a pen to write, the Pastor must not haue a tongue to speake, not the people an eare to heare; but that the bles|sed soules in heauen pray for vs, against our enemies in generall, is an article of faith, and an euident truth of the Bible.
I come from Gods selected band in heauen, to the common band, the host of his creatures on earth, the which containes both sea and land, and all that is therein, euermore willing to fight in this quarrell.
The Eod. 14. red sea did ouerwhelme proud Pharaoh, and all his host, euen all his horses, his chariots, and horsemen. Anno 1588. the sea and fish in the sea fought against the superstitious Spaniard, enemy to God and his true reli|gion: a wonderfull worke, which ought to be had in perpe|tuall remembrance. I say, wind and water ouercame that inuincible army, prepared for our destruction; in such sort, that the Treat. to Mendoza. popish Relator hereof confessed ingenu|ously, that God in that sea-fight, shewed himselfe a very Lutheran, and meere Protestant.
The floods and inundations which happened in di|uers parts of this kingdome within these few yeeres, here should not be passed ouer with dry eyes. If the Lord had not according to his infinite greatnes and goodnesse, fet|tered the waters of our seas, as Herodot. Xerxes did the waters

of Hellespontus. If God had not gathered the waters together on an heape, and laid them vp in the deepe, as in a treasure house: Psalme 33.7. If hee had not spo|ken to the flood, Iob 38.11. IIitherto slt thou goe, but no further, and here shall it stay thy proud waues, assuredly there had followed a great doomesday to this Iland. Psalm. 77.16. The waters saw thee, O Lrd, the waters saw thee, and were afraid; Psal. 72.18. Blessed be the Lord God, euen the God of Israel, which only doth wondrous things; and blssed be the nme of his Maiesty for euer and let all the people , Amen, Amen.
I passe to the shore, to drie land, Numb. 16.30. which opened and swallowed vp quicke, Corh, Dathn, and Abram.
In this one Prouince are sundrie rankes of fighting souldiers, armies o fell dragons, of hissing serpents, of roring lions, of deuouring wolues, of other wilde beasts in the forrest, and cattell vpon a thousand hils; all which named, and all other not named, are readie with force and furie to crush the wicked, and at Gods alarum to breake them in pecces like a potters vessell.
Euen the least of these creatures is strong enough, if God set them to fight; an host of frogges, an armie of grashoppers, a swarme of flyes, able to dismay Pharao and all his people; a few rats troubled all the citizens of Munster. Hamel; a few wormes deuoured Act. 12.23. Herod; a little gnat choked a great man, yea the greatest monarch in his own conceit, Adrin the Pope.
The very senselesse creatures haue sense and feeling of the wrong done to God. In Siloam (as we reade in the Luke 13.4. Gospell) a tower fell vpon eighteene prsons and slew them. In Lanquet. chro. fol. 95. Rome fiftie thousand men were hurt and slaine with the fall of a Theater, as they were beholding the games of the Sword-players. Stow. Anno 25. Reg. Elizb. the scaffold about Parisgarden vpon a Sunday in the af|ternoone fell downe, which instantly killed eight per|sons, and hurt many moe. A faire warning to such as profane the Sabbath, and delight more in the crueltie of beasts, then in the workes of mercie, which are exer|cises

of the Lords day. The time will not suffer me to name, much lesse to mufter all the rest of Gods wariers on earth: I will only remember one, whom, I thinke, you feare most, namely the plague, fitly called by the Cano|nists, bellum Dei contra homes, the warre of God against men, and by the Scripture, the 1. Chron. 21.30 sword of God, and Psal. 91.5. aror of his anger.
In the yeere 1006, there was such an vniuersall plague thoroughout the whole world, that the liuing were not able to burie the dead, as Sigisbertus and Zuingr. in Thearo. volum. 2. lib. 7. pag. 544. other report. Anno 1342. there was in Sabellicus lib. 8 Aeead. 9. Venice such a pestilence, that the hundreth person was scarsly lft aliue, insomuch that the State made a law, that whosoeuer would come and dwell at Venice two yeeres, he should instantly be made free.
About the yere 1522. there died of the plague in Laquet. chro. fol. 280. Millaine fiftie thousand within the space of foure mo|neths. In Stowes a|bridgement. Norwich from the first of Ianuarie to the first of Iuly, 57104. In Idem. Yarthmouth within the space of one yere 7052. In London and the liberties thereof, from the 23. of December 1602. vnto the 22. of Decem|ber 1603. there died of all diseases, as was accounted weekely, 38244. whereof of the plague 30578. and from that time to this day, the Citie not yet free. This last yeere past, as appeares in your own bils, there died 2262. Lay this heauie iudgement to your heart, heare this pro|clamation againe and againe, There is no peace to the wicked.
As the Iob 5.. stones of the field are in league with the righteous, and the beasts at peace with the godly, they may dwell safe in the wildernes, and sleepe in the woods: Ezech. 34.25. so contrariwise the stone shall crie ut of the wall, and the beame out of the timber against the wicked: Habacuk 2.11.
Their sinne begets their sorrow, their faults increase their foes, euen their tables are made snares, and their iorie beds accusrs, and their seeled houses witnesses a|gainst

them; all things which were giuen for blessings are become curses vnto them: and that which is most strange, beside these two great bands of souldiers, one common in earth, another select in heauen; there is yet a third of rebels, euen of the very diuels in hell; for al|beit they be Iude epist. v. 6. reserued in euerlasting chaines vntill the iudgement of the great day; yet God infinite in his po|wer and wisedome, who brings light out of darknesse, doth make good vse of these bad instuments.
It is said in the first of Sam. chap. 16. that the euill spirit of the Lord vexed Saul; it was Gods spirit which came vpon Dauid, but it was a malignant spirit which was on Saul; and yet this spirit is called srius Domini, the spi|rit of the Lord, because the Lord Immissus seu permissus  Do|mino. Em. Sa. not. in loc. sent that euill spirit, and suffered it to torment Saul, as Ad Simpli|cian. lib. 2. qu. 1. Augustine and 2. Sen. dis. 44 Lom|bard haue well expounded that place. So likewise we reade in the Gospell, that the foule spirits made some dase, some dumbe, casting one into the water, another into the fire; all which actions, as they were actions, proceeded from God for the Scripture tels vs plainly, Rom. 13.1. there is no power but of God.
Happily some will say, the diuels assault the good so well as the bad. We wrestle (saith Ephes. 6.12. Paul) against prin|cipalities, against powers, against the prince of darknes: for Satan goes about like a roring lion, seeking whom he may deuoure. Answere is made, that God suffers Satan to tempt his children onely to trie them, but suffers him to tempt the reprobate, so farre, as to destroy them: the temptations of the good are instruction; of the bad, de|struction, vtter ruine of bodie and soule. In what a mi|serable case then is euery wretch irrepentant? Esay 5.18. drawing iniquitie with cords of vanitie, and sinne as it were with cart|ropes, Rom. 2.5. heaping vp wrath against the day of wrath. For the number of his enemies is without number; the number of the blessed Saints is innumerable: Apocalyp. 7.9. Af|ter these things, I beheld, and loe a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kinreds, and people, and

tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lambe, clo|thed with long white robes, and palmes in their hands. The number of Angels is infinite: Thinkest thou (said Christ to Peter, in the 26 of S. Matthw) that I cannot now pray to my father, and he will giue me moe then twelue legions of Angels?
A legion is Dionysius Hal. lib. 1. 3000. footmen, and 300. horsemen; or as Caluin vpon the place, 5000. foote, 500. horsemen; as Lib. 2. de re mi|litari cap 2. See the view of certaine mili|tarie matters annexed to Tacitus in Eng|lish. Vegetius, 6000. in all; and uery particular Angell able in one night, to kill, as is recorded in the storie of Senn|cherib, one hundred, eightie and fiue thousand. The num|ber of starres in the skie, of fowles in the aire, of fish in the sea, of beasts in the field, of diuels in hell are without number: How infinitely infinite then is the number of all his enemies? in what a farefull state doth hee stand, when as God and man, Angels and Diuels, saints and sin|ners, heauen and earth, fish and fowle, beasts and birds, other and himselfe; in a word, all that is within him, all that is without him, all that is about him, combine them|selues together to maintaine Gods holy warre against him?
I know there are degrees of sinners, as there are de|grees in sinne; some be fautores, some actores, a third sort authores. Of the first, Seneca wittily, Nihil interest faeas ne sceleri an illud facias: It is in a manner all one to com|mit and commend a villanie. Non caret scrupulo occultae societatis, qui manifesto discrimini non occurrit, saith Gre|gorie: He is suspected to be an abetter of euill, who doth not endeuour to better the euill. A commoner then that flattereth, a Commander that fauoureth vngodly wret|ches in a citie, lets in so many strong foes, to cut your throtes, and ruine your estate.
Yet actors on the stage be worse then idle spctators: for howsoeuer sinne be commendable, because common, as De gubernat. Dei, lib. 5. Sluinus complained in his time; In hc scelus res deuoluta, vt nisi quis malus fuerit, saluus esse non possit: In plaine English, except a man be first bad, he cannot be

reputed a good fellow: Yet horrible blasphemers, incor|rigible drunkards, shamelesse whoremongers, makebate pettifoggers, malcontent accusants on the one side, re|cusants on the other, are the very men and meanes, which bring and keepe the dearth and plague so long among you.
But authors of euill and plotters of mischiefe are worst of all; as it appeares euen by Gods owne censure giuen of the first sinne in Paradise, where the serpnt had three punishments inflicted vpon him, as the originall contri|uer; the woman two, being the mediate procurer; and Adam but one, as the partie seduced. Applie, for I can no further amplifie.
When Cdren. hist. pag. 542. Phocas had built a mightie wall about his palace, for his securitie, in the night he heard a voice: O King, though thou build as high as the clouds, yet the citie might easily be taken, the sinne within will marre all: Ser. 87. as see Ambrose notably; Grauiores sunt inici mores praui, quam hostes inesti: Wicked manners are stronger then armed men. If God be with vs, who can bee against vs? if we stand against God, who can withstand him?
And as God is abl, because God. so willing to main|taine this warre, because my God: that is, the God of his people, whom the wicked persecute: for his Grant is faire in letters patent to Gen. 12.3. Abraham and his seed for euer: I will blesse them that blee thee, and curse them that curse thee. Or, my God that is, the God by whom I speake, who dealeth alway with his seruants according to his word.
The gods of the Gentiles are lying gods, and dying gods: but my God is the truth, and the life, who can nei|ther deceiue nor be deceiued. Or, my God, because wee must not only beleeue the Maior of the Gospell, but the Bucer. Minor also, saying with Thomas my Lord; with Mary, my Sauiour; with Esay, my God. If we can gaine this as|sumption, it will bring vs to the most happie conclusion; enioying peace of conscience which is an heauen on

earth,  peace of glory, which is heauen in heauen. Vnto which, hee bring vs that hath made peace for vs, euen Christ Iesus the righteous to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, as we are bound, so let vs heartily yeeld all honour, c. Amen.



The Epistle. COLOS. 3.12.
Put vpon you as the elect of God, tender mercy, c.

THis Epistle consists of two parts: In the first, Saint Paul exhorts the Colossians vnto many speciall ver|tues, as tender mercy, kindnesse, humblenesse of mind, meek|nesse, long suffering, c. In the second, because it is infinit to insist in euery particular, he drawes them, and all other duties, vnto two Zanchius in loc. generall admonitions in grosse:

whereof, the

1. concernes our theory; Let the word of Christ dell in you plenteously, c.
2. our practise; whatsoeuer ye doe in word or deed, doe all in the name of the Lord, c.


Put vpon you] Christ had two sorts of garments, (as we read in the Iohn 19.23. Gospell:) one without seame, not diuided at his death; and that was a Luther. postil. maior. in epist. Dom. 5. ab Epi|phan. figure of faith, which, maugre the Rupert. com. in Ioan. lib. 13. rents of all heretikes and schismatikes in the Church, is Ephes. 4.5. but one.
Another with seames, parted among the souldiers, and that was a type of loue, 1. Cor. 13.5. which seekes not her owne, but communicates it selfe to many.
Luther. vbi supra. So the Christian must haue two coates: one of faith, indiuisible, by which he puts on Christ: another of loue, parted among many, by which one Christian Idem. postil. in Epist. Fst. circumcis. puts on another; Rom. 12.15. reioicing with them that reioice, weeping with them that weep.
Vpon the point, these two coates are but one; faith be|ing inside; and loue outside; faith in respect of God, and loue toward the world. This Epistle speakes of the out|side,

put on tender mercy] Postillae ma|iores cum glos|sis  figuis. in loc. quoad affectum; kindnesse] quo|ad effectum: meeknesse] bene vtendo prosperis: long suffe|ring] bene se habendo in aduersis, c.
These vertues are both ornamenta, and munimenta, clothes and corslets. Ephes. 6.11. Put on the whole armour of God, that yee may be able to stand against the assaults of the diuell. Seeing we must euery day sight, and euery day be seene, let vs as well for armour as honour, put on tener mercy, kindnesse, c. that we may Prou. 10.9. walke vprightly and confidently. See epist. dom. 21. post. Trinit. How loue is said to be the bond of perfectnesse, and chiefe vertue; See epist. dom. quinquages.
As the elect of God] Saint Paul builds all these good exhortations vpon one argument, drawne ab Zanchius in loc. honeso se Sarcerius in loc. debito: you are the elect of God, holy and beloued; chosen and beloued of God before the world; through baptisme consecrated solemnly to God in the world: wherefore being thus, electi, selecti, dilecti, Ephes. 2.10. Gods owne workmanship created in Christ Iesus vnto good works; it is most meete new men should vse new maners; in stead of the works of darknesse, put on tender mercy, kindnesse, humblenesse of mind, which are weapons of light. It is due debt that you should be followers of God, forbearing one another, and forgiuing one another, as Christ forgaue you. See epist. dom. 3. quadrages.
The Defence for not subscrip. part. 1. cap. vlt. Nouelists except against our Seruice Booke, for omitting here two titles, holy and beloued. Our answer is, that the word, elect. implies the rest; for if elect, then be|loued and holy. The Church omits not the greater, and in|fers the lesser, as the Churches of Scotland and Middle|burge, call Gods heauy iudgements vpon the wicked, a little rap: Psal. 74.12. and bread of affliction, brone bread: Psal. 127.2. Contrary, not onely to the Geneua Bible, but euen Cluins exposition of the place. If these friuolous obiections be their aqua coelestis, to keepe life in their fainting cause, we may toll the passing bell, and ere long ring out to the funerall.
Let the word of Christ] That is, the Scripture, the

Gospell, especially so called, in respect of three causes:

Efficient: for he speakes in the Prophets and Apostles: Esay 52.6. I am he that doth speake; behold it is I.
Materiall: for hee is the con|tents of all the Bible; sha|dowed in the Law, shewed in the Gospell: August. in Psal. 49. vnam vo|cem habent duo Testamenta. The word of the Lord con|taines nothing, but the word, which is the Lord.
Finall: as being the Rom. 10.4. end of the whole Law,  scope Luke 1.70. of all the Prophets euer since the world began. Wherefore, seeing the Scriptures haue Christ for their author, Christ for their obiect, Christ for their end, well may they be called the word of Christ.


Dwell] We must not entertaine the word as a stranger, giuing it a cold complement, and so take our leaue; but because it is Gods best friend, the Kings best friend, and our best friend, we must vse it as a Caluin. in loc. familiar and dome|sticke; receiuing it into the parlor of our heart, making it our chamber fellow, study fellow, bed fellow. Things of lsse moment are without doore, the staffe behind the doore, Erasmus. sed quae pretiosa sunt, no vno seruantur ostio: things of worth are kept vnder many locks and keyes. It is fit then that the word, being more pretious Psal. 119.117. then gold, yea the most fine gold, Matth. 13.46. a peerlesse pearle, should not be laid vp in the Porters lodge, onely the outward eare, but euen in the cabinet of the mind: Deut. 11.18. Ye shall lay vp these my words in your heart, and in your soule: so the word that now doth plenteously dwell among you, may dwell plenteously in you.
Plenteously] Reade, heare, meditate, with all attention exactly, with all intention deuoutly, with all diligence throughly. Iohn 5.39. Search the Scriptures. Esay 8.20.

to the law, to the testimony. Apocalyps 1.3. Blessed is he that reades, and heares, and keepes the words of this prophecie: not onely reade, nor onely heare, nor onely meditate; but all: sometime reade to rectifie meditation, and sometime me|ditate to profit by reading. Lectio sine meditatione arida, meditatio sine lectione erronea.
It is reported of Alphonso King of Spaine, that hee read ouer all the Bible with Lyraes postil, fourteene times. And Prolog. in l. b. 1. de do+ctri Christi|ana~. Augustine writes of Antonius an Egyptian Monke, that hauing no learning, he did by hearing the Scriptures often read, get them without booke, and af|ter by serious and godly meditation, vnderstand them.
This one word, plenteously, confutes plenteously, first, ignorant people, who cannot: secondly, negligent peo|ple, who will not reade and heare: thirdly, delicate peo|ple, who loath the Scriptures as vnpleasant, preferring the Poets before the Prophets, admitting into their house the writings of men before the word of God: fourthly, perfunctory students in the Bible, turning ouer not the whole, but some part, and that so coldly, that as it is said of the Delphicke Oracle, Ausonius. quoties legitur, toties negligi|tur, a lesson is no sooner got, but it is forgot: fiftly, coue|tous people, who will not giue to their Pastor plenteous|ly, that the word may dwell in them plenteously. Nehem. 13.10. Ne|hemia complained in his time, that the Leuites for want of maintenance, were faine to leaue the Temple, and fol|low the plow. And Saint Augustine made the like com|plaint in his age: Luther. postil.  Zanchius in loc. whereupon in processe of time, Clergy men inuented such points of superstition, as were most aduantageous vnto them. Hence they aked heil, and found out Purgatory, to make the Popes kitchin smoke: an inuention not knowne vnto the Greeke Church for the space of Rossensis art. 18. contra Lu|therum,  Al|phonsus de hae|resibus. 1500. yeeres after Christ; and but of Polydor. de inent. lib. 8. cap. 1. late knowne to the Latine. Hence praier for the dead, indul|gences, and other new trickes of popery, which are more for the Priests belly, then the peoples benefit. God of his infinite goodnesse forgiue Britans ingratitude in this

kind, and grant that the burning lamps in our Temple, may be supplied with sufficient oile, that the light of Israel goe not out. Sixtly, this condemes Enthusiasts, de|spising the word and ministery. Seuenthly, the Marcionits and Manichees, reiecting Moses and the Prophets. Last of all, and most of all, the Papists, in denying the vulgar translations of Scripture to the common people. Let the word of God dwell in you: Zanchius in loc. that is, in all you, Priest and people: Non in nobis modo, sed in vobis: as Saint Hiron. in loc. Hierom peremptorily; Hic ostenditur verbum Christi, non suffici|entr sed abundantr etiam laicos habere debere,  docerese inuicem vel monere: The word must dwell in vs: Ergo, the Bible must be in our house. It must dwell plenteously: Ergo, we must reade daily; but, as it followes in the text,
With all wisdome] The Luther. postil. in loc. Papists as well in the Church as in the street, chant scripture plenteously; but because their hymnes are not in a knowne tongue, it is without vnderstanding. The Brownists in their For articles 25. in their confession, they quoted aboue 3000. texts. bookes and ser|mons often cite scripture plenteously, but it is not in wisdome. Learned In Rom. 2. Origen notes well, (and where hee doth well, none better) that heretikes are scripturarum fures, great lurchers of holy writ: but they so wrest it, that (as Expositio. ori|or. in cap. . ad Galatas. Hierom speaks) Euangelium Christi, fit euangelium ho|minis, aut quod peius est, daboli.
Table Gospellers are full of text: It is ordinary to dis|cusse diuinitie problemes euen at ordinaries; a custome very common, but by the censure of our Church, no way commendable. For the 37. Iniunctions of Queene Elizabeth. Iniunction forbids all men to reason of diuine scripture rashly; and the greatest part of Archbishop Cranmers preface before the Church Bi|ble, is spent against idle brabling and brawling in mat|ters of Theology. And a Master Dea|ring. lect. 27. vpon the Heb. graue Diuine, much esteemed in our daies, held it better for venturous discoursers of predestination, and sinne against the holy Ghost, that they had neither tongues in their heads, nor hearts in their breasts, then that they should continue in this irre|uerend vsage.
In loc. com. Manlius reports, how two meeting at a tauerne, con|tended much to little purpose about their faith. One said he was of Doctor Martins religion; and the other sware he was of Doctor Luthers opinion; whereas Martin, and Luther, were but one. So many men moue many doubts in many matters, hauing neither will to heare, nor skill to conceiue the state of a controuersie, and then, as Contra literas  li. . cap. 26. Augu|stine said of Petilian the Donatist: Multa dicendo nihil di|cunt: aut potius, nihil dicendo multa dicunt.
The word of Christ must dwell in vs plenteously, but in all wiidome, we must heare it in all wisdome, reade it in all wisdome, meditate on it in all wisdome, speake of it in all wisdome, preach it in all wisdome; not only in some, but in all wisdome; for all is little enough, considering the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse, who taketh his name in vaine.
Teaching and exhorting] This clause may be referred either to that which went before, or to that which fol|lowes after: to that which went before; Let the word of Christ dwell in you so plenteously with all wisdome, Marlorat.  Aquin. in loc. that yee may both instruct and exhort your selues vnto euery good worke; for doctrine and exhortation are two prin|cipall vses of the Scripture: 2. Tim. 3.16. For doctrine, the Malanct. in loc. law shewes euery man in his vocation, what actions are acceptable to God; and the Gospell teacheth how they be acceptable; namely, by faith in Christ. Let the word of Christ therefore dwell in you so plenteously with all wis|dome, that it may be a lanterne to your feet, and a light to your paths; a direction how to serue God in holinesse and righteousnesse all the daies of your life.
For exhortation; the word must so dwell in vs, as that wee may stirre vp one another to godlinesse: Esay 2.3. Heb. 3.13. Zanchiu in loc. ; est in ; so to put it, and print it in our mind, that it may not onely be profitable to our selues, but vsefull also to other; Luther. post. in loc. in publike, which is the Pastors office; in priuate, which is euery Christians duty.
This also may be referred vnto the words following, as according to Ad sequentia pleri referunt: vli Zanchius in loc. most expositors our Church here; Teach and exhort your owne selues in Psalmes, c. where Saint Paul describes the Christians musicke, both for

the matter; Psalmes, hymnes, spirituall songs.
the maner; sing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.

Psalmes and hymnes] Some distinguish these by their obiect, affirming that hymnes are laudatory: Chrysost.   solia. for the glorious Angels in heauen sing not Psalmes, but hymnes: Theophy lact. Hymnus eol|lit, Psamus lau|dat. Ambrosn loc. Hominum est psallere, Deum hymnis efferre angelorum. Spirituall odes are peculiar songs accuratelie framed by the Church, according to her seuerall exigence: Psalmes are of sundry matters and arguments, exhorta|tory, consolatory, precatory, deprecatory. But I follow that other distinction of In loc. Hierom and Luther, vnderstan|ding by the first, the Dauidicall Psalmes; by the second, the songs of Moses, Debora, Zacharias, Mary, Simeon, mentioned in the Bible; by the third, godly hymnes in|uented by the Christians of that age, called spirituall,

respectu termini  quo, as proceeding from Gods spi|rit.
respectu terminiad quem, as edifying our spirit: contai|ning spirituall matter and melody for the comfort of our soule, not any carnall or wanton dittie, to nourish the lust of our flesh. And therefore the Papisticall hymnes in an vnknowue language are not spirituall, respectus termini ad quem; in that they neither instruct, nor exhort; much lesse ribald ballads, instructing in vanity, exhorting to villany.

Vbi supra. Luther, In Ephes. cap. 5.19. Zanchius, In loc. Marlorat construe this of sing|ing in the Church, as well as in priuate: for Gods holy people haue vsed in Con. Toletan. 4. can. 12. all ages, euen fro~ the primitiue time, vntill this day, to sing in the publike congregation the Psalmes of Dauid; hymnes of Zacharias, Simeon, Mary; spirituall songs, composed by deuout Doctors, according to the seuerall occasions of the Church; and therefore Come holy Ghost, sung at the consecration of our Bishops:

Te Deum of Saint Ambrose, the Creed of Athanasius, vsed in our Liturgy, are warranted both by Gods precept, and his peoples practise.

With grace] I finde three con|structions of this one clause:

for grace.
by grace.
with grace.


Sing to the Lord for grace receiued: as Paul Ephes. 5. Speake to your selues in psalmes and hymnes, and spiritu|all songs, making melody to the Lord, giuing thanks al|way for all things. And in the next verse following here; What soeuer yee doe in word or deed, doe all in the name of the Lord Iesu, giuing thanks to God the Father by him. Euery good and perfect gift is from aboue, comming downe from the father of lights. Ipsum Audax. apud August. epist. 139. minus munus est: the least gift is a grace; the meanes to get and preserue grace, proceeds altogether from grace: for if God withdraw his mercy, we presently fall. As a staffe, which if a man take and set vpright vpon the ground, so long as he holds it with his hand, it stands vpright; but so soone as he with|drawes his helpe, though he neuer push it downe, it will fall o it selfe. Ascendat ergo gratia, vt descendat gratia: Let our thanks ascend vp vnto God, that his grace may descend downe to vs.
Chrysost. Theo|phylact.  schol. in loc. By grace] Man is not onely the Temple of God, as Paul speakes; but as Clemens Alexandrinus, the timbrell of God. Now the timbrell cannot found, except it be touched. It is then the Macarius, hom. 47. spirit of God that makes our pipes to goe. God, saith Orat. pro Christianis. Athenagoras, is the bellowes, and we the organs. A man may sing to the diuell, to the world, to the flesh without this grace; but he cannot sing to the Lord, but by the Lord. Our musicke may bee songs, but not spirituall songs, except they bee guided by the spirit. This should teach vs in our Psalmes and hymnes to praise God for his grace when wee feele it, and often to pray to God for it, when wee feele it not.
With grace] Theophylact. Luther. Caluin. in loc. That is, with a gratious dexteritie, with

delight and profit, both vnto our selues and other. Vnto our selues: for as it is a ioy to the iust to doe iustice, Pro|uerbs 21.15. so a grace to the godly to bee ioyfull in the Lord: to serue the Lord with gladnesse, and to come be|fore his presence with a song: to sing the Psalmes of Da|uid with the spirit of Dauid: the song of Mary with the spirit of Mary; Te Deum of S. Ambrose with the spirit of S. Ambrose.
Againe, with grace to other: Ephes. 4.29. Let no cor|rupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which may minister grace, Caluin.  Marlorat. in Ephes. 4. that is, instruction and con|solation to the hearer, vttered in such manner and me|thod, that it may bee well accepted euen of the most vn|toward. We must not sing our own crochets out of tune, without rule, witlesse and senselesse songs; All that we sing, all that we say, must be gracefull:
Et prodesse volunt,  delectare poetae.
And if Poets, how much more Prophets? Hee that doth preach and pray without a grace, doth the worke of the Lord negligently, though he preach euery day, and pray euery houre.
In your hearts] As our mouth must shew foorth his praise, so our soule must magnifie the Lord, and our spirit must reioyce in God our Sauiour. It is not enough that we come neere to God with our lips, in chanting hymnes and psalmes, except we make melodie to the Lord with the best member that wee haue. Bernard, srm. super salue re|gina. Plus valet consonantia voluntatum qum vocum. How wee neglect this precept in singing, when our hearts are on our haruest, and our mindes on our meate, I neede not say; your domesticall Chaplane doth daily tell you.
To the Lord] Rom. 11.36. That as of him, and through him, and for him are all things, so vnto him may be glorie for euer|more.
Whatsoeuer yee doe in word or deede] A generall rule ex|tended to all men, and all actions in all places at al times, vno cumulo cuncta complectitur, as Luther vpon the place.
Doe all] Not say yee, but doe. Origen. contra Celsum. lib. 3. Celsus and Antiphon writing against the truth, intituled their treatise, the book of truth: and the Papists vnder the name of the Church, ouerthrow the Church, Lo epist. 83. Ecclesiae nomiee armamini,  contra ecclesiam dimicatis; Anabaptists are most carnall, and yet they boast of the spirit. Vnconscionable men in our time, seeme to be all for conscience: Iustice and Con|science are the greatest martyrs in the world. For a great man in doing mischiefe pretends iustice, and a meane man alway conscience: so that as it is in the Prouerb, Luther. in loc. In nomine domini incipit omne malum. So soone as the mali|cious man had sowen his tares, he went his way. See the Gospell for this day.
In the name of the Lord Iesu] Not in our owne name, for there is no good in vs: of our selues we cannot think so much as a good thought, much lesse speake a good word, or doe a good deede: nor in Theophylact. in loc. Angels name, nor in any Saints name, for that is to mingle the blood of Tho|mas with Christs blood, as Luke 13.1. Pilate did the blood of the Galileans with their owne sacrifice. Christ is our only Sa|uiour, and redeemer, our only mediatour and aduocate. This (saith the Eccles. 43.27. Wiseman) is the summe of all, that he is all; yea 1. Cor. 15.28. all in all; and therefore good reason all should bee said, all should bee done in his name: that is, as our Church in the Collect, begun, continued and ended in him: he is Alpha, therefore we must begin euery worke, Zanch. in loc. by calling vpon his name, and squaring it according to his word: he is Omega, therefore all must be referred vnto him, and end in him: 1. Cor. 10.31.
To God the Father] Erasmus an|not. in loc. Because God, and because a fa|ther: God for his greatnesse, Father for his goodnesse.
By him] Otherwise, our spirituall sacrifices are not ac|ceptable to God: 1. Pet. 2.5.




The Gospel. MATTH. 13.24.
The kingdome of heauen is like vnto a man which sowed good seed in his field, c.

THis parable being explained by Christ, vers. 37. needs not any further exposition, but our good disposition only to practice that hee taught; it requires application rather then explication.

For application then vnder|stand, that it makes against 4. principal enemies of y^e Church:

Carnall Gospellers.
Brownists.
Papists.
Atheists.


Against carnall Gospellers, in that they neither watch ouer the Church, nor pray for the Church as they should. Satan is here called our enemie, both ab affectu, and effectu: for his malice, 1. Pet. 5.8. going about daily like a roring lion, see|king whom he may deuoure. For his successe, ouercom|ming many; for this cause called a man in 28. verse, ; Ludolphus de vit Christi, cap. 64. as Scipio was called Africane, for that hee con|quered Africa: or as Coster. in loc. other obserue, there is such affini|tie betweene Satan and the wicked, as that mutually they be called one by anothers name. The wicked man is cal|led a diuell: Ioh. 6.70.  1. Tim. 4.1. Haue not I chosen you twelue, and one of you is a diuell? and the diuell is here termed a wicked man.
This enuious aduersarie soweth alway tares among the wheate; where God hath his Church, he hath his chapell. The diuell hath not any ground of his owne, but he soweth in Gods field, vpon Gods seede; and so the corruption of the good is the generation of the bad; he|resie being nothing els but an ouersowing. 1. Tim. 1.3. , an after teaching, or another teaching.
Almightie God hath Pontan. in loc. foure principall fields:

Heauen.
Paradise.
The Church.
Mans heart.

In heauen Lucifer ouersowed pride, by which himself and his angels fell: in Paradise Satan ouersowed disobe|dience, by which he deceiued Adam and Eue: Gen. 2.17. God said, in the day that thou eatest of the tree of knowledge, thou shalt die the death: Gen. 3.3. Eua being corrupted by the Serpent, said, lest ye die; Satan himselfe, ye shall not die: so Gods good seede, moriemini, was turned first to ne moriamini, then vn|to non moriemini: Bernard. sers. de quadruplici debito. Deus affirmat, mulier dubitat, diabolus negat.
In the Church (as it is here shewed) he doth ouersow schismes and heresies, in such sort that tares ouertop the wheate, at least they be so mingled together, as that the one cannot bee rooted vp without hurt to the o|ther.
In mans heart (which is Gods especiall enclosure) when the good seede is sowen, Satan enters, and ende|uours to Matth. 13.19. catch it away, planting in stead thereof vn|lawfull lust, pride of life, couetous desires. He doth la|bour to blast our good workes, Gregor. moral. in Iob, lib. 1. cap. 38. either in the act, or els in the end: and all this is done, saith the text, while men sleepe. The which I finde construed of Thomas ex Augustin.  Hieron. in loc. Priests especially, called in holy Bible, the Ezechiel 3.17 Hieremy 17. Watchmen of Israel: but not onely, for the Prince being a pastor of his people, must watch also the flocke; yea the shepheards, ouerseeing the Seers, and watching the watchmen that they doe not sleepe.
This also concernes the people: for euery master hath charge of his house, euery man of his soule. The Ferus ser. 1. in loc. master doth sleepe when he doth not gouerne well his familie; Hemingius in loc. euery man doth sleepe, when hee neglects Gods seede sowen in his heart. That therefore which our Sauiour said vnto his Disciples, he said vnto all, Mark. 13.37. Watch: and so the Hom. against idlenesse. Church expounds it of all idle persons, insinuating, that it is the best time for the diuell to worke his feate, when men are negligent in their calling.
It is not Gods fault then that tares are mingled among wheate, for he sowed none but good seede: Gen. 1.31. All that he

made was good yea very good. Neither can we iustly con|demne the diuell, for he doth but his part, being a Iohn 8.44. mur|derer from the beginning; Ferus vbi sup. all the blame belongs vnto our selues, in that we sleepe, when we should watch.
Here the Gospell and Epistle parallel: If the word of God dwell in vs plenteously with all wisedome, then Sa|ta cannot sow tares in our soule. If Ministers, Magi|strates and Msters, as Gods elect, put on tender mercie, kindnes, humblenes of minde, loue toward their charge, their compassionate bowels assuredly will pitie the dan|gerou, state of such as are tares vnder their gouern|ment, endeuouring to make them wheate against the great haruest. For the seruants here teach vs by their ex|ample to bee Ferus serm. 2. in loc. solicitous for the good of the corne, to come to Christ, and to pray that Matth. 9.38. faithfull labourers may be sent into Gods haruest.
Paul was grieued because some cockle grew in Philip. 3.18. Phi|lippi: Psalme 79. Dauid was grieued because the Heathen had broken into Gods inheritance: Christ was grieued be|cause Gods house was made a Matth. 21.53. denne of theeues; and so Christians in our time should bee grieued, because Satan hath sowed such offences and scandals among the profes|sors of the Gospell.
Secondly, this parable makes against the Brownists in their

criticall doctrine.
hypocriticall co~uersatio~.

It condemnes their doctrine; for there was, is, and euer shall be darnell in Gods field, tares among wheate, bad among good, in the visible Church. I confesse, the Church militant may be called the Coster in loc. suburbs of heauen; our Sa|uiour here termes it the kingdome of heauen, because the King of heauen doth heauenly gouerne it with his holie word, and blessed Spirit: but it is not heauen in heauen; it is but heauen on earth: and therefore in this heauen are many fire-brands of hell; the children of the Matth. 13.38. wic|ked, whose Philip. 3.19. end is damnation, and vtter confusion in vnquenchable fire.
Wee may not therefore leaue Gods flower, because

there is some chaffe; neither breake Gods net, because there are some baggage fish; neither depart out of his house, because there be some vessels of wrath; neither runne out of his field, because there growes some cockle: but, as Epist. 48. Augustine determined against the Donatists accurately: Non propter malos boni deserendi, sed propter bonos mali tolerandi: We must not forsake the good for the bad, but rather tolerate the bad for the good. Al|mightie God would haue spared a whole citie for tenne Gen. 18.32. good mens sake; let vs not then condemne a whole Church for tenne wicked mens companie.
Augustin. lib. 3 contra Crescon. cap. 35. Ecclesiam tenco lenam tritico  palea, emndo, quos possum, tolero quos emendare non possum; fugio paleam, ne hoc sim; non aream, ne nihil sim: In 2. Tim. 2.20. Gods house there are not onely vessels of gold, and vessels of siluer, but also of wood and of earth, and some to honour, and some to dis|honour. Cyprian. epist. lib. 3. epi. 3. It is our dutie to striue that we may be golden vessels, and as for earthen, we must leaue them to God, in whose hand is a rod of iron, to Psal. 2.9. breake them in peeces like a potters vessell.
I will say to the Brownist as Lib. . contra Crscon. cap. 36. vide Tom. 7. Psalm. contra partm Donat. lib. contra epist. Parmnian. contra literas  Ptilian  Cy|prian bi supr. Augustine to the Do|natist: Accusa quantis viribus potes; si innocentes fuerint, nihil eis tanquam frumentis oberit ventositas tua; si nocen|tes, non debent propter zizania frumenta deseri: accusa quantum potes; vinco, si non probas; vinco, si probas; si non probas, vinco, iudice te ipso; sin probas, teste Cypriano, qui docuit horreum non esse deserendum ob paleas. Hee might haue said, teste Christo, commanding here, Let both grow together vntill the haruest. Wee may not 1. cor. 4.5. iudge be|fore the time, calling (out of our immoderate zeale) for fire from heauen to consume the tares, but expect hell fire to burne them vp; and that for two reasons espe|cially, that the bad may be conuerted, and the good ex|ercised.
Augustin. in Psalmum 54. Omnis malus aut ideo vinit, vt corrigatur; aut ideo, vt per illum bonus exerceatur: Thomas ex Hieron.  Au|gustin. in loc. He that is now cockle, may proue by Gods especiall grace corne: weed not the field

therefore presently, lest while ye gather the tares, ye plucke vp also the wheat.
Saint Peter was an apostate, S. Matthew a Publican, Zacheus an oppressor, Paul a Saul, Iustin Martyr was a Gentile, Saint Augustine a Manichee, Martin Luther a Monke, Tremellius a Iew, Leo Africanus a Mahumetan: if all cockle had then been rooted vp at the first, Gods field would haue wanted much good wheat, the Church ma|nie good men, yea Pont. in loc. all men; for Adam in Paradise was a tare, when he disobeied. Here the Gospell and Epistle meet againe. For if we may not root vp the tares, it is ve|ry requisite that we put on tender mercy, kindnesse, humble|nesse of mind, meeknesse, long sufferance, forbearing one ano|ther, and forgiuing one another, c.
Againe, the cockle must grow for the cornes exercise: 1. Cor. 11.19. There must be heresies among you, that they which are approued among you might be knowne. If Arius had not bin borne, Thom. 1. part. quaest. 31. art. 2. qui posuit cum Trinitate personarum Tri|nitatem substantiarum: and Sabellius on the contrary, qui posuit vnitatem personae cum vnitate essentiae: the questions about the blessed Trinitie would neuer haue been deter|mined so sufficiently by those great lights of the Church, Athanasins, Augustine, Hilary, c.
If superstition had not a long time growne in Gods field among th wheat, principles of the true religion, especially the point of iustification by faith onely, would neuer haue been so well vnderstood.
If Anabaptists and Brownists had not contended a|gainst the Church, it would haue gone worse with the Church; as Lib. 3. de ciu. Dei. cap. 21. Augustine said of Rome: Maegis nocuit Ro|manis Carthago tam cito euersa, qum pris nocuerat tm di aduersa. The counsell is good;Consule Plu|tarch com. d capiend ab bostibus vtili|tate. Sic viue tanquam ini|mici semper te videant: for the Church, as Christ, must suf|fer and ouercome, in medio inimicorum, in the midst a|mong all her enemies: Psal. 110.2.
Secondly, this makes against the Brownists in their hy|pocriticall conuersation. It is said here, that so soone a the

malitious man had sowne tares among the wheat, hee went his way. Hemingius in loc. Not that he departs from hypocrits and here|tikes, but he putteth on another face: when hee doth a worke of darknesse, he transformes himselfe into an 2. Cor. 11.14. An|gell of light. He is no more blacke, nor browne, but a white diuell, saith In Galat. 1. Luther. And therefore when it is ob|iected against the conformable Clergy, that heretikes and schismatikes are graue men, and good men: our an|swer may be; that the diuell is now gone: Matth. 7.15. rauening wolues are in sheeps clothing. Tares are so like good corne, that they cannot be discerned vntill the blade spring vp and bring forth fruit. Fitches haue many fetches: hypo|crites are like Goodwin sands, in dubio pelagi terrae, nei|ther of both, and either of both, as occasion shall serue: Hieron. ad C|lant. tom. 1. fol. 109. Gentilem agunt vitam sub nomine Christian: They play the Turkes vnder the names of Christians, oues visu, vul|pes astu: there is no more diuell appearing, but all is now the spirit of God, and secret reuelations euen from heauen.
Thirdly, this parable makes against the Pa|pists, in the question of

their religions antiquity.
putting to death of heretikes.
Purgatory.

We protest, and that vnfeinedly, that no Church ought further to depart from the Church of Rome, then she is departed from her selfe in her florishing estate. Shew then, say the D. Bishop. epist. to the King. . 13. Papists, in what age the tares were sowen among the wheat: When and where purgatory, praier for the dead, indulgences, auricular confession, and other new tricks of Popery crept into the Church. Answere is made for vs here by Christ; While men slept, the malitious enemy sowed tares among the wheat. And it was not discerned vntill the blade was sprung vp, and had brought forth fruit.
When I see the finger of the diall remooued from one to two, shall I be so mad as to thinke it standeth still where it was, because I could not perceiue the stirring of it? In the Apocal. 17.5. forehead of the whore of Babylon, is written

a mystery: so Paul 2. Ths. 2.7. calles the working of Antichrist, a my|stery of iniquity; because the man of sinne doth couertly and cunningly wind his abominations into the Church of Christ.
Polititians obserue, that corruptions are bred in ciuill bodies, as diseases in naturall bodies: at the first they be not discerned easily, but in their growth: insensibly they proceed often, till it come to passe, which Decad. 1. l. 1. Lie said of the Roman State; Nec vitia nostra, nec remedia ferre possu|mus; We can neither indure the malady, nor the medicin. D. Abbots answer to Bi|shops epist. to the King. pag. 111. Was it so in the Empire of Rome, and might it not be so in the Church of Rome?
The Preface to the Reader. . 22. Rhemists acknowledge many barbarismes and incongruities in the vulgar Latine text. Cardinall Caie|tan, Sanctes Pagninus, Franciscus Forerius, Hieronymus Oleastrius, Bibliothec. l. 8. fol. vlt. Sixtus Senensis, all learned Papists, ingenu|ously confesse, that beside solecismes in the vulgar tran|slation of Rome, there are many grosse faults, additions, transpositions, omissions. Eist. lectori. praefix. Bib. Ve|net. An. 1557. See D. Fulk des Eg. Trans. pag. 60. Isidorus Clauius a Spanish Monke, professed that he found in it 8000. errors. It is plaine they were so manifest, and so manifold, as that the Councell of Sess. 4. Trent; and after it, Pope Sixtus Quntus, ad Clement 8. took order for the correcting of it. I would know then of a Papist, how this cockle was sowen among Gods seed? in what yeere this  that absurdity first crept into their text? as Luke 15.8. domum eertit, for domum euerrit: and Exod. 34 29. Moses in stead of a bright coun|tenance, is said to haue cornutam faciem, a face of horne, whereupon the common painters among the Papists, vsu|ally paint Moses with two hornes, as a cuckold, to the great scandall of Christian religion, as Anot. in Exod. Augustinus Steuchus, and blioth. l. 5. annot. 116. Sixtus Senensis obserue.
The whole Rhemish Colledge cannot tell in what age confusus est, in stead of confessus est, entred in Marke 8.38. Pope Sixtus Quintus hath sundry coniectures, in the pre|face prefixed to his Bible, vel x niuri temporum, vel ex librariorum inuri, vel ex impressorum imperiti, vel ex te|mer

emendantium licenti, vel ex recentirum interpretum audaci; vel ex haereicorum scholijs ad marginem. If the Pope cannot tell in whose head and hands is all the Churches treasure, both for wit and wealth; it is enough for the disciple to be as his Master is, and the seruant as his Lord.
The late Pope Clement 8. corrected the corrections of his predecessor Sixtus Quintus, setting forth another Bi|ble, which one called vnhappily, The new Transgression. In these reformed editions of Rome, there is such Consule bellum papale r Thom. Iames. diffe|rence, that we may say with the Esay 19.2. Prophet; Egyptians are set against Egyptians, and the Esay 21.2. destroier against the de|stroier, one against another, and all against the truth.
In the Consule praef. Pij 5.  Clem. 8 Breuiar. nuper reformat. Roman Mssals and Breuiaries, there were so many damnable blasphemies, and superstitious errors, that the late Popes euen for shame reformed them; and yet they cannot tell in what yeere these corruptions first grew: and therefore what need wee tell them at what time this and that popish nouelty was first sowen? Is it not enough that we now discerne the tares among the wheat? and prooue to the proudest of their side, that there was no such darnell in Gods field for the space of Melancthon, Iewel, and all other  arned Protestants. six hundred yeeres after Christ? I say, no such stinking weeds, as the single communion of the Priest, halfe commu|nion of the people, worshipping of the bread, creeping to the Crosse, supremacie of the Pope, which are the most essentiall points of all the Romish religion.
Secondly, this parable makes against the Ekius en|chirid. tit. de comburend. aeret.  Rof|fsis contra Luther. at. 33. Papists in the question of putting heretikes to death. I confesse the words, sinite vtra simul crescre; teach not the Magi|strates duty, but rather shew Gods bounty towards here|tikes. It is the Chrsost. hom. 47. in Ma. Princes office to banish, imprison, mulct, and by all meanes possible, to suppresse them, and in no sort to suffer them, as being so pstilent as the plague. For as the plague doth instantly strike the heart, and by poi|soning one infects many, Bellarmin. praefat. Tom. 1. controuers. ic haeresis cor ipsum animae petit,  cm vnum inerficit, centum alios inficit: Heresie strikes

at faith, and so takes away the life of the Christian; for the iust doth liue by faith, and then it fretteth as a 2. Tim. 2.17. canker or gangren, corrupting all other members of Christs my|sticall body: we may cry mors in ill; as the children of the Prophets 2. King. 4.40. mors in ll: such cockle then ought to be cropt and topt, but not vtterly rooted vp and burnt vntill the great haruest. A murtherer and a traitor indued with faith and repentance, may passe from the crosse to the crowne; as the blessed theefe in the Gospell was instantly translated from his paine to Paradise: but an heretike dy|ing in his heresie, cannot be saued. He therefore that puts an heretike to death, is a double murtherer, as P stil.  aior. in loc. Luther thinks, in destroying his body with death temporall, in slaying his soule with death eternall. Excommunication, exile, losse of goods, imprisonment, depriuation, haue bin reputed euermore fit punishments for heretikes: but fire and fagot is not Gods law, but canon shot, Bullinger de concilijs, lib. 2. cap. 12. enacted first by Pope Lucius 3. An. 1184. and confirmed afterward by Innocentius 3. and Gregory 9. as it appeares in the De|cretals: and it was executed against the Waldenses, and in latter times against the Protestants especially, marty|ring the The bones of Fagius and Bucer. dead with the liuing, the wife with the hus|band, the new borne, yea M. Fox. Acts and Mon. fol. 1765. not borne infant with the mother, (whom they should haue cherished by all lawes, and christened by their owne lawes) and that not for the denying of any article of the Creed, but one|ly for not beleeuing Transubstantiation, and other new quirkes of the Schoole, which the most iudicious a|mong them, as yet cannot explicate: for as one wit|tilie,
Corpore de Christi lis est, de snguine lis est,
de modo lis est, non habitura modum.
In. 4 sent. dist. 11. quaest. 3. Scotus, Chemnitius examin. con. Trident. de Transubstant. Cameracensis, and Andradius vi Chem. vbi supr. other Papists of great note, confesse plainly, that transubstantiation cannot be inforced by the Gospell, nor by any testimonies of the ancient Church. And De sacrament. earist. lib. 3. cap. 23. . Se|cund dicit. Bellrmin, Romes oracle, doth ac|knowledge, that it may well be doubted whether there

be any place of scripture cleerly to proue transubstantia|tion, otherwise then that the Church hath declared it so to be, because many learned and acute men hold the con|trary. What hellish crueltie then was it in the Bonners of Queene Mary, to make bonfires of sillie women, for not vnderstanding this their ineffable mystery, wherein are nine miracles at the least, as Compendium thelog. lib. 6. cap. 14. Ioannes de Combis af|firmes? If these gunpowder Priests, and fagot Diuines are Saints, I wonder who are Scythians: if these be Catholikes, who are Canibals?
In this question, as in all other, I submit my selfe to the iudgement of our Church, and practise of our Country. Which, as Whitaker. rpn. ad epist. Campian. Diuines and Execution of English iustice. Statesmen auow, neuer put any to death meerly for the cause of religion. I conclude with the glosse of Loc. com. tit. de zelo. Luther; Hoc verbum, Sinite, non est confirma|tionis, aut approbationis haereticorum, sed consolationis  exhortationis nostri ad patientiam: August. in Psal. 39. Apert saeuit perse|cutor paganus, vt leo; haereticus insidiatur, vt draco; ille cogit negare Christum, iste docet: aduersus illum opus patien|tia, adersus hunc opus vigilantia. Consulas Augustinum, epist. 48.50.61.127.158.159.160. Diligite homines, interfi|cite errores, sine superbi de veritate praesumite, sine saeuiti pro veritate certate. Contra literas Petilian. lib. 1. cap. 29.
Thirdly, this makes against Popish Purgatory, prouing it to be superfluous and idle: for whatsoeuer is in the Lords field, is either corne or cockle: a barne is prouided for the one, and vnquenchable fire for the other. A third place for a third sort of persons, is that Sir Edward Hoby to T.H.  5.  Sutliu. de pugat. cap. 4.5.6. c. which neither God made, nor Christ mentioned, nor the Apostles be|lieued, nor the Primitiue Church imbraced. It is an hea|thenish fantasie founded by the Poets,  not by the Pro|phets, by In Timaeo. Plato and Aead. 6. Virgil, not by Peter and Paul, and that vpon so tickle ground, that the most learned Papists can neither tell vs where it is, nor what it is.
De pugato|ri. lib. 2. cap. 6. Bellarmine reports eight sundry different opinions about the place, confessing honestly, that the Church as yet hath not defined, vbi si purgatorium; it is in so many

places, as that it can be in no place, quod vbi, nllibi. Sir Contra Luther. See B. Iwel. de|fence Apolog. part. 2. cap. 16.  Sutliu. de purgat. cap. 2. Thomas More said, that in all purgatorie there is no water, and that hee would proue by the words of Zach. 9.11. I haue loosed thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water. On the contrarie, Conta Luther. art. 7. Roffensis affirmed, that there is great store of water, and this he proued by Dauid, Psalme 66.11. Wee went thorow fire and water. Consule Iewl. visupr diui|sion. . Albertus and Roffesis are of opinion, that purgatories executioners are good Angels. Other, as In 4. sentent. dist. 20. qaest. 2. osule Sutu. bi supr. Dioyius Carthusianus, and Sir Thomas More make no doubt, but that they be di|uels. Cardinall Bellermine is of both sides, and no side, concluding this point; Lib. 2. d pr|gat. cap. 13. Maneat hoc inter sereta, qu su tempore nobis aperientur. Happily this vncertaintie is a great certaintie to the Pope, being Lord of Purgatorie; for hee can Ioannes Ange|lus vti Il. vbi supr dis. . when he please make gale-delirie, an auoid all the soules in Purgatorie, being is peculiar; the Pope may Clem. 6. in bull. command Gods Angels to fetch away from thence whom he list: and therefore this imaginarie fie may make his kitchin smoke, but it is altogether need|lesse for the people; because Christ (saith Heb. 1.3. Paul) hath purged our sinnes: all our sinnes, saith S. 1. Epist. 1. Iohn: as Lib 2. de actis cum Felice, c. 2 tom. 6. fol. 362. Au|gustine sweetly, Gods piti is mans purgatorie.
Lastly, this makes against Atheists, imagining that ei|ther eternall iudgement shall haue an end; or else that the world shall haue no end: our Sauiour confutes both in his exposition of this parable: vers. 39. The haruest is the end of the world, and the reapers be the Angels, who shall gather the tares, c. but the wheate shall be gathered into Gods barne.
The glorious Angels at the great haruest, shall first ga|ther the tares, Matth. 25.32. separating them from the wheate, which is poena damn, priuation of God, and all that is good; Angels, Saints, friends; and then they shall binde them in sheaues to be burnt, which is poena sensus, a possession of hell and all that is euill; Ludolphus in loc. they shall not be bound all in one, but in many fagots; an adulterer with an adulteresse shall make one fagot, a drunkard with a drunkard ano|ther

fagot, a traitor with a traitor another fagot: as there be seuerall sinnes, so seuerall sheaues; all shall not be pu|nished in the same degree, though in the same fire: all shall be burnt, yet none consumed. In that vnquench|able flame, Prosper. poenae gehennales torquent, non extorquent: puniunt, non finiunt corpora: Augustin. de spiritu  ani|ma, cap. 56. mors sine morte, finis sine fine, defectus sine defectu.
Dauid said of his enemies in the 55. Psalme; Let them goe downe quicke into hell: in another sense wee may wish so much vnto our best friends, euen our own selues, (as Gueuara eist. one fitly) let vs often goe to hell while we liue, that we come not thither when we be dead; let vs euery day descend into hell by meditation, that in the last day wee may not descend by condemnation.
Gather the wheate into my barne] In Gods field tares are among wheate, but in Gods barne no tare, no care shall molest vs: in the kingdome of grace bad are ming|led with the good, but in the kigdome of glorie there shall bee none but good, enioying nothing but good, good Angels, good Saints; aboue all, our good God, in whose Psalm. 36.9. light we shall see such light, 1. Cor. 2.9. as the eye of man hath not seene, neither eare hath heard, neither heart sufficiently can conceiue, c.



The Epistle. 1. COR. 9.24.
Perceiue ye not, how that they which runne in a course runne all, but one receiueth the reward?

THere are Melancon. oat. e agu|ent. st. prae|fix. tom. 5. two waies of teaching; one by precept, and another by paterne. S. Paul vseth here both: a precept, so runne that ye may obtaine: a paterne, I there|fore so runne, c.

The precept is pressed by two similitudes:

1. Fro~ runners in the 24 verse.
2. From wrastlers, in the 25.


The summe of both is: Rhe. annot. in loc. if such as runne for a wager,

and co~tend for a corruptible crowne, suffer great pains, and abstaine from many pleasures to winne the gole; what should wee doe, what should wee not doe to gaine the crowne of glorie, proposed and promised onely to such as runne, trauell and endeuour for it? So runne there|fore that ye may obtaine.

In which exhortation 4. points are regardable: the

Men, ye.
Matter, runne.
Manner, so runne.
Marke, that ye may obtaine.


Runne ye] That is, all yee; for that is taken as granted here; Perceiue ye not? All men are viatores in this valley of teares, before they can be comprehensores, ascended vp to heauen, and resting on Gods holy hill, the blessed Vir|gin not excepted, the most blessed of all the sonnes of men, Christ Iesus himselfe not exempted, he first Luke 24.26. suffe|red, and after entred into glorie; first he did runne, then obtaine. God hath three houses, Heauen for ioy, Hell for paine, Earth for labour: Man is borne to trauell, as the sparkes flie vpward: Iob 5.7.
The matter then in the next place to be considered, is, that we must runne, Runne ye.

Wherein obserue Aquin.  Gor|ran. in loc. 2. things especially:

1. The labour of our life.
2. The shortnesse of our life.


The labour in that wee must runne, the shortnesse in that it is but a race. Iob 14.1. Man that is borne of a woman, is of short continuance, and full of trouble: Petrarcha. Animal aeuibre|uissimi, solicitudinis infinitae: Mans life is not short and sweete, but sharpe and short. Running is a violent exer|cise, therefore sharpe; a stage is but a little ground, there|fore short.
God is good vnto vs in tempering these so fitly, that thinking on the shortnesse of our life wee may bee con|tent, because full of miseries; and againe, considering the miseries of our life we may be co~forted, because it is but of small continuance, not a long iourney, but a short tye.


The word originall is , a race of men or horse, whereof I finde in consul Cor|ucop. pag. 196. 197. anti|quitie three kindes:

Italicum.
Olympicum.
Pythicum.


One of Italy, containing 625. fecte, that is, 125. paces. The second, of Olympus, containing 600. feete, that is, 120. paces. The third, containing 1000. feete, that is, 200 paces. It is probable that Paul writing this vnto the Co|rinthians, alluded to the Olympiack course which is the shortest, much like the tyes in Kent, some 30. or 40. rods. And as experience shewes daily, some giue ouer at the first setting out, in the very cradle; some perish when they haue runne two or three paces in their youth; other about the midst of their race; most are out of breath be|fore they can reach the staied paces of threescore yeeres; if any liue till eighty, we repute him exceeding old. Why doe I name rods or paces? our life is as it were a Psalm. 39.6. span long, a very Psalm. 144.4. nothing in respect of eternitie: seeing then our course is small, and reward great, a little paine, but an inestimable price; seeing our 2. Cor. 4.17. light affliction, which is but for a moment, causeth vnto vs a farre most excellent and an eternall waight of glorie; let vs not faint in our course, but so runne that we may obtaine.
So runne] Noting the manner and the meanes, Melancton. in loc. tom. 4. sol. 236. a ge|nerall rule necessarie for the course of our whole life, teaching vs in all we say or doe to foresee the right end, and to vse the meanes for obtaining that end.
Some looke to the right end, but vse not the right meanes, as Carolostadius in Luthers age, who desired the Gospell might florish, but he failed in the meanes; he de|spised authoritie, neglected humane lawes, and was alto|gether transported with his owne piuate humours of ambition and couetousnesse. And so the Schismatikes in our time, especially those of the separation, embrace the Gospell (as it should seeme) so much as we, but they faile in their Sic, in their so running; for they runne out of the Church, without which none can be safe, none can be sa|ued

and so the more they runne, the further are they fro the prize.
Some vse the right meanes, but not for the right end, as Matth. 7. hypocrites vse to fast and giue to the poore, not for Gods glorie, but for their owne praise. So vainglorious Preachers and people seeke the trueth, but not for the truth,  Augustin. dum quaerunt eam, non quaerunt ipsam.
Some neither vse the right meanes, nor aime at the right end, as Atheists, who preferre their fiue senses be|fore the foure Euangelists, and panem nostrum in the Pa|ter noster, before sanctificetur nomen tuum.
Some look to the right end, and vse the right meanes, as the holie Prophets and Apostles, all their preaching tended to the glorie of God, and they runne the right way, to propagat that his glorie: So runne therefore that e may obtaine.

Now y^t we may run well, 2. things are re|quired especially: a

due preparatio~ before the race.
right disposition in the race.


He that vndertakes to runne a tye, will first, if he be wise, English glosse in loc. diet himselfe, and not spend his time in drunken|nese and gluttonie; the text saith, he will abstaine from all things, euen those meates and pleasures which hee doth most affect, only to make his bodie swift and fit for the race. So if we will happily runne our course in Gods way, we must not walke in surfetting and drunkennesse, in chambering and wantonnesse, but as aul heere, wee must tame our bodies, and bring them into subiection: Wee must not be filled with Ephes. 5.18. wine, but with the holie Spirit: for fasting and voluntarie chastising of our bodies, as oc|casion is offered, are not workes D. Fulk in loc. either superfluous or superstitious. A full panch and heauie head is fitter to lie then to goe, to stand still then to runne a swift race. The Gentiles liue to eate, but Cle. Alex. paedagog. lib. 2. cap. 1. Christians eate to liue, and life consists in Vita non est viere sed va|lere. health and strength, and both are maintained especially by moderate fare.
Secondly, the runner vseth to strip himself of all about

him, except some white garment to couer his nakednesse: and so we must put off the workes of darknesse, and eue|ry thing that Heb. 1.1. presseth downe: wee must cast away the cares of this life, 1. Cor. 7.31. vsig the world as if we vsed it not; hauing wiues and children as if wee had neither wiues nor children, accounting all things losse to winne Christ. We must strippe our selues of all that might hinder vs in our course, leauing nothing on vs but the Apocal. 7.9. long robe of Christs righteousnesse to couer our nakednesse, to Psalm. 32.1. co|uer our wickednesse, as our Apostle, Rom. 13.14. Put yee on the Lord esus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it.
And as the runner must haue due preparation before his race; so likewise a right disposition in his course, that he begin well, continue well, and end well.
First, he must be carefull to begin well, to set out in the right and direct passages: otherwise if he runne in wrie waies and by-waies, the more his labour the greater is his losse. Wee must take heed lest meta be Luther. posil. in loc. transpost: such as will obaine Gods prize, must walke in Gods path, turning neither to the right hand, nor to the left, Deut. 5.32.33. for there is danger in both; and, as Com. in Gal 1. vers. 6. Lu|ther obserues, often the gratest perill is on the right hand. For Schismatikes hurt more vnder a colour of re|forming and building vp the Church, then heretikes and open tyrants can doe by persecuting and pulling downe the Church. Omnes mici omnes inimici (quoth Bernard). On the contrarie, by the Martyrs blood, the Church is not destroyed, but watered: Cyprian. epist. lib. 2. epist. 6. Ante fuit in ope|ribus fratrum candida, nunc in martyrum cruore purpurea. Euey man must be sure to set foorth aright, in the true profession of the Catholike faith; otherwise when wee runne without Christ, who is the way, Luther. in Ga|lat. 1.4. then our wise|dome is double foolishnesse, our righteousnesse double sinne; when we are best, then are we worst. Againe, we must walke in an honest vocation warranted by Gods word, otherwise we shall not run to, but from the prize.
Secondly, we must continue well; for many runne, but one receiueth the crowne: we must therefore take heede that we doe not slip; or if we slip, that we doe not fall; or if we fall, that we fall not backward but forward, so that wee may with speede rise againe. The most iust Prou. 24.16. often slip, and sometime fall, but they fall not backward as 1. Sm. 4. Eli, and the Ioh. 18.6. Iewes who tooke Christ, but forward, as Gen. 18. Abraham in the valley of Mambre, and Ezech. 1. Ezechiel by the riuer Chebar.
Lastly, wee must end well; Death is our last enemie, which must be destroyed, and therefore we must run well vnto the end, and in the end. As good not to runne at all, as to runne neere the end, and then to lose the prize; to suffer Satan at the last houre to snatch our reward from vs. A runner will bee sure to stretch out his hand at the races end to take the marke; so when death approcheth, a Christian must stretch out the hand of faith apprehen|ding Christ and his righteousnesse.
Obserue yet a great difference betweene the Christian and other races. In the games of other runners, as it is here said, one onely doth winne the gole; Ambros. in loc. but in the Christian course many receiue the prize, so many as con|tinue stedfast vnto the end, though they doe not runne so fast, though they doe not runne from so farre as other. So Christ shewes in the parable of the vineyard, allotted for the Gospell on this day; Such as came to worke at the eleuenth houre had a peny, so well as they that came into the vineyard at the third houre.
Secondly, in other races one hinders another; Marlorat. ex Caluin. in loc. but in our iourney to heauen one helpes another. The moe the merier, the greater companie the better encouragement, euery good man being a spurre to his neighbour. As when Peter and Iohn ranne to Christs sepulchre, Iohn o|uerrunne Ion 20. Peter vnto the graue, Peter outwent Iohn into the graue.
Thirdly, runners and wrastlers contend for a crowne that shall perish, but we runne to obtaine an euerlasting

crowne. They run for a little prize, for a little praise; but wee striue for no lesse then a kingdome that is at stake, that is the marke, which being D. Fulk in loc. infinitly aboue the value of all mens works, it cannot be deserued by merit, but onely giuen by grace. To propound a garland for the runner, and a crowne for the wrestler, proceeds altoge|ther from Gods owne meere mercy: to run, and not to fall, to fall, and not finally to be cast downe, comes also from his especiall grace. So that it is Rom. 9.16. neither in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth, but in God that shewes mercy. Yet we must so runne, that we may obtaine. Wee must worke well in respect of the reward, as also for feare of punishment, due to such as worke not well, albeit not onely, nor chiefly for these considerations, as slaues for feare, or hirelings for reward; but principally out of lo|uing obedience to God, as becomes children vnto so good a father. Holy conuersation is a signe and seale of our iustification, by which our election is made 2. Pet. 1.10. sure. Ambros. de Abraham. lib. 2. cap. 9. Feramus ergo sidei fructum ab ips pueriti, augeamus in adolescenti, coloremus in iuuentute, compleamus in se|ectute.
I therefore so run] Bocholzer. in chron. An. 1500. One said of Erasmus his Enchiri|dion, that there was more deuotion in the booke, then in the writer. But here Saint Pauls life doth preach so much as his letter; I so run, so fight, I Preachers, as it is well ob|serued vpon the Gospell for this day, must be not onely Ludolphus, de vit Christi. part. 2. cap. 13. verbarij, but operarij: fo that as Christ said to the Luke 10.37. Law|yer; I say to thee, Goe and doe thou likewise.
Not as one that beateth the aire] Mlanc. in loc. Such as contend in the Church about things vncertaine and vnnecessary beat the aire.
I tame my body] The Gyrald. Cam|bren. in speculo Ecclsiae. Monkes of S. Swithin in Win|chester, complained to Henry the second, that their Bi|shop had taken away three of their dishes, and left them but ten: to whom the King answered, that the Bishop should doe well to take away ten, and to leaue them but three; for they were so many as he had in his Court. In

England Monkes so tamed their body, that among vs as yet, Frier and fat are Lubbers are heires appa|rent of Ab|bies. voces conuertibiles: and the new ba|stard Monke, though his habit resemble loue, couering a multitude of sinnes; yet himselfe is the pire of en|uie. No treason in old time without a Priest, no treason in our time without a Iesuit: so that I may say with the Poem. de cor|rupt statu Ec|cles. per Illyri|cum. Poet:
In vestimentis non est contritiomentis,
Ni mens sit pura, nil confert regula dura.
1. Tim 4.8. Bodily exercise profiteth little; but godlinesse is pro|fitable to all things. As Hieron. ad Experant. tom. . pag. 210. to shew the behauiour of a Pro|phet in the robes of a cauiliere, is louely: so contrariwise, doe the works of a ruffin in the weeds of a Priest, is no better then hyporisie.
Lest by any meanes] Our Apostle was assured of his sal|uation, as it is euident Rom. 8. Marlorat.  za in loc. This then is to be con|strued of reproofe before men, not of reprobation before God. Or if it be referred to damnation eternall, his D. Fulk in loc. a|ning is, that we may not presume of the end, without the meanes and waies, by which Almighty God brings vs vnto it. And so we August. apud Pet. Lombard in loc. lambes may tremble, seeing the bel|wether of the flocke must so labour and subiect his flesh, lest perhaps he misse the marke.
Mat. 17.20. Christ doth assure that a little faith, euen little as a grain of mustard seed, is strong enough to cast all moun|taines into the sea, that shall rise vp to diuide betweene God and vs. It is true that the Ephes. 6.16. shield of faith is able to repell all the fierie darts of the wicked: but this our faith is made Luther. fat by good works. And if we will make our cal|ling and election sure, we must with all diligence 2. Pet. 1.5. ioine vertue with faith, and with vertue knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and with temperance patience, and with patience godlinesse, and with godlinesse bro|therlie kindnesse, and with brotherly kindnesse loue, c.




The Gospel. MAT. 20.1.
The kingdome of heauen is like vnto a man that is an housholder, c.

OVr Sauiour was delighted exceedingly with cer|taine prouebiall speeches; as, Luke 18.14. Euery man that ex|aleth himselfe, shall be brought lo; and hee that humbleth himselfe, shall be exalted. Mat. 25.29. Vnto euery man that hath, it shall be giuen, but from him that hath not, euen that which he hath shall be taken away. Many that are first shall be last, and the last shall be first. The which saying is hard, and (as Ser. on the Gospll for Septgs. Bishop Latymer speakes) it is no meat for mowers and ignorant people. Christ therefore propounds here this parable for Ludolphus de vita Christi. part. 2. cap. 13. Iansen. con. cap. 101. Marlorat. ex Bullinger. in loc.  relqui fere omnes. explanation thereof, as it is apparent by the 16. verse of this present Chapter, as also by the last words of the former Many that are first shall be last, and the last shall be first: for the kingdom of heauen, c.
In which, a lecture of meeknesse is read by the great August. de sanct virginit. cap. 31. Doctor of humility; Luer. postil. maior. in loc. teaching all such as are forward in religion, not to be proud, because the first may be last; and all such as are called late, not to despaire, because the last may be first.

In the whole parable, three points are to be noted: our

calling.
worke.
reward.



In our calling, obserue the

Author of our calling; God.
diuersitie of our cal|ling, in respect of

time, called a houre, 3.6.9.11.
place: some cal|led in y^e mar|ket,  other elsewhere.



God is termed here paeterfamilias, in respect of his Culma. con. 2. in loc. fa|therly loue and care, disposing of all things in the Catho|like Church, with greater prouidence and wisdome, then any discreet housholder can manage the priuate busi|nesse of his particular family. So that all Atheists and Epi|cures holding that either there is no God, or that hee cares not for the things on earth, are confuted by this one word, that God is an housholder, a father of his Church.
Went out] Whither can he goe, that is euery where? Pot. in loc. Liceat dicere, exijt  se, vt intret in te, imo vt te conuertat in se. God went out from his maiesty, which is vnknowne vnto his mercy, which is manifested in all his works, in gouerning the Church espcially, sending labourers into his haruest, and workmen into his vineyard.
If then all laborers in the vineyard are called by God, Marlorat. ex Caluin. in loc. such as are busied in vnlawfull professions and occupa|tions, not allowed by his word, are not seruants of the Lord, but hirelings of Satan.
The second point obseruable in our calling, is the di|uersity thereof in respect of time and place. God cals in diuers houres of the day; Ludolphus  Iasen. vbi sup. ex Chrysost. that is, in diuers ages of the world, and in diuers yeeres of our age. In the time before the law, God called Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and such like. In the time vnder the law, Moses, Dauid, Esay, together with other Kings and Prophets: in the time af|ter the law, the blessed Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors. Or as Hitron. in loc.  August. de verbis Dom. ser. 59. other, God called some in the first houre, as Adam and the Patriarks vntill Noah: some in the third houre, as all Noahs posterity to Abraham: some in the sixt houre, as all his seruants, who liued betweene Abraham Mo|ses: some in the ninth houre, as Moses and the Prophets: some in the eleuenth houre, as Peter and Paul; and all o|ther who liued since Christs time, which is hora nouissima, the last houre: Iohn 1. epist. 2.18.1. Cor. 10.11. But I thinke with Saint Hierom, that this difference is meant of our age, rather then of the worlds age. For our great

Master calles some to labour in his vineyard at the first houre of the day, that is, in their childhood, as Samuel, Ie|remy, Iohn the Baptist; each whereof might say with he Psal. 22.9. Psalmographer; O Lord, thou wast mine hope, when I hanged yet vpon my mothers breasts. Thou art my God euen from my mothers wombe. Other he cals in the third houre, that is, in their youth, as Daniel the Prophet, and Iohn the Euangelist; of whom Saint Ad Heliodo|rum. om. 1. fol. 4. Hierom, Discipu|lum minimum Iesus amauit plurimum. Other in the sixt houre, that is, in their middle age, as Peter and Andrew. Other in the eleuenth houre, that is, in their old age, as Gamaliel, and Ioseph of Arimathea; some not onely in the last houre of the day, but euen in the last minute of the houre, as the theefe vpon the Crosse: Luke 23.
Againe, this our calling is diuers in respect of the place: for God calles some from their Mat. 4.19. ships, and some from their Mat. 9.9. shops, and some from vnder the Luke 14.23. hedges, and some from the market; as it is here, vers. 3. Now this diuers calling at diuers times, and in diuers places

in|timates a caueat, for such as are called.
in|timates a comfort, for such as are not called.

A caueat for such as are called, that they neither mag|nifie themselues, nor vilifie other. It proceeds not from our good works, but from Gods good will that wee be called; and he being infinitely rich in mercy, can call the most wicked ruffin, euen though he haue denied Christ with Peter, or sold Christ with Iudas, or crucified Christ with Pilat. Mat. 7.1. Iudge not therefore, that ye be not iudged: iudge not malitiously, iudge not curiously. The counsell of Gods election is secret: Rom. 8.30. whom he did predestinate, them also he calleth; and whom he calleth, he iustifieth; and whom he iustifieth, he sanctifieth in his good time: and therefore iudge not before the time.
This also may Ferus. ser. 5. in. loc. comfort such as feele not themselues as yet sufficiently called. Our good Lord calles at all times, in all places: he called Paul in the midst of his fu|rie, Acts 9.1. breathing out theatnings and slaughter against the

professors of the faith. He called Cardinall Petr Pau|lus Vegerius, vti Lanquet chron. fol. 343. Vergeriu as he was running away: for being suspected in the Court of Rome, to fauor the Gospellers, and purposing to cleere himselfe of that suspition, intended to write a booke a|gainst them; and for that purpose reading their works, and examining their arguments exactly, was fully resol|ued that their doctrine was good, and also perswaded his brother, the Bishop of Pola, to receiue the same. He cal|led Henry 8. Wicklif, Luther, in their discontent. Henry 8. of famous memory, displeased with the Pope for deny|ing his diuorce, banished all forraine iurisdiction, and immediately made publike profession of the Gospell. D. Godwin in the life of Simon Lang|ham. Iohn Wicklif, with other, being thrust out of Cantebu|rie Colledge in Oxford,  Monkes placed in their roome by the Popes edict, and Simon Langham Archbishop of Canterburies power, at the last grew so disco~tent, that he misliked Pope, Bishop, Monkes and all and afterward it pleased God to shew him the bright beames of his truth, in so much that Wicklif was a wicket, and a doore of en|trance to many who liued in that time of ignorance.
Martin Luther at the first distasted in all popery but one point onely, to wit, the base prostitution of indulgen|ces in Germany: but herein receiuing no satisfaction, he grew to be so great a laborer in the Lords, vineyard, that it might haue been written on his tombe:
Stapleton. de magnitudine Rom. Eccls. lib. 1. cap. 7. Pestis eram viuens, moriens ero mors tua papa.
Or as In epitaphijs. learned Bza worthily and wittily:
Roma orbem domuit, Romam sibi Papa subegit,
Viribus illa suis, fraudibus iste suis.
Quanto isto maior Lutherus, maior  illa
Istum, illam vn qui domuit calam.
Hitherto concerning our calling into the vineyard. The next obseruable point is our working. This vine|yard, as the Esay 5.7. Prophet tels vs, is the Church. Surely the vineyard of the Lord is the house of Israel, and the men of Iudah are his pleasant plant. All men are either loite|rers in the market of the world, or else laborers in the

vineyard of the Church. Of such as stand in the market

idle there be foure sorts: some

sell their soules.
pawne their soules.
lose their soules.
giue their soules.


Some sell: for as it is said of the Lawyer, that hee hath linguam venalem, a tongue to bee bought and sold; so it may be said of the couetous man, that hee hath animam venalem, a soule to be Eccls. 10.9. sold; so the Ludolphus in lc. voluptuous man doth sell his soule for pleasures, as Esa did his birthright for a messe of pottage; so the proud man doth sell his soule for aduancement, s Alexander the 6. is said to haue done for his Poedome. The Lord saith, Thou shalt haue no other Gods but me, neither in hauen aboue, nor in earth beneath, nor in the water vnder the earth: and yet as the Scripture doth intimate, the proud man makes ho|nour his god, the couetous man gold his god, the volup|tuous man his belly his god. The first hath his idoll as it were in the aire; the second his idoll in the earth; and the third his idoll in the water, as Ioannes de Combis com|pend. lib. 5. cap. 60. one pithily notes vp|on the second Commandement.
Secondly, some pawne their soules, albeit they be not so desperate, so giuen ouer to commit sinne with greedi|nesse, as to sell their soules right out, yet for their profit and pleasure they will be content to pawne their soules vnto the diuell for a time: so Dauid in committing adul|terie did as it were pawne his soule; Noe when hee was drunke did pawne his soule; Peter in denying Christ did also pawne his soule: but these being all labourers in Gods vineyard redeemed their soules againe, with vn|fained and hartie repentance. But let vs take heede how we play the merchant venturers in this case: for our soule is our best iewell, of greater value then the whole world, and the diuell is the craftiest vsurer and greatest oppres|sor that euer was, if he can get neuer so little aduantage, if we keep not day with him, he will be sure at the iudge|ment day to call for iustice, and to claime his owne, spea|king

vnto God as the King of Sodome did vnto Abra|ham; Gen. 14.21. Da mihi animas, caetera tolle tibi: Giue me the soules which haue been pawned and forfetted vnto me, the rest take to thy selfe.
There is another kinde of pawning of soules, and that is vnto God; for Princes and Prelates, Ministers and Ma|sters are bound to God as it were in goods and bodie for all such as are vnder them: as the Prophet said vnto King 1. King. 20.39. Ahab; Keepe this man, if he be lost, and want, thy life shall goe for his life. But if thou dost thy best endeuour, though the wicked incorrigible sinner die for his iniquitie, thou shalt Ezech. 33.9. deliuer thy soule, redeeeme thy pawne, and when euening is come, the Lord of the vineyard shall giue thee thy reward.
Thirdly, some lose their soules; as carnall and care|lesse Gospellers, ignorant negligent people, who though they come to Church either for fashion or feare; yet, a|las, they seldome or neuer thinke of their poore soule, from whence it came, or whither it shall goe, trifling a|way the time in the market, neither buying nor selling, nor giuing; but idly gaping and gazing vpon other, a fit pray for the cutpurse, betraying themselues and their soules vnto that old cunnicatcher Satan, who goes about daily, seeking whom he may deceiue, cunningly snatch|ing and stealing such soules as are vnguarded, vnregar|ded. O blockish stupiditie! will you keepe your chicken from the kite, your lambe from the wolfe, your fane from the hound, your conies and pigeons from the ver|mine; and will not you keepe your soule from the diuell, but idly lose it without any chopping or changing in the market?
Fourthly, some giue their soules, as first the malitious and enuious person: for whereas an ambitious man hath a little honour for his soule; a couetous man a little pro|fit for his soule; a voluptuous man a little pleasure for his soule; the spitefull wretch hath nothing for his soule, but fretting and heart-griefe, like Cain, who said of himselfe,

Gen. 4.14. Whosoeuer findeth me, shall slay me.
Secondly, such as finally despaire, giue their souls away; for the diuell bestoweth nothing in liew thereof, but hor|ror and hell of conscience. The Ferus, ser. 5. in loc. distressed soule may comfort himselfe with the conclusion of this parable: The first shall be last, and the last first. The Ludolphus in loc. last in  owne iudgement, the first in Gods eye.
Thirdly, such as destroy their bodie, that the diuel may haue their soule, giue themselues away for nothing: in one word, this is the case of all such as stand idle in the market, they serue the diuels turne for nothing: for the wages of sinne (saith Rom. 6.23. Paul) is death; and death is none of Gods workes, a nothing in nature. Why therefore do you stand idle in the market all the day? goe into the vineyard, saith the Lord, and whatsoeuer is right I will giue you.
Now there be diuers labourers in the vineyard, as there be diuers loiterers in the world; one plants, another wa|ters, some dig, some dung; the Hemingius in loc. householder giues vnto one man a shredding hooke, to another a spade, to a third an hatchet: so there be Mils equis, piscator aquis,  clericus hym|nis, nauta fre|tis, pugiles Mar|te, poeta mtris. sundrie vocations and offices in the Church, diuersities of gifts, and diuersities of admini|strations, and diuersities of operations, 1. Cor. 12. But about the trimming of the materiall vine, there be Esay 5.2. three sorts of labourers especialy: the first to proyne; the se|cond to lay abroad, and vnderprop it; the third, to digge away the old mould, and to lay new to the root: al which are so necessarie, that if any of them faile, the vine will soone decay.

No lesse needfull in Christs Church are these three estates:

Clergie.
Magistracie.
Commonaltie.


It belongs to the Priest to cut away supersuous bran|ches with the sword of the spirit. The Magistrate must protect, vnderset and hedge in the vine, lest the wilde Psalm. 80.13. bore out of the wood roote it v, and the wilde beasts of the field deuoure it. The common labourer must dig

and till the ground, that hee may get sustenance for him|selfe and other. If no Priest, what would become of our spirituall life? if no Prince what would become of our ciuill life? if no common people, what would become of our naturall life? We must al be labourers, and that pain|full and profitable; painfull, called in this our parable thrice, workmen: Non otiandum in vi, sed laborandm in vine: There is no roome in y^e vineyard for sluggishnes: Ieremy 48 10 Cursed is he that doth the worke of the Lord negligently.
But because Satan is the most B. Latymer ser. at Pauls. diligent preacher in the world, and heretikes Matth. 23.15. compasse sea and land to make proselyts, and to draw disciples after them; it is not e|nough that labourers in the vineyard be painfull, except they be profitable: for as one said of the schoolemen; A man may magno conatu nihil agere, take great paine to little purpose; toile much, and yet not helpe, but rather hurt the vineyard. The by-word, Euery man for himself, and God for vs all, is wicked, impugning directly the end of euery vocation and honest kind of life. That our paine may be profitable, wee must labour in a lawfull calling lawfully, for the good of the vineyard, and then, as it fol|loweth in the last point of the parable, wee shall receiue Gods peny for our paine.
When euen was come, the Lord of the vineyard said vnto his steward, Call the labourers and giue them their hire, be|ginning at the last vntill the first.] Wherein obserue two

things especially:

When? at euening.
What? giue the~ their hire; the which is not a reward os merit, but of mercie; not of debt, but of fauour, as it appeares here by the

persons,

Of whom, God the Father.
Through whom, the Steward, God the Sonne.
To whom, to the labourers; yet so that the last be paied first, and the first last.




When euen] All our time of labouring in the vineyard is termed in this and other places of holy writ, a day:

2. Cor. 6.2. Behold now the day of saluation: Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another while it is called to day.

Now our whole pilgrimage on earth is called a day, in two respects especially:

1. For the shortnesse of our life.
2. For that after this our day is spent, wee shall no longer worke.


All our time is but a day, and that a short day, a win|ters day; for our eternal night is infinitly longer then our temporall day: and alas! it is but a little part of this little day that we worke. Seneca, epist. 1. Multos annos transegi, paucos vixi. Cael. Calcag|ninus. Multum temporis eipitur nobis, plus subducitur, plurimum effuit: exigua pars est vitae quam nos viimus. It is the least part of our life that we truly liue; for wee spend our youth, which is our morning, in toyes and vanities; and our old age, which is our afternoone, for the most part is lost in carking and caring for things of this life, so that there remaineth only the noone of our day. As Epaminondas aptly, we must salute young men with good morow, or welcome into the world; old men with good night, because they bee leauing the world; only those of middle age with good day.
Let vs examine then how we spend our noone. Though honest men vse not to sleepe at noone, yet all wee being labourers in Gods haruest and vineyard ordinarily sleepe almost halfe our time. Other houres we waste in eating, other in playing, and that which is worst of all, most of all in sinning: all which time, wee cannot properly bee said to liue; for as the scripture teacheth vs plainly, bad workes are not the workes of light, but of night and darknesse: a day mispent is lost, Titus Vsp. vti Sucton. in ius vita. amici, diem perdidi.
Similis Captaine of the guard to the Emperour A|drian, after he had retired himselfe, and liued priuatly se|uen yeeres in the countrey, confessed that hee had liued only 7. yeers, and caused to be written vpon his tombe:
Xiphilinus in vita Adriani. Hic iacet Similis, cuius aetas
multorum annorum fuit, ipse
septem duntaxat annos vixit.

So, many religious men haue numbred their yeeres, not from the day of their birth, but of their new birth, from their beginning of their regeneration and repentance, reputing all that time lost, which was idly misspent in the market of the world: so that whether we consider our life of nature, or life of grace, our whole time may well be called a short day.
Secondly, a day in regard of our eternal night, in which we cannot worke; for there is no grace in the graue, nor health in hell. I must worke the workes of him that sent me, (saith Iohn 9.4. Christ) while it is day; the night commeth when no man can worke. When euen is come the Lord of the vine|yard shall say to his steward, call the labourers, and giue them their hire. This euen is either Soarez tract. 2 in Matth. 20. euery mans end, or else the Theophlact. in loc. worlds end; the particular houre of our death, or the general day of iudgement: at Culman.  Maldonat. in loc. both which as well the loiterer as the labourer, shall receiue his reward.
The next point to be discussed, is, what? Giue them their hire] The word hire doth exceedingly trouble the Papists; for they cannot, or at least will not vnderstand how eternal life may be both a reward and a gift: where|as it is demonstrated in holy Scripture, that the immor|tall crowne of glorie, is called a reward secundm quid, only, but a gift simplicit; if we compare life euerlasting to the worke, and looke no further, it is called a reward: Matth. 5.12. Great is your reward in heauen: but examine the first original from whence the worke it selfe also pro|ceedes, and all is meerely and wholly gift: eternall life is the gift of God through Iesus Christ our Lord; whereas the blessed Apostle said, the wages of sinne is death. If there were any merits in our workes, the sequell of his speech Perkins resor|med Catholike, tit merits. should haue been, The wages of righteousnesse is eter|nall life; hee saith not so, but the gift of God is eternall life; and so by that which he doth not say as also by that which he doth say, sheweth that there is no place for me|rit. Rom. 11.6. If then it be of grace, it is no more of works; other|wise grace is no grace: Augustin. con|tra Plag.  Ce|lestiu~, lib. 2. c. 24 tom. 7. fol. 541. Gratia non erit gratia vllo modo,

nisi sit gratuita omniodo: Grace is not grace in any sort, if it be not free in euery sort.
In this controuersie, the scriptures, and fathers, and ma|ny learned Papists are on our side. God saith in the Exod. 20.6. law, that he will shew mercy to such as keep his commande|ments: Ergo, rew is giuen of mercy to them that ful|fill the law. Christ saith in the Luke 12.2. Gospell; It is your fathers pleasure to giue you kingdome. And Rom. 8.18. Paul; The sufferings of this life are not worthy of the glory in the life to come.
The most iudicious and the most indifferent for both parties among the fathers is Augustine, who repeates in his Enarrat. Psal. 102.  epist. 10. works often this one golden sentence; Deus coronat dona sua, non merar. God crowneth his owne gifts, not our merits: according to that of Psal. 103.4. Dauid; Hee crowneth vs with compassion and louing kindnesse. August. epist. 105. Eternall life should be rendred as due vnto thee, if of thy selfe thou hadst the righteousnesse to which it is due. But of his fulnesse wee receiue, not onely grace, now to liue iustly in our labours vnto the end, but also grace for this grace, that afterward wee may liue in rest without end; Im. epist. 120 cap. 19. Haec est gratia ratis da non meritis operantis, sed miseratione donaxi. In Rom. c. 4. Origen saith, he can hardly be per|swaded that there can be any worke, which by debt may require reward at Gods hand, in as much as it is by his gift, that wee are able to doe, or thinke, or speake any thing thati good. De his qui pu|tant se ex operi|bus iustificari. Marke the Hermite, saith; He that doth good  ng reward thereby, serueth not God, but his owne w
De vocat. Gnt. lib. 1. cap. 17. Non labori pretium sluens, sed diiias bo|nitatis suae in cs quos sine operibus clegit, .  the words of my text: The Lord of the vineyard  hire, not as paying a price to their labour, bu powing forth the riches of his good|nesse to the  chos without works, that euen they alo who  with much labour, and haue re|ceiued no mre , may vnderstand that they haue receiued a , not wages for their worke. So Saint  in Rom 8. Greg. Mag|nus in Psalm.  1. d interpell. cap. 1.

 in Luc. lib. 8. c. 17. Fulgentius ad Monimum. lib. 1. Many learned Papists agree with vs also both in their positi|ons and practise. Fol. 106. Bernard in his sermon vpon the Annun|ciation, said, that the merits of men are not such as that life eternall by right is owing for them: his reason is this; Omnia merita, Dei dona sunt,  ita homo magis propter ipsa Deo debitor est, quam Deus homini. For, saith he, all our me|rits are the gifts of God: and so man is rather a debter to God for them, then God to man. And in Ser. 61. in cant. another place; Meritum meum miseratio Domini, c. my merit is Gods mercy, c.
In Luke cap. 7. Stella: God my protector looke not vpon me; but first looke vpon thine onely Sonne: place betweene me and thee, his crosse, his blood, his passion, his merit; that so thy iustice passing thorow his blood, when it commeth at the last to me, it may be gentle and full of mercy.
Frier Ferus in his commentaries vpon this plece, saith, that the parable of the vineyard teacheth, that whatsoe|uer God giueth vs, is of grace; not of debt. And in his Ser. 8. dom. septuags. Postil he professeth openly, that if it were not for pride, this question would soone be at an end.
Part. 1. quaest. 17. art. 2. fol. 77.78. Gregorius Ariminensis vpon Peter Lombard, defends at large, that no worke done by man, though comming from the greatest charity, meriteth of condignity, either eternall life, or any other reward temporall; because eue|rie such worke is the gift of God. His owne words are; Ex hoc infero, quod ne dum vitae eternae, sed nec alius alte|rius praemij aeterni vel temporalis aliquis actus hominis ex quantcun charitate elicitus est de condigno meritorius a|pud Deum, quia quilibet talis est donum Dei.
Cardinall De iustificat. lib. 5 cap. 7.  sit tertia pro|posuo. Bellarmin, after he had a long time trauel|led and wearied himselfe in the questions of iustification, at the last holds it the safest course to repose our whole trust in the onely mercies of God: propter incertitudinem propriae iustitiae,  periculum inanis gloriae, tutissimum est fiduciam totamin sol Dei misericordi  benignitate re|ponere.
Thus, as you see, Papists of the best note for lear|ning, accord with vs in the pulpit and schoole. Now for their practise, that learned Clerk Loc. com. tit. Iustificat. Chemnitius hath ob|serued long since, that most of them in the question of iu|stification by works, haue said one thing in their disputa|tions, and another in their meditations; otherwise beha|uing themselues at their death, then in their life. For when once they see that they must appeare before the bar of Gods iustice, they plead for the most part, guilty, crauing a Psalme of mercy; Miserere mei Deus,  secunudum, multitudnem miserationum tuarum dele iniquitatem meam.
Pope Moral. lib. 9. cap. 17. Gregory counselleth vs, vt recta, quae agimus, scindo nesciamus, in plaine English, to take no further no|tice of our good workes, but to renounce them.
Chemnitius vbi supr, tit. de peccat. ori|ginal. Anselmus, Archbishop of Canterbury, confesseth of|ten in his meditations, that all his life was either vnpro|fitable or damnable. Whereupon hee concludes at last; Quidergo restt  peccator; nisi vt in tot vit tu deplo|res totam vitam tuam? What remaines to bee done in our whole life, but to lament for the sinnes of our whole life.
Abbot Ser. 68. in cant. Bernard hath this sweet saying; Sufficit ad e|ritum scire quod non sufficiant merita. Penury of merit is a dangerous pouerty, presumption deceitfull riches. I will therefore (saith he) pray with Prou. 30.8. Salomon, O Lord, giue me neither pouerty nor riches, neither want of merit, neither abundance of presumption.
Sherwin, a Seminary Priest, An. 1581. executed for treason with Edmund Campian at Tiborne, when hee was in the cart, ready to die, though he held himselfe a Martyr for the Catholike faith, acknowledged notwithstanding inge|nnously, the miseries, imperfections, and corruptions of his owne vile nature, relying wholly vpon Christ, and in|uocating no Saint but his Sauiour, ending his life with these words; O Iesus, Iesus, Iesus be to me a Iesus.
But the truth of this doctrine doth appeare more plainly by the consideration of the persons here mentio|ned,

of whom, through whom, to whom. First, of whom, the Lord of the vineyard, that is, God the Father, who saith in the 15. verse, that the eternall penny is his owne, and that he may doe with it what he list. If it were debt, then not his owne, neither could he dispose of it as he will. In execution, the worke goeth before the reward; as here the labour before the hire: but in Gods intention the re|ward is before the worke. God therefore giueth vs grace to worke wel, because formerly by his election he giueth vs eternall life: Rom. 8.30. Whom he doth predestinate, them hee calleth; and whom he calleth, he iustifieth; and whom he iustifieth, them he glorifieth. And so his mercy is Psal. 103.17. from euerlasting to euerlasting, from euerlasting predestina|tion, to euerlasting glorification.
Happily some will say; prise is deb ut God pro|mised and couenanted with  bourers in the second verse, to giue them a penny.  made, that this ve|ry promise is mercy on Gods part, not merit on our part: by promise hee bindeth himselfe, but by merit wee bind him vnto vs. It is in his own power to promise, and with|out promise he should be tied vnto nothing but whether there be promise or not, he is tied in iustice to reward de|sert. If a man deserue a penny, he must haue a penny; for God infinitely rich in mercy, doth highly scorne to owe any laborer a farthing: but if this penny be due not by any performance of man, but onely by the promise of God, it cannot truly be called a reward of debt, but of fauour; not purchase, but inheritance. Mat. 25.34. Come  blessed of my father, inherit the kingdome prepared for you, c.
Inheritance is a matter of birth, and not of industry. The younger brother often is of bet  then the elder; yet that cannot make him his fat heire. When therefore the Scripture sets orth vnto vs eternall life, vn|der the condition of inheritance; it teacheth v plainly, that we cannot attaine it by merit; but that God electing vs his childen, bre any worke, giueth vs freely the state and prerogatiue thereof.
Christ is the Steward, by whom euery labourer hath his hire: for we receiue nothing from God the Father, but by God the Sonne; Iohn 1.17. grace by Iesus Christ.
The persons vnto whom reward is giuen, are the first and the last labourers in Gods vineyard, and the last hath equall pay with the first. If then in our spirituall warfare, any good worke chance to leape ouer the wall, and chal|lenge to it selfe any prerogatiue of merit, and so the di|uell by his seeming retreat, infect it with the bane of pride, as hauing obtained victory; we must vse it as Tor|quaus did his oueruenturous sonne, cut it off with the vnpartiall sword of the spirit, for daring beyond his com|mission. I conclude with Epist. 105. Augustine; It is true righteous|nesse vnto which eternall life is due; but if it be true, it is not of thy selfe. It is from aboue, descending downe from the father of lights, that thou mightst haue it: if at least thou haue it, verily thou hast receiued it: for 1. Cor. 4.7. what hast thou that thou hast not receiued? Wherefore, O man, if thou be to receiue eternall life, it is indeed the wages of righteousnesse; but to thee it is grace, to whom righte|ousnesse it selfe is also grace.
That God cals, it is his mercy; that thou commest at his call, it is his mercy; that thou dost labour when thou art come, it is his mercy; that thou art rewarded for thy labour, it is his mercy. 1. Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God I am that I am, and his grace which is in me, was not in vaine; but I labo|red more abundantly then them all; yet not I, but the grace of God which is with me.



The Epistle. 2. COR. 11.19.
Ye suffer fooles gladly, c.

SAint Paul was so modest in his owne cause, that hee cals himselfe the greatest sinner, and the least Saint: but in Gods cause, perceiuing that his personall disgrace

might tend to the generall hurt of the Church, and scan|dall of the Gospell, he doth boast with the prowdest; In whsoeuer a tan is bold, I am bold also. Not out of vaine glory, to commend himselfe, but out of a Lur.  Stus nl.  oc. iust necessitie to stop the mouthes of other; especially to confound the false teachers. He doth therefore, Aq oc. first confer, then pre|fer himselfe before them all.
He compares himselfe with them in that which is lesse commendable, namely, for his birth and ancientry.  are Hebrewes, euen so m I: they are Israelites, euen so am  they are the seed of Abraham, euen so am I: whereas they re|ioice after the flesh, I will reioice also: vers. 18.
As he doth equall himselfe with them in things car|nall; so prefer himselfe before them in things spirituall, in that which is more worthy praise, to wit, in his Apostle|ship. First in generall: They are the Ministers of Christ, (I speake as a foole) I am more: Rom. 1.1. put apart to preach the Gospell of God, Galat. 1.1. not by man, but by Iesus Christ.
In more particular, he doth extoll himselfe aboue them

all, in two points especially:

1. For that he suffered moe troubles; as he sheweth in this scripture.
2. For that he receiued mo graces; as he declareth in the next Chapter.



His trou|bles here mentio|ned, are partly, such as him|selfe assu|med of his owne ac|cord:

such as other imposed on him. In Acts 16.22.23. stripes a|boue measure. Aquin. Supramodu~ virtutis huma supra modum co~suetuinis humanae. In prn more plenteously: in Rom. 8.36. death of: of the Ies sue times I receiued forty stripes saue one. Thrice was I beaten with rods: I was once Acts 14.19. stoned: I suffered thrice shipwracke: night and day haue I been in the deep sea: in perill of watrs, in perill of robbers; in ieopardie of mine owne nation, in ieopard among the heathen: inpe|rils in the Act. 18.  19. Citie in perils in wildernesse, in pe|rils among false brethren, c.
Outward: Labour, watching, hunger, thirst, fasting, cold, na|kednesse.
Inward: I am cumbred daily, and take care for all the congrega|tions, c.



The naturall man is comfor|ted in three things especially:

quiet rest.
liberall diet.
good apparell.


For rest, Paul did labour much, Acts 20 34. euen with his owne hands, 2. Thes. 3.8. night and day, watching osten preaching some|time till midnight: Acts 20.7. For diet, he sometime was in hunger and thirst, vpon want: 1. Cor. 4.11. and often he did fast for the aming of his body: 1 Cor. 9.27. For ap|parell, he was in cold and 1. Cor. 4.11. nakednesse: the one hurtfull to himselfe, the other hatefull to the world. For his in|ward afflictio; he tooke care for the whole Church, ex|ceeding solicitous for their spirituall  temporall good: spirituall; who is weake in faith, or good works, and I am not grieued? 1. Cor. 9.22. insirmis factus sum infirmus: I became weak to the weake, that I may win the weake. So the Ieremy 9.1. Pro|phet: Oh that mine head were full of water, and mine cies a fountaine of teares, that I might weepe day and night, for the slaine of the daughter of my people!
Concerning defects in temporall good, he saith; Who is offended, that is, afflicted, and I burne not, in heat of compassion? All this Saint Paul doth hedge in with a preface before; Yee suer fooles, c. And a protesta|tion after, vers. 31. The God, euen the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, which is blessed for euermore, knoweth that I lie not.
In the preface, Saint Paul doth Luther. l. Sn lc. tax the Corinthians folly, for that they suffered, and that gladly, the false tea|chers to tyrannise ouer their persons and purses,Goan. in loc. eiter secretly defrauding, or openly deuouring their estate; whereas the good Apostles in the meane while, (who

preached liberty of conscience, and sought not their owne, but that which is Iesus Christ) were neglected and despised.
As it was in Corinth, it is in England; the craftie Iesuit, and dissembling schismatike, preuaile more with the people then the true Protestant Preacher. Our popish La|dies are so wise, that they suffer the Iesuit to bring both their credits and consciences into bondage, to deuoure their husbands estate, to take what they list, inioyning penance to other, while they pamper themselues, and ex|alt their order aboue all either Priest or people.
So the Schismatike gaines by losse: as in familiar let|ters, it is the best rhetoricke to vse no rhetoricke: Politian. epist. lib. 1. epist. Pet. Me. carere figuris sigurat epistolam. And as Cic. offic. lib. 3. Sciio said; he was neuer lesse alone, then when he was alone: so the factious haue neuer so much liuing, as when they haue no liuing. But the Protestant Pastor is kept often from his own, (which all lawes of God and men hold his due) by prohibitions and vniust vexations; or else paied with insupportable grudging and enuie. Some will happily complaine with Devil tate condit. human. lib. 2. cap. 5. Innocentius; Iustitia nisi venit, non prouenit, ne datur nisi vendatur. So that (as See trauels of Englishmen into far Coun|tries. p. 62.63. trauellers obserue) Diuines are lesse regarded in England, then in any nation of the world, either Christian or heathen.
Saint Paul in his protestation, Ambros. in loc. calles to witnesse the most mercifull and most mighty, that he speaks nothing but the truth. He that knoweth all, knoweth I doe not lie.
The Aquin. in loc. Lord is to be feared, because God; to be loued, be|cause the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ; to be praised, be|cause blessed for euermore. By this great, good, glorious Lord, whom I dare not abuse, because great; will not, be|cause good; may not, because glorious, I protest that all is true which I haue said, or shall say.
It appeares then in his preface, that he dealt wisely in his protestation, that hee dealt truly. Some commend themselues truely, but not wisely, moe commend themselues wisely, but not truly. Paul here doth both,

approuing himselfe before God and men: before God in speaking so truly; before men, in speaking so wisely.



The Gospel. Luke 8.4.
When much people were gathered together, and were come to him out of all cities, he spake by a similitude: The sower went out to sow, c.


OVr Sauiour Christ in this Scripture

propoundeth a parable.
expoundeth a parable.



In the propounding, three points are regardable: the

Occasion: When much peo|ple, c. vers. 4.
Parable: The sower went out to sow: vers. 5.6. c.
Conclusio~: He y^ hath eares to heare, let him heare: v. 8.


The peoples pressing Marlorat. ex Calu. in Mat. 13 occasioned Christ to deliuer this

parable: wherein obserue, Culman. in loc. the

diligence of the people in hearing.
care of Christ in instructing.


The peoples earnest desire to heare doth appeare, in that they were a multitude: , a very great mul|titude; as it is in our vulgar English, much people, gathe|red together; many srom many cities, in zeale so good, in number so great, that pressing vpon Christ by the sea side, he was faine to leape into a ship, and make that his pul|pit, as S. Matthew reports in his Matth. 13.2. Gospell.
This peoples paterne condemnes our peoples practise, who will not runne out of the citie into the countrey, nor out of the countrey into the citie to heare Christ, ex|cept it be vpon hatred or curiositie, faction or affection.
Vnder the cruell persecution of Euseb. Dioclesian twentie thousand Christians in Nicomedia were burned in the Temple, being all assembled to celebrate the birth of Christ. And Epist. ad Go|ront. Hierom makes mention, how that at Ments in Germany, the citie being taken, many thousands were

slaine in the Church. And what massacres haue late|ly been in England, France, Flanders, is not vnknowne vnto such as haue had either open eyes or eares. Happie then are the eyes which see the things that we may see: for we liuing vnder the peaceable gouernment of a most religious Prince, may come to Church in peace, heare in peace, depart in peace: wee may come in our slippers and sit on our cushion If then Christ doe not hold vs by the cares, as Plutarch. in vita Alcib. Socrate did Acibiades: if we doe not presse to heare him, as the people did here, he will one day speak of vs, as he did of Hirusalem: Matth. 23.37. How often would I haue gathered you together, as the henne doth her chickens vnder her wings, and yee would not? Prou. 1.24. I haue called, and yee refused, I haue stretched out mine hand, and none would regard: But because yee despised all my counsell, and would none of my correction; I will also laugh at your destruction, and mocke when your feare com|meth, c.
Happily some will obiect: All the people whom yee commend, came not vnto Christ with a good minde and honest heart to be taught: it may be some came in ma|lice to carpe at him; other in curiositie to wonder at his miracles; other vpon couetousnesse to reape some tem|porall benefit by him, Ludelhus ex Hieron.  Diz in lc. according to which seuerall hu|mours our Sauiour was occasioned to propound this pa|rable of the sower sowing his seed in diuers lands increa|sing diuersly.
Well, how soeuer ye come, yet come vnto Christ: if ye come with an intent to carpe, come: for happily while ye thinke to catch the preacher, he may catch you, as August. ous. . lib. 5. cap. 14. Am|brose did Augustine: if ye come with a minde to slepe at the Temple, yet come; for it may be (saith Sr. 6. before King Ed 6. B. La) Almightie God will take you napping: if you come with a resolution to steale, yet come; for peraduenture the first word that yee shall heare, will be, Thou shalt not steale: or, Let him that hath stollen, steale no more Psalm. 19.7. The word of God is pure, and conuerteth the soule: perfect and

pure formaliter and effectiue, both in it selfe pure, and making other pure; Come then howsoeuer ye stand af|fected, euermore presse to Christ, out of all cities and vil|lages.

The care of Christ in instructing, is seee

1. In that hee went out of his house (saith Matth. 13.1. Matthew) to a more publike, large, sit place for teaching.
2. For that he spake by a simi|lide.


By y^ former al Preacher may learne to take their best hint and opportunitie for the propagating of the Gos|pell,Musculus in Ma. 13.  auxami Har. m. 2. sol. 282. and instructig of Gods people, leauing sometime their own lil cure and vpon good occasion to preach vnto much people, sowing their seede in a more large field, and profiting euen so many as they can.
For the second point, Diuines haue rendred sundrie reasons, why Christ vsed to speake by parables: as first, Hicron. Futhy|ius: Gene|rard.  sal. 77 that the Scripture might bee fulfilled: I will open my mouth in a parable, Psal. 78.2.
Secondly, Beauxamis  bi   Hmin|gus in locum. that wee might know that Christ spake with the same spirit, by which all God holy Prophets in old time spake, whose writings are full of parables.
Thirdly, Frus sr. 2. in loc. that ee might descend vnto the capacitie of the most simple, who best vnderstand and remember omely comparisons; as the Hrat. art. poet. Poet truly:
Segs iritnt anios dsser ure,
Quam qsns oclis sub  idelibus.
Fourthly, Marlorat. x uer. in lc. that his auditors might hereby take occa|sion to moue doubts, and aske questions, as the Disciples in the 9. verse, i ht manner of litude is this?
Fiftly, that the mysteries of Gods heauenly kingdome might not be ruealed vnto the scornefull; as Christ him|selfe teacheth in the tenth verse: To you it is giuen to know the secrets of the kingdome; but to other in parables, that when they see they should not see, c.
Sixtly, that euery man in his occupation and ordinarie

vocation, might be taught those things which concerne his soules health, as this parable may bee termed the ploughmans Gospell. The seed is the word of God, c. He that meditates on it, when he plougheth his ground, may haue a Ferus vbi sup. sermon alway before him, euery furrow being a line, euery graine of corne a lesson bringing foorth some fruite.
The sower went out to sow his seede] S. In Psalm. 77. Augustine wri|ting vpon the words: Aperiam in parabolis os meum, elo|quar propositiones ab initio, wisheth; vtinam qui dixit ape|riam os meum in parabolis, ita aperiret etiam ipsas parabo|las;  sicut eloquitur propositiones, ita etiam eloqueretur ea|rum expositiones. Here S. Augustines prayer is heard: for Christ giues an exposition of his proposition; and there|fore we must Hieron. in Matth. 13. take heede, that wee neither detract nor adde any thing to it: Opus Culman. in loc. habet lectore, non interprete.
And as he said these things he cried, he that hath eares] Hemingius in loc. He cried to manifest his affection and our dulnesse: ex|cepting this occasion he did not cry aboue three or foure times in all his life. He cried as he taught in the Temple, Ioh. 7.28. He cried when he raised vp Lazarus from the dead, Ioh. 11.43. Hee cried, Ioh. 12.44. He cried on the Crosse, Matth. 27: at all which times he deliuered matter of great consequence. This sentence then, He that hath eares to heare, let him heare, being vttered vpon a crie, must not lightly be respected of vs. All men for the most part haue both their eares, but not to heare. The Stapletn. premptuar. mo|ral. ser. dm. sexages. man sicke of the gowt hath both his feete, but not to walke: Hee that is purblind, hath both his eyes, but not to see cleere|ly: he that is manicled by the Magistrate for some fault, hath both his hands; but so long as they are bound, they cannot doe their office. So most men haue eares, but few men haue eares to heare, namely, to heare that which is good,  to heare y^ which is good, well. Remigius apud Thom. in Mat. 13 Aures audiendi sunt aures me~tis. scilicet intellige~di,  facie~di quae iussa sunt.
A good eare, saith the Eccles. 3.31. Wiseman, will gladly hearken vnto wisedome: where note two lessons as concerning

hearing: first, that wee hearken vnto nothing but that which is good, vnto wisedome. Secondly, that we hear|ken vnto it gladly, with a great desire to learne: for in Scripture phrase, obaudire is obedire: so Christ in the Gos|pell, Luke 10.16. Hee that heareth you, heareth mee: that is, he that obeyeth you, obeyeth me: and he that despiseth you, de|spiseth me. Matth. 18.1 If thy brother heare thee, thou hast wonne thy brother: that is, if thy brother follow thy counsell, and will be content to be ruled by thee.
We reade in the Exod. 21.6. Deut. 15.17. law, that if a bond seruant will not be made free, but stay still with his master, hee shall bee brought before the Iudges, and set to the doore or the post, and his master shall boare his eare thorow with an aule, and so he shall serue him for euer. Euery sinner is the diuels vassall: and therefore if hee refuse to be free, when libertie and free grace of the Gospell is offered, ere it be long the diuell will so boare his eares, as that they shall be made vnfit to heare, and then hee shall serue his old master for euer. Hee may peraduenture come to Church and heare the sermon; but hee shall be like the man, Iames 1.23. that beholds his face in a glasse: for when he hath considered himselfe he goeth his way, and forgets imme|diatly what manner of one he was.
Wherefore, when yee come to Christ bring your eares with you, eares to heare; so to heare, that ye may vnder|stand; so vnderstand that ye may remember; so remem|ber that ye may practise; so practise that ye continue; so Gods seede shall be sowen in good ground, and bring foorth fruite in some thirtie, in some sixtie, in some an hundred fold, c.
The parables exposition is occasioned by the Disciples question, vers 9. What manner of similitude is this?

Where note

their carefulnesse in asking.
Christs readinesse in answering.


For the first, the Sabbath is aptly termed a Ramus dercli|gion. lib. 2. cap. 6 schole day, wherein all Gods people must come to the Temple, which is the schoole, to learne his word their lesson. In

this seminarie Christ is the chiefe seedman, stiled in the beginning of this parable, , The sower. In this Vni|uersitie Christ is the prime Doctor: Matth. 23.8. Vnus est doctor ve|ster; ^e cuius schola in terris, cathedra in coelis. His Apo|stles sowed as vnder-bailiffes in his field; and his Prea|chers in our time teach as vnder-vshers in his schoole.
As then in the schooles of humane knowledge, so soone as the lecture is read, it is the schollers dutie to question among themselues how to parse  construc it, and when they doubt, to haue recourse to their Gram|mar rules, by which all construction is examined: and when they doe not vnderstand an hard rule, to come for a resolution vnto their master, who is as it were a liuing Grammar and a walking booke.
So likewise in Gods Academy in the Diuinitie schoole, when either the lecture of the Law is read, or sermon on the Gospell ended, it is your part to reason among your selues as you walke abroad in the fields, or talke at home in your house, how this and that may be construed; and when you cannot resolue one another, with the men of Acts 17.11. Beroea, to search the Scripture daily, whether those things are so, to trie the spirits of men by the spirit of God: for the Bible is our Diuinitie Grammar, according to which all our lessons ought to bee parsed and con|strued. And if yee meete with a difficult place, repaire to Gods Vsher the Priest, Malac. 2.7. whose lippes should presrue knowledge: Demand of your pastor, as the Disciples of Christ here; What manner of parable is this?
It is apparent in the Gospell that the Disciples euer tooke this course: when Christ had deliuered any deepe point, first they disputed among themselues, and then af|ter came to him, and asked his resolution: Mark. 9.11. Why say the Scribes, that Elias must first come? How Io. 3.9. can these things be? Matth. 13.36. Declare vnto vs the parable of the tares.
In our daies if the pastor be learned in the lawes of the land, and well acquainted with businesse of the world, his house shall be reputed oraculum totius ciuitatis, (as

Lib. 1. de orat. Tully speakes) all his neighbours will haste vnto him for aduice in law, but few for counsell in religion. Indeed they come to schoole, but like truants onely for feare of punishment, and when they come, they care n how little learning they haue for their money. Bt let me tell them of another schoole tricke; at the worlds end there is a black friday,Dan. 7.10. a generall examination; at which time Conscience the monitor  her bookes and bils of all our faults, and our  Schoolmaster in his owne person shall reward euery  according to his worke. It behoueth euery one therefore to be diligent in comming to schoole, to be carefull in hearing, painfull in examining, fruitfull in practising.
And he said] Christs readinesse in answering, teacheth all Preachers his Vshers and Curates, not only to preach in publike, but also to catechise their auditors, as occa|sion is offered, in priuate: especially such as hunger and thirst after righteousnesse; for vnto them it is giuen to know the secrets of Gods kingdome. The which words containe Gods donation vnto his elect, and it is cum pri|uilegi  grati; with priuiledge to you, but vnto other in parables: cum grati, it is giuen. Consulas Augustin. de prae|destinat. Sanctorum, cap. 8. lib. de bono perseuerantiae, cap. 8.9 11. lib. de correp.  grati, cap. 4.6.7.8
Sauing knowledge of God is a gift and grace: for the 1. Cor. 2.14. naturall man vnderstands not the things of God; hee beleeues ocul magis qum oraculo, trusting his fiue sen|ses more then the foure Gospels. It is a mysterie reuealed vnto you, but hidden vnto many, whose eyes the 2. Cor. 4.4. god of this world hath darkened, that seeing they should not discerne, and hearing they should not vnderstand. O fa|ther, saith Christ, Matth. 11.25. thou hast hid these things from the wise, and hast opened them vnto babes. It is so, because thy good pleasure was such. As it is our fathers will alone to giue vs a kingdome; so likewise his good will alone to make vs know the secrets of his kingdome.
There are mysteria regis, which may not be knowne,

and there are mysteria regi, which must be knowne: ma|ny mysteries of our heauenly king are knowne onely to himselfe. Canst thou (saith Iob 11.7. Iob) finde out God? canst thou finde out the Almightie to his perfection? The heauens are high, what canst thou doe? it is deeper then the hell, how canst thou know it? The measure thereof is longer then the earth, and it is broader then the sea. God therefore requires ra|ther we should remember what hee hath been to vs, then curiously to seeke what he is in himselfe.
But as for the secrets of his kingdom, he reueales them vnto the heires of his kingdome; these mysteries may, yea must be knowne: and therefore Christ cried, He that hath eares, let him heare. Teaching hereby that in making our election sure, we must not begin  priori, but  poste|riori: such as with a good heart heare the word and keep it, and bring foorth fruite through patience, shall inherit the kingdome of God; Matth. 21.43 but the kingdom of God shall be taken away from such as are fruitlesse, from such as are faithlesse.
This is the parable] Bare reading without vnderstan|ding, is bare feeding; the true meaning of the Scripture is the true Manna: Origen peri ar|chon. lib. 4. cap. 2 for as a man, so the Bible consists of a bodie and a soule. The sound of the letter is the bodie, but the Cyril. sense is the soule: this indeed is the scripture this is the parable.
The seede is the word of God] The sower is Christ, who went out, Thomas ex paribus in Mat. 13.  Bauxa|mi, vbi supr. ab occult Patris in mundum,  Iudae in Gen|tes,  profund sapientiae in publicum doctrinae. The Prea|cher is not properly the sower, Ludolphus vbi supr. but the seedcod, at the most an vnderseed man.
The sower went out to sow] Not to reape. Pontan. in loc. Now many goe out into Gods field only to gather in haruest, Pltarch. tn|quam Stratocles  Dromoclids, ad auream messem, inten|ding to reape things carnall, more then sowing things spirituall.
The sower sowed his seede; for the seed is the word of God, Hemingius  Beaxamis, c. not of Angell or man: and this seede hath in it

generatiue power in it selfe, it is Heb. 4.12. liuely, yea the word of Phil. 2.16. life. So that if it bring not forth fruit, the fault is not in the seed, but in the grou~d, being either vnplowed, or sto|ny, or thorny. The seed is the word of God. And therefore such as corrupt it, as heretikes; or choke it, as hypocrites; or keepe it downe from growing by force, as tyrants; or thrust oher seed into it, as Papists doe, shall one day feele the  wrath of God: for as he gaue pure seed, so will he requre pure crne.
He left this in the Church, euen in the garners of the Prophets and Apostles; and therefore whosoeuer adulte|rate i before it be sowen, or nip it when it doth spring, or cut it downe before the Lord, haruest, are not Gods hus|bandme, but Satans hirelings and you may know them, saith Mat. 7.16. Christ, by their fruit, Melact. in Mat. 7. that is, by their doctrine. For Gods husbandmen sow Gods seed; but the diuels fa|ctors, as Saint 1. Tim. 4.1. Paul plainly, the doctrines of diuels. As for example, this is pure seed; Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him onely shalt thou serue. But to worship An|gels and Saints, and to giue the same kind of worship to the crucifix, which is due to Christ, is sophisticate seed. This was not at the first sowen by the sower; but ouer|sowen after by the malitious enemie, while men slept.
Those that are bde the way] Thophylact. in Matt. 13. Three parts of foure are bad; Luther. in loc. yea the most of such as heare the word,  confesse Christ, are vnprofitable. Mat. 7.13. Striue then to enter in at the strait gate. Remember that couetous cares and volup|tuous liuing, are the thornes which vsually choke Gods seed in our heart: riches vnto the couetous are thornes, in this and the next life; their pricks are threefold in this life;

namely, Ludolphus. puntura

lboris in acquisitione.
timoris in possessione.
doloris in amissione.


The true reason why so many men are delighted with them, is, Diez in loc. because they put on wants or tining gloues, and so their hearts and hands being hardened, they feele not their pricking: but in the next world they will bee

thornes againe, when Christ shall say to the couetous; Hence from me yee cursed, into euerlasting fire: for I was an hungred, and ye gaue me no meat; I thirsted, and ye gaue me no drinke, c. Here pause good Reader, and pray with De vit Christ. par. 1. cap. 64. in fine. Ludolphus.
O Domine Iesufac me de veteri vita exire, ne semen verbi tui quod in me intellectu boni propositi, quod in me affectu boni operis, quod in me actu seminsti, comedatur  volu|cribus inanis gloriae, ne conculcetur in vi assiduitatis, ne areat in petr durae obstinationis,  ne suffocetur in spinis so|licitudinis, sed potis in terra bon cordis humilimi centesi|mum fructum edat in patienti: fac etiam me haec omnia in|telligere  facere, ac verb vel saltem exempl alios do|cere. Amen.



The Epistle. 1. COR. 13.
Though I speake with tongues of men and An|gels, c.

THe Bible is the body of all holy religion; and this little Chapter is as it were, an abridgement of all the Bible: for it is a tract of loue, which is the Rom. 13.10. complement of the law, and Iohn 13.34. supplement of the Gospell. All the scrip|ture teaching nothing else (saith De doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 7. Augustine) but that we must loue our neighbour for God, and God for him|selfe. Ibidem. lib. 3. cap. 10. Nihil praecipit nisi charitatem, nec culpat nisi cupidi|tatem: it forbids nothing but lust, and inioines nothing but loue: for without Galat. 5.6. loue, there is no true faith; and without faith, Rom. 14.23. all our righteousnesse is sinne.


S. Paul therefore doth extoll in this Chapter a|boue all other, this one vertue:

1. largely, shew|ing that it sur|passeth al other graces in Goran.  Beza in loc. two things:

Vse: vers. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Continu|ance: ver. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

2. briefly, by way of Calu. Institut. lib. 3. c. 18. . 8. recapi|tulation in the last verse. Now abideth faith, hope, and loue, euen these three; but the chiefe is loue.


Charity doth excell in vse: for all other gifts without it are nothing auaileable to saluation, as Paul proues by this induction; If I speake with tongues of men and An|gels, c.

All vertues are either

Intellectu|all: in

accurate speech: vers. 1.
other knowledg: vers. 2.

Morall: in

doing: v. 3. Though I feed the poore with al my goods.
suffering: Though I giue my body to be burned, c.



Though I speake with the tongues of men] Aquin in loc. That is, of all men. If I had vnderstanding in all languages, and Art to parle in them all: if a man could speake so many tongues as our late Soueraigne of blessed memory Queene Eli|zabeth, of whom the diuine Du Bartas in his Babylon. Poet, as a Diuine truly; not as a Poet flatteringly:
That Rome, Rheine, Rhone, Greece, Spaine and Italy,
Plead all for right in her natiuity.
If a man could discourse in so many languages as My|thridates,

of whom Comment. lib. 17. pag. 522. Volaterane reports, that he well vn|derstood 22. sundry tongues; or as Aul. Gellius lib. 17. cap. 17. other, 25. If a man could thunder in an Oration, as Aristophanes said of Pe|ricles; or tune his note so sweetly, that hee could moue mountaines and stony rockes with Orpheus; or fech soules out of hell, as fabulous antiquity fained of Mer|cury. Though a man could hold the people by the ares, and cary them vp and downe the Country like pitchers, as Plutarch. in vit Alcib. Socrates did Alcibiades; and steale away their harts, as 2. Sam. 15.6. Absolon did in Israel. If a man were so bewitching an Orator, that he could Picus Miran. epist. Barbaro. pro arbitrio tollere, extollere, mpli|ficare, extenuare, magicis quasi viribus eloquentiae in quam velit faciem habitum transformare; so subtill a disputer, as that he could make quidlibet ex qulibet, euery thing of anything, yet without loue were he nothing.
Yea though a man could speake with the tongues of Angels, Aquin.  Gorran. in loc. that is, of the learned Priests and Prophets, who are Gods Mal. 2.7. Angels and messengers. If a man had the siluer Hieron. aduer|sus Ruffin. tom. 2. fol. 221. trumpet of Hilary; or the golden mouth of Chrysostome; or the mellifluous speech of Origen, Vincentius, vti Magdeburg. cent. 3. col. 269. cuius ex ore non tam verba qum mella flure videntur. If a man were so painfull in preaching, that as Acts 2.41. Saint Peter, he could adde to the Church with one sermon, about three thousand soules: or as it is Magdeburg. cent. 8. col. 852. recorded of venerable Beda, fondly and falsly, that he could make the very stones applaud his notes, and say, Amen.
Or as Caluin.  Beza in loc. other expound it, hyperbolically: though a man should speake like the glorious Angels, as Paul, Gal. 1.8. Though an Angell from heauen should preach vnto you: Hieron. in loc. si quae sint Angelorum linguae. Giue me leaue to adde one thing more to this hyperbolicall supposition. If a man could speake like God, as antiquity reports of Ficinus in vi|t Platonis. Plato; that if Iupiter himselfe should speake Greeke, he would vse no other phrase but his. And of Laert. in vit Chrysip. Chrysippus, that if the gods should speake logicke, they would haue none but his. Or as the people blasphemously of Herod, Act. 12. The voice of God, and not of man. Though, I say, we could

speake with tongues of men, of Angels, of God, if it were possible, and haue not loue, we were but as a soun|ding brasse, or as a tinckling cymball: Gorran. in loc. we might hap|pily pleasure other, but not profit our selues vnto salua|tion. Herein Marlor. in loc. resembling Balams Asse, who by spea|king, bettered her Master, not her selfe.
A plaine piece of brasse makes but a plaine noise, Tin|kers musicke; but a tinckling cymball, in regard of the concauity, yeelds a various sound, a more pleasant stroke. So rude speakers are like sounding brasse; Aquin. in loc. but the Curi|ous and Iudicious, adorned with multiplicity of distincti|ons, and variety of good learning, are as a tinckling cym|ball, or more tickling delight to their hearers: and yet if they preach without loue, their sound is without life. Qui non diligit fratrem,1. Epist. 3.14. man in morte, saith S. Iohn. Such fitly resemble the sermon bel, which cals other to the Church, but heares nothing it selfe; it weares out to his owne hurt, though others good.
Nay, when Auditors are perswaded throughly, that their Pastors instruct not out of charity, their plaine do|ctrines are but as sounding brasse, tedious as the Tinkers note; their accurate sermons as a tinking cyball, which onely pierce the eares, and enter not into their hearts: as the Ezek. 33.32. Prophet aptly; Their admonitions are vnto them: as a iesting song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can sing well: for they heare their words, but they doe them not. Diez con. 4. d. 3. adent. As one that heares excellent musicke from out of the streetes in the night, will instantly leape out of his bed, and lend his care for a time; but when the musitians are gone presently returnes to sleep againe: so many de|light to heare the sweet songs of Son, but when the ser|mon is at an end, they sleep in their old sinnes againe, for|getting immedialy the good lesson, as if it were but the drumming on a pan, or scraping on a kele.
And though I  prphie] Prophecie then is no|thing without loue. Ambros. in loc. For Balaam, Cap, and Sul pro|phecid. Vnderstanding of mysteries is nothing without

loue: for Iudas, and Nicolas, and Arius, were wel acquain|ted with the scriptures. All knowledge is nothing: for the Scribes had the Luke 11.52. key of knowledge, yet entred not in themselues.
And all knowledge] Though a man were an Ocean of learning, as Plutarch is called; in so much that Claudius Ver|drius cension. in Authores pag. 174. Theodo| Gaza said, if he could reade but one mans bookes, he would make choice of him. Or if a man were so full as Plinie, whose works are Ibidem. p. 173. instar mille voluminum: if a man were a treasure house of letters, as Picus Mirandula writes of Hermolaus Barbarus: a library for a whole na|tion, as Tom. 9. fol. 338. Baronius of Albinus: as Epist. 84. Erasmus of Bishop Tonstal, a world of learning, mundus eruditionis, aboun|ding with skill in

Margarita philosophica.all Arts:

theorical:

real:

metaphy|sical:

inspired: as Di|uinity, contai|ned in y^e Bible,
acquired: of w^t Aristotle and Auicen write.

mathemati|cal: as

Arithmetike.
Geometry.
Musicke.
Astronomie.

physical: con|cerning the

Principles.
Generation of naturall things.


rational:

Grammar.
Rhetoricke.
Logicke.


practical:

actiue:

Ethicks.
Oeconomicks.
Politicks.

factiue: as skill in

Nauigation.
Husbandry.
Hunting, c.




If a man vnderstand all mysteries in Scripture, all se|crets in nature:Imponere Pe|lion Ossae. f he had all faith, that he could remoue moun|taines, in a literall sense, moue that which cannot be mo|ued, high hils, Imponere Pelion Ossae: Grran. in loc. in an allegorical ex|position, cast out diuels. If a man had all parts of all knowledge, prophecie, sapience, prudence, and had not loue, he were nothing. Nothing Aquin. in loc. in esse gratiae, though something in esse naturae; dead spiritually, though some|thing, some great thing in the naturall and ciuill life. For great Clerkes haue long life on earth. Albet Aquiras, Iewel, Picus Mirandula, Whitaker died in the principall strength of their age: yet in respect of honour and fame, they liue with the longest.
Prudentius peristephan. hym. 13. Dum liber vllus erit, dum scrinia sacra literarum
Te leget omnis amans Christum, tua Cypriane discet.
Knowledge is a good stirrup also to get aloft, the hie way to much honor  preferme~t in this world; but with|out loue, nothing auailable to glory eternall in the world to come. Knowledge 1. Cor. 8.1. bloweth vp, but charity buildeth vp. Aduancement of learning. l. 1. pag. 5.  Greg. in Euangel. hom. 7. quod virtus scientiae con|gregat, ventus elationis spar|git. If learning be taken without the true correctiue thereof, it hath in it some nature of poison, and some ef|fects of that malignity, which is a swelling. If I speake with the tongues of men and Angels, and had not charitie, it were but as a tinckling cmball. Not but that it is an ex|cellent thing to speake with tongues of men and Angels, and a far more noble treasure to possesse all knowledge. For Christ said of his Apostles; that they were the light of the world; and the worthy Doctors succeeding, were Baron. epist. Clem. 8. praefix. tom. 4. annal. lu|minaria magna, great starres in the firmament of the Church, by whose light, descending from the father of lights, we finde out the truth hidden in many darke pla|ces of the scripture. But the meaning of P i, if our knowledge be seuered from loue, and not referred to the good of men and glory of God; it hath rather a sounding glory, then a meriting vertue; though it seeme to be ne|uer so much, it is a very nothing.
The Rhem. in loc. Papists out of these words; If I haue all faith, so

that I can remoue mountaines, and haue not charitie, I am nothing; gather two conclusions against vs: the first is, tht true faith may bee without loue: the second, that faith alone without good workes is nothing worth in the businesse of our iustification.
To the first, answere is made, that the speech of Paul is not a categoricall proposition, but an hypotheticall supposition; Luther. or il. maio. in lc. if it were possible that all faith should be without good workes, it were nothing.
Secondly, Paul here Genalius apud Occume|nium in loc. speakes not of a iustifying saith, of that faith of beleeuers which is common and gene|rall, but of the speciall gift of faith to worke miracles, of which our Sauiour in the Luke 17.6. Gospell; If yee had faith, a much as a graine of mustard sede, and should say vnto this mulbery tree, Pluck thy selfe vp by the rootes, and plant th selfe in the sea, it should euen obey you. This hee said vnto the beleeuing Apostles; and therefore cannot bee con|strued of a sauing faith, but of a miraculous faith: and so S. Ambrose notes vpon this text, to doe wonders, and to cast out diuels by faith is nothing worth, except a man be an earnest follower of good conuersation.
Our Diuines acknowledge that euery kind of faith is not ioyned with loue: for there is Iames 2.10. a dead aith, and there is a Galat. 2.10. liuely, whereby Christ liueth in vs,  we in Christ. There is a faith of Iames 2 19. diuls, and a faith of 1. Tit. 1. Gods elect. There is a faith, whereby the beleeuer shal neuer Ioh 3.15. perish; and there is a faith, whereby some Luke 8.13. beleeue for a time, and in the day of temptation fall away. There is a faith, which the world 1. Tim. 2.18. destroyeth, and a faith which is our 1. Iohn 5.4. victorie, by which a Christian ouercomes the world. There is a faith, whereby wee beleeue there is Iames 2.19. a God; and there is a faith, whereby we beleeue Iohn 14.1. in God: ac|cording to these differences of faith in Scripture, there is a faith without Iames 2.14. workes, and there is a faith which wor|keth by Galat. 5.6. loue.
We say then of the faith of Gods elect, whereby we be|leeue in God, to which the promise of iustification and

eternall saluation is made, that is a faith which cannot be separated from charity, but wheresoeuer it is there is loue ioyned with it, Philip. 1.11. bringing forth the fruites of righteous|nesse, which are by Iesus Christ vnto the glorie and praise of God. Inseparabilis est bona vita  sid. qua per de iio|nem operatur im ver ea is est bona v, saith De fide  operib. cap. 23. Agu|stine; according to that of Lib. 4. cap. 14. Irenaeus, to beleeue is to doe as God will: and therfore Beza translates here, , not omnem fidem. but tom idem; implying not all kinde of faith, but all faith of this kinde to worke miracles; as if Paul should argue thus: If a man could worke neuer so many miracles, and faile in his morals, he should be ne|qum,  nequam is nequiquam, as our Apostle speakes, a nothing.
The second conclusion gathered out of these words against vs is, that faith alone without charitie, nothing auaileth to iustification. Our answere is, that albeit faith is not solitaria, yet in our iustification it is sla; Perkins re|formed Cat. tit. I stiiat. euen as the eye in regard of being is neuer alone from the head, yet in respect of seeing it is alone, for it is the eye onely that doth see. So saith subsists not without other graces of God, as hope, loue, c. yet in regard of the act of iusti|fication it is alone without them all. For the further ope|ning of this hard point, you must vnderstand, that separa|ting of things one from another, is either See D. Abbot against Bishop. pag. 482. real in the subiect, or mental in the vnderstanding: real separation of faith and charitie wee wholly denie. For D  lib. 4. cap. 1.  Ac  con|sso, c. Bellarmine confesseth expressely that Luthr, Melanthon, Chemni|tius, Caluin, and other learned Protestants haue taught, that good workes in sme sort be necessarie to saluation, and that there is no true aith vnlesse it bring forth good workes, and be conioyned with charitie.
Separation mental in vnderstanding and consideration is either negatiue or priuatiue. Negatiue, when in the vn|derstanding there is an affirming of one, and denying of another. Priuatiue, when of things that cannot be sepa|rated indeed, yet a man vnderstands the one, and omit|teth

to vnderstand the other. As for example, though light and heate cannot be sepaated in the fire, yet a man may consider the light, and not the heate: so then in our iustification, wee doe not negatiuely separate other gra|ces from faith, as if faith existed alone without hope and loue, but priuatiuely making them effects and conse|quents, not concuring causes of our iustification. Our assertion is, faith considered without hope and charitie, that is, hope and charitie not considered with it, doth iu|stifie.
Christ Iesus is our husband, and we are his spouse: now the Luther. in 2. Galat. 16. Bridegroome must bee lone with the Bride in his secret chamber, all the seruants and the familie being put apart; afterward when the doore is opened, and he com|meth foorth into the waiting roome, then let all the ser|uants and handmaids attend, then let hope doe her of|fice, let loue doe the duties of loue; then, as S. 2. Pet. 1.5. Peter ex|horts, ioyne vertue with faith, and with vertue knowledge, and with knowledge temperance. c. The Bellarmin. de Iustificat. lib. 1. cap. 4.  Rhem. in Galat. 5.6. Papists obiect that loue is the life of faith. All faiths actiuitie proceedes only from charitie, and without which our aith is dead. So the Scripture plainly, that in Christ neither is circumci|sion any thing, neither vncircumcision: but faith which wor|keth by loue. Cardinall Vbisup. . Di|stinctio ve. Bellarmine reades , pas|siuely, wrought by loue: disagreeing herein from all the Fathers, and that which becomes him worse, from the vulgar Latine, to which all Papists are tied by the Coun|cell of Trent, as also from the Rhemish translation in En|lish, which hath as our Testament, woreth, actiuely: for they foresaw this absurditie, that if they should haue translated faith wrought by loue, then it would haue fol|lowed, that loue must needs be before faith, whereas all of them acknowledge faith to be before loue; according to that of D praedestina|tine sactorum, cap. 7. Augustine; Faith is giuen first, by which wee obtaine the rest: and sol. 109. Altissiodorensis in his golden Summe saith, that faith, hope and charitie are a created trinitie, resembling the three diuine persons vncreat. For

the Sonne is begotten of the Father, and the holy Ghost proceeds from both: so stedfast hope is bred of faith, and loue doth issue from them both.
And Catechis. cap. 1.  raesat. tom. 1 cotus.  de Rem. ont. lib. 1. ca. 10.  dinde ides. Bellarmine cites often in his workes out of Au|gustine: Domus Deicredendo fundatur, sperando erigitur, diligendo perficitur: The foundation of Gods house in our soules is faith, the walles hope, the roofe charitie. The Prophet in a vision saw the transgressor against the transgressor, and the destroyer against the desroyer. So the schoolmen oppose the schoolmen, and their Cham|pion Bellarmine fights against Bellarmine. For if faith be the foundation of all other vertues, as himselfe writes, lib. 1. de Rom. pont. cap. 10. then it is not as hee disputes in lib. 1. de Iustificat. cap. 4. wrought by charitie: but contra|riwise charitie doth arise from faith.
It is then an idle dreame to suppose that charitie is in|closed in faith, as a diamond is in a ring; for Luther. in Ga|lat. 2.5. Christ is the pretious pearle, which giues life and lustre to the ring. The iust liue not by loue, but by faith in him. It is an im|proper speech (as D. Fulk in Ga|lat. 5.6. our Diuines obserue) to say that faith worketh by loue, as the bodie by the soule, the matter by the forme; for the soule rather worketh by the bodie, then the bodie by the soule. The matter is passiue, the forme actiue.
Secondly, we Luter. in Ga|lat. 5.6.  Per|kins refrm. Ca|thol. tit. Iustific. say, that Paul in that text, faith which worketh by loue, doth not intend iustification, but y^e whole course of a Christian aftr his iustification: hee shuts out of Gods kingdome nullifidians and meritmongers on the left hand, nudifidians and carnall Gospellers on the right. In Christ neither circumcision auaileth any thing, neither vncircumcision, that is to say, no merit, nor worshipping. No religious order in the world, but faith alone without any trust in workes, auaileth before God. On the right hand he doth exclude slothfull and idle persons, affirming that if faith only doe iustifie, then let vs worke nothing, but barely beleeue. Not so y carelesse generation, ene|mies of grace: for faith is operatiue working by loue.

Paul therefore sets foorth in that excellent sentence the whole perfection of a Christian in this life, namely, that inwardly it consists in faith toward God, and outwardly in good workes and loue toward our neighbours: so that a man is a perfect Christian inwardly through faith be|fore God, who hath Psalm. 16.2. no neede of our workes; and out|wardly before men, (whom our faith profiteth nothing) by loue.
Faith is the Christians hand. Now an hand hath a pro|pertie to reach out it selfe and to receiue a gift, but it can not cut a peece of wood without an hatchet or saw, or some such like instrument, yet by help of them it can ei|ther cut or diuide. Such is the nature of faith, it doth re|ceiue Christ into the heart; but as for the duties of the fist and second table, faith cannot of it selfe bring them forth, no more then the hand can cut of it selfe: yet ioine loue to faith, and then (as our Apostle) ith worketh through loue, performing all duties so well to man, as God.
The propertie of true faith is, to receiue in to it selfe. The nature of true loue is to lay out it selfe vnto other: faith then alone iustifieth, apprehending and applying Christs merits vnto it selfe; but it cannot manifest it selfe to other, except it be ioyned with loue: Iams 2.16. Shew me thy ith out of thy workes. And thus, as you see, that inward worke of iustification is ascribed in holy Scripture to faith onely; but outward workes of sanctfication, holi|nsse and righteousnesse, to faith and loue ioyntly.
I refre the distressed soule to the comfortable Com|mentaries of Mrtin Ler vpon the Galathians; and the curious Diuine to Dotor Abbot his Apologie for the reformed Ctholike. Ti. Itiication. For I will ingenuous|ly confesse, that my consciee was neuer quieted more then in reading the one; and my curiositie neuer satis|fied more then in examining the other.
Though I besto all my goods to eed the poore Mrcifull workes are Auusin. de iit.  10... pro sacriicis, im prae sacriicis, accepted of

God as sacrifice, Heb. 13.16. yea more then sacrifice: Ho|sea 6.6. I will haue mercie, not sacrifice. To be mercifull is the Synesius epist. 35. sole worke common to man with God.
It is then an higher step of perfection, to distribute goods vnto the poore, then to spake with the tongues of men and Angels, or to be furnished with all varietie of knowledge: yet Paul saith, If I bestow my goods, all my goods, not vpon the rich, but vpon the poore, to feede, not to feast them, and had not loue, it profits me nothing. Where note fiue degrees of this amplification: the first is to giue; for most men, as it is in the prouerbe, are better at the rake then at the pitchforke, readier to pull in, then to giue out. The second is to giue, not another mans, but our owne goods. If I bestow my goods. According to that of Salomon, Ecclesiastes 11.1. Cast thy bread vpon the wa|ters: Pais, si tuus, qui tuus. The third is, all our goods, not some small portion, or great summe, but all; accor|ding to that of Matth. 19.21. Christ; If thou wilt be perfect, sell all that thou hast, and giue it to the poore. The fourth is, to giue not to the rich, but to the poore: Frange panem esu|rienti, saith the Esay 58.7. Prophet, Deale thy bread to the hungry. The last is to giue to the poore, not superfluously to feast, but necessarily to feede them. If a man performe this and more then this out of vaineglorious ostentation, or idle prodigalitie, not out of loue to Christ and com|passion of his members, it were but so much as no|thing.
Though I gaue my bodie to be burned] Loue is seene more in deedes then in words, and in suffering more then in doing; and of all suffering death is most terrible; and of all kindes of death, burning is most fearfull. Here then are many degrees in this one speech (as Aquin. in loc. Interpreters ob|serue): first, si tradidero, not, if I be forced, but if of mine owne accord, I giue my bodie to be burned, as it is said of Christ, Ephs. 5.2. he gaue himselfe for vs a sacrifice. Secondly, si tradidero corpus, if I suffer losse not of goods onely, (though that be very commendable, Heb. 10.34. Ye suf|fered

with ioy the spoiling of your goods] But affliction in body, which is far dearer then our wealth, as the father of lies in this truly; Iob 2.4. Skinne for skinne, and all that euer a man hath, will hee giue for his life. Thirdly, Stra|dero corpus meum; if I giue not onely the body of my child, (though a woman is highly magnified for such an act in the 2. of Maccabees, 7.) but my hod; not one|lie flesh of my flesh, but flesh which is my flesh; not onely to suffr a naturall death, but a violent, and of all violent, the most terrible, to be rosted, yea consumed in the fire.
If any suffer all this, and want charity to particular per|sons, espcially toward the common body of the Church, it is no better, or rather indeed wore then nothing. I beseech you therefore by the mercifulnesse of Gd, whatsoeuer you speake, whatsoeuer you study, what|soeuer you doe, whatsoeuer you suffer, 1. Cor. 16.14. let all be done in loue.
Vniuersa inutilitr habet, qui vnum illud, qu vniuersis vtatur non hbet: Vnprofitably (quoth De verbis Do. ser. 18. tom. 10. sl. 57. Augustine) hath he all, who wants that one whereby he should vse all. As the Tract. 9. in loan. same father in another place: Qua~ta est charitas? quae si desit, frustr habentur caetera, si adsit, rect habentur om|nia: How great is loue; for if it be wanting, all other gra|ces lose their grace; but if present, all are profitable. So the text here; Loue suffereth long, it is bountifull, c.


In this en|comiasticall passage, S. Paul sets downe loues operation in Gorran. in loc. 3. points:

Imbracing that which is good:

Internall: it is pa|tient.
Externall: it is cour|teous.

Eschewing that which is euill, a|gainst our

Aquin. in loc. neigh|bour, in

thought: it enui|eth not.
deed: loue doth not frowardly.

selues, either out of

passion: it swelleth not, dealeth not dishonestly, seketh not her owne: it is not pro|uoked to an|ger.
election: it thinketh no euill; it r|ioyceth not in iniquity.


Perseuering in both: suffering, belieuing, ho|ping, induring all things.


Loue suffereth long] Saint Paul doth begin with pati|ence, Melanct.  in loc. because desire to reuenge is a vice most opposite to charitie. Malitious impatient men are like the toad, no sooner moued, but they swell: or like gunpowder; no soo|ner touched with an hot word, but instantly they are in your face. Which accasioned Laert. in vit Bion. Bion the Philosopher to say; Magnum est malum ferre non posse malum. For if hine enemie be little, Seneca. parce illi the best course is to spare him; if great, parce tibi, the best counsell is to spare thy selfe. Si turbet non perturbet; as Epist. 25. Bnar in the like case, Though he moue thee, let him not remoue the fro~ that

which is good, from that which is thy good. The Prou. 19.11. dis|cretion of a man deferreth his anger, and his glory is to passe by an offence. Better it is to suffer much and long, then by courses of impatience, to runne thy selfe out of all honest breath. It is reported of the Philo|sophers, Loctantius de fa sapient. cap. 4. that they had a sword, and wanted a buck|ler: but a buckler becomes a Christian better then a sword. We must not beat euery dog that barks at vs in the way, but run with patience the race that is set before vs: Heb. 12.1.
Loue is courteous: or as other read, bountifull] Amor si est, operatur; si non operatur, non est. As loue is patient in wrong, so actiue in kindnesse, doing good vnto all, al|way performing liberall and courteous offices, euen to the greatest enemie. So S. Steuen abounding with loue, Greg Nyssen. orat. e Stephan. respected his accusers as brethren, and saluted them as fathers: Acts 7.2. So Gen. 45. Ioseph vsed his brethren nobly, who sold him for a slaue basely.

Loue enuieth not] There are Ptrarcha. two parents of enuie,

highnesse.
nighnsse.


For it is nothing else but a repining griefe for our neighbours happinesse. An enuious man, saith Lib. 5. de gu|bat. De. Saluia|nus, esteemes anothers good, his hurt; parum est si ipse sit felix nisi alter fuerit infelix. And therefore when Lartius in vit Bion. Bion saw such an one very sorrowfull, asked him; I pray thee whether hath some euill happened to thee, or good to thy neighbour? Hieron. ad Eu|sochium. As high hils are most exposed to thun|der, friunt summos fulmine montes: and Plut. com. de odi  inui|di. as the fairest flowers are soonest nipt by the venemous Cantharides; euen so the most eminent gifts in neighbors, are the grea|test griefes of enuious wretches.
In neighbours, I say; for as the basiliske doth kill none, but such as he doth see; so the malecontent enuious eye malignes none that are far off. And this I take to be the true reason why the schismaticall Brownist, and other of the like malitious humor, hate the conformable Prote|stant more then either Turke or Pope: because that which

eye seeth not, heart grieueth not. But it hath been their hell to behold their neighbour Bishops, and fellow Mi|nisters in btter fshion, and among the best of greater account for iudicious preaching and writing then them|selues.
It is wittily noted by Diaeta salutis. cap. 4. Bonauentura, that an enuious man is like Cam, who said of himselfe, Gen. 4.14. Whoso|euer sdeth me, sall slay me. For either he seeth in a man that which is good, and then he repineth; or else that which is euill, and so reioiceth: and both these slay the soule.
Things amisse in our Church, are the schismatikes may game; but her glory, their griefe; her weale, their woe. Let them reade this Chapter often, and marke this word especially. Loue enuieth not; Loue doth not froward|ly] Not ouerthwartly, not insidiously, Melan. in loc. quod est arte alios pellere aut tollre, by cunning to thrust men out of their preferments and others loue: so Baronius, tom. 4. ol. 355. Maximus expelled Gre|gor Nazianzene, Aechines wronged Deosthenes, and Mrtin Makebate the Whitgifs of our Church.
Loue swelleth not] As loue doth not abuse good things in other, Goran. in loc. so it makes men vse well their owne graces. It swelleth not in any preferment it hath; it is not ambiti|ous for any which it hath not; it is not querulous for any which it once had, and is now lost; it seeketh not her owne, Aquin. in loc. that is, with others hinderance, so Esay 5.8. to ioine house to house, and field to field, till there be no place for other in the land. It doth not desire that Iob 1.14. oxen should labour, and asses feed; that one should take the paines, and ano|ther reape the profit; but is content that preferment be conferred vpon men of worth, according to merit, with Melan. in loc. equall proportion.
Or it seekes not her owne principally, bu so far forth as shall be for the Churches good, and Gods glory. So faith our Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. I seeke not mine owne profit, but the profit of many, that they might be saued. And Philip. 2.21. he rebukes all such as seeke their owne, and not

that which is Iesus Christs. Or it seekes no  Aquin. in loc. that is, to recouer her owne by law, when it sha be to the scandall of the Gospell, as he sheweth in th ixt Chapter of this Epistle.
It is not prouoked to anger] That is, rash and inonsid|rate anger; otherwise a man may be angry and sinne not, as our Apostle Ephis. 4.26. elsewhere; Hieron. epist. ad Antonium. tom. 1. ol. 219. rasci hominis, iniui non facere Christiani: It is the part of a man to be angy, but the duty of a Christian to doe no wrong in anger. A lo|uing man will chide his friend sweetly; and a good man punish sinne according to his place suerly: Saluian. epist. 1. Qu te appellem amr? nescio: bonum in malum? or quippens facit nostros amare, amor interdum cogit offenre: si vgi|let tolerantia, saith Ser. 22. de ver|bis Apost. Augustine, vt non domit disciplin. Saint Pauls meaning then is, that we must not be trans|ported with heat, so that we forget our friends, and lose our selues; in such sort, that the ending of our anger proue the beginning of our sorrow.
It thinks no euill] It is so far from doing wrong, that it doth not so much as thinke euill. Mlan. in loc. A vertue compoun|ded of truth and ingenuity. Truth belieues onely that which is certaine: ingenuity construeth in the better part that which is doubtfull: whereas suspiciousnesse is misled often with false, alway with vncertaine report. Ielous yoke-fellowes, and suspicious friends, are both vnchari|table. For such, as the Psal. 7.15. Prophet aptly, trauell with mis|chiefe, and bring forth vngodlinesse; vnquiet as the Esay 57.20. ra|ging sea; Psal. 140.2. stirring vp strife all the day long.
It reioiceth not in iniquity] Not n her owne fault, not in anothers fall. Not in her owne: for albeit the malitious incorrigible sinner reioiceth in doing euill, and delights in frowardnesse, Prou. 2.14. yet the man of God doth no sinne: 1. Iohn 3.9. For it is rather done on him, then of him: according to that of Rom. 7.19. Paul; I doe not the good thing which I would; but the euill thing which I would not, that do I. Not in anothers fall: for it doth grieue when they grieue: yea sometime because they doe not grieue for their sins,

as Tom. 1. fol. 231 Hieroe to Sabinian: Hoc plango, qud te non plangis. And Epist. 145. Agustin calles this a blessed vnhappinesse, when a man is afected, not infected, with his neighbours ini|quitie: ta miseria vitijs alienis tribulari, non implicari; dlor  trabi, no amore attrahi.
I sufereth all things; it beleeueth all things] English glosse in loc. It suffe|reth not it selfe to bee abused, but it iudgeth other wih al loue and humanitie. To beleeue all, wer sillinesse; to bue ne, ullennsse: discreet loue therefore doth bleue much, and hope the best of all. Enduring all thing: that is, all that it may without offence to Gods holy word: Luther. in Ga|lat. 2.6. Nor ptitur ludum fma, fides, oculus: A  god nme, faith, and eye will not be dallied with|all A Chstan as concerning his faith, cannot bee too ster oolour. I will ake vpon me (saith Luther) this tile: : I giue place to none.
lo oh not fall aay] Knowledge is not abolished in the orld to come, but perfited, as Paul expounds himsele: We know in prt, we prophecie in part: but when hat which is perfect is come, then that which is vnperfect shal be done awa. Melancton. in loc. Ex abstractiu sit intuitiua notitia. Martyr. apud Marlorat. in loc. As the light of a candle doth vanish away when the bright Sunne doth shine. The manner of teaching in the world to come shall cae: for we shall neede no schooles or tu|tors in heauen: all there shall see God face to face, but knowledge it selfe shall not vanish, Iohn 17.3. for this is eternall lie to know God.
S Paul proues our knowledge and prophecying vn|perfct by two familiar exmpls: one taken from his owne person, another from a looking glasse: When I was a childe, I spae as a childe,  vnderstood as a childe, I imagi|ned as a childe. Speaking may be referred vnto the gift of tongues, vnderstading to the gift of prophecie, think|ing to knowledge.
Now we see in a glss darl but then shall wee see face to face.] When a man sees a map of Hierusalem, he can pre|sently conceiue what maner of citie it is imperfectly:

but when he comes thither, and beholds all the streetes, is better satisfied. The Scripture is a glasse, faith is an eye, by which all Gods elect in part know the glorious buil|ding of Hierusalem aboue; they beleeue that this 1. Cor. 15.54. cor|ruption shall put on incorruption, that this mortall shall put on immortalitie; that the iust shall shine Dan. 12.3. like stars for euer: in heart conuersing with the Saints, and assured through hope, that themselues are Philip. 3.20. burgesses of that celestiall Incorporation.
I am sure, saith Iob 19.25. Iob, that my redeemer is aliue, who died for our sinnes, and rose againe for our iustification, and now sitteth at the right hand of God as our aduo|ate. But hereafter, when wee shall sup with him in his kingdome, and sit with him in his Apocal. 3.21. throne, when al mists of ignorance and diffidence shall vanish away, when we shall see God face to face, then we will say to him as the noble Queene of 1. King. 10.7. Sheba to Salomon; Loe, the one halfe of thy kingdome was not told vs.
Now abideth faith, hope and loue] The rest of the graces are reduced to these, saith Melancthon, and the chiefe of these is loue, saith Paul. There is so great affinitie be|tweene faith and hope, that (as Com. in Gal. 5.5 Luther obserues) it is hard to finde any difference, they cannot be well separa|ted, one hauing respect to the other, as the two Cheru|bins on the mercie seate: Exod. 25.20.

Yet they differ much especially in their

Obiect.
Subiect.
Order.
Office.


In their obiect: Faith hath for her obiect the truth; Hope for her obiect the goodnesse of God. Faith (as Enchirid. c. 8. Augustine notes) is of good things and bad: but hope lookes on good things onely. The Christian beleeues there is an hell as well as heauen; but hee feares the one, and hopes only for the other; as the Lucanus aud Augustin. vbi supr. Poet distinguish|eth aptly:  liceat sperare timenti.


Faith is of things

Past: for wee beleeue that Christ is dead, bu|ried, risen againe, c.
Present: for wee beleeue that Christ now sit|teth at the right hand of God.
Future: for we beleeue Christ shall come again to iudge the quick and the dead.


But hope doth expect and respect only things to come.
In their subiect: Faith is in the Luther. vbi sup.  Prkins exposit. Creed. art. 1. vnderstanding, hope resteth in the will: if they differ in place, this I take to be the most probable separation.
In order: for Hb. 11.1. faith is the ground of things hoped for. A stedfast hope proceeds out of a liuely faith: if the sparke of faith should not giue light to the will, it could not be perswaded to lay hold vpon hope. Faith alway goeth be|fore, then hope followeth after.
In their office: for faith is our Luther. loc. com. tit. de tri|bus charitati|bus. logicke to conceiue what we must beleeue; hope our rhetorick to perswade vs in tribulation vnto patience. So S. Paul saith: Wee are saued by hope, Rom. 8.24. Melanct. in Rom. 8. Sic liberati sumus, vt adhuc spe|randa sit haereditas, postea possidenda; nunc habemus ius ad rem, nondum in re. Faith is a Doctor and a Iudge, dispu|ting against error and heresie, iudging spirits and do|ctrines; hope is a Captaine fighting against impatience, tribulation, heauines of spirit, weaknes, desperation. In a word, the difference betweene faith and hope in Diuini|tie, is the same that is betweene fortitude and prudence in policie. Fortitude not guided by prudence is rashnes, and prudence not ioyned with fortitude is vaine: So faith without hope is nothing, and hope without faith a meere presumption and tempting of God. And therefore wee must ioyne together all these graces, as Paul here, faith, hope, charitie: We waite for the hope of righteousnesse through faith, and faith worketh through loue.
First faith teacheth vs the truth, and then hope teach|eth vs what to suffer; and loue what to doe for the truth. Faith engendreth hope; faith and hope loue, but the chief is lone, c.
The Rhem. in loc.  D. Bshop. agaist te re|ored Cath. it. Iustficat. Papists hence reason against vs; If charitie bee greater then faith, it is vnprobable that men are iustified only by faith. Calum. apud Marlorat. i loc.  D. Abt against shop, pa. 478. Our Diuines answere, that the argument is not good: A Prince doth excell a pesant: Ergo, till the ground better. A man is better then a beast: Ergo, runne faster then a horse, carrie more then an elephant, c.
Secondly, Luther  Me|lanct. in loc. that loue is not greater in euery respect absolutely, but onely greater in latitude of vse and conti|nunce: faith and hope are restrained within the bounds of our priuate persons, as the iust man doth liue by his owne faith, and the good man hopes only for himselfe: but loue like Psal. 80 10.11 Dauids vine doth cour the mountaines with her boughes, and stretcheth her branches vnto the sea, extending it selfe to God, Angels, men; in men, to our selues and other; in other, Vide Bzam, aunot, maior. in Ephes. 3.18. vpward, to supeiours, downward to inferiours; on the right hand to friends, on the left to foes.
Loue the~ in respect of other is of greater vse: but if we consider a man in himselfe priutly, faith is more needfull then loue, as wherein originally stands our communion and fellowship with God, by which Christ Ephes. 3.17. dwels in our hearts, into which as an hand, Almightie God pow|reth all the riches of his grace for our saluation, and by which only, whatsoeuer else is in vs is accepted of God, as Epist. 1. Saluanus excellently: Omnibus semper ornatibus orna|mento est, quiae sine hac nihil tam ornatum quod ornare pos|sit. See Epist. Dom. 17. post Trinit.
Againe, charitie is greater in latitude of continuance: faith apprehends the Lords gratious promise concerning eternall saluation, and hope doth expect it with patience. When God then shall haue fulfilled his word, and filled vs with vnspeakable ioy, when in that other life we shall see God face to face, faith is at an end, hope is at an end, their vse cease, but loue shall continue betweene God and vs an euerlasting bond. So the fathers expound it; only loue (saith In 1. Cor. hom. 34. Chrysostome) is eternall; in this respect the greatest is charitie, because they passe away, but cha|ritie

continueth alway. So De doctrin. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 39. tom. 3. fol. 14. Saint Augustine; Loue is the greatest of the three; because the other two departing, it shall continue more increased, and better assured;  auctior  certior permanebit. Primasius vti D. Fulk in loc. In this pesent life there are three; but in the life to come, loue remaineth onely: therefore that is greater which is euer needfull, then that which once shal haue an end. And so In loc. Gorran and Postil. maiores cum figuris. epist. Dom. quinqa. other popish writers heretofore construed this text. I con|clude, to saue a man, faith is greater; in a man saued, cha|ritie is the greater: vntill faith haue 1. Pet. 1.9. finished our salua|tion, loue must yeeld to faith; but when faith hath fully saued vs, it shall haue an end, and so must yeeld to loue, which is without end.



The Gospel. LVKE 18.31.
Iesus tooke vnto him the twelue, and said vnto them; Behold we goe vp to Ierusalem, and all shall be ful|filled, c.

IN this Gospell, our Sauiour Christ, Iohn 1.9. the true light of the world, doth illuminate two sorts of blinde: the dis|ciples, who were spiritually blind; and a poore beggar, who was corporally blind. The disciples Vers. 34. vnderstood not as yet the mysteries of our redemption, wrought by Christs humiliation and exaltation; by Thomas part. 3. qust. 53. art. 1. the one taking from vs all euill; and by the other, giuing all that is good. Rom. 4.25. Hee died for our sinnes, and rose againe for our iustifi|cation.
Christ therefore doth open their eies, and instruct them in these two points exactly.
First, generally: vers. 31. Behold we goe vp to Ierusalem, and all things, c.
Secondly, more particularly, declaring the maner of his death and resurrection, in the 32.33. verses.


Concerning his passion, fiue things are deliuered.

traditio, that hee shall be betraied.
illusio, that hee shall be mocked.
conspuitio, that hee shall be spitted on.
flgellatio, that hee shall be scourged.
occisio, that hee shall be put to death.


For truth it selfe was betraied, wisdome it selfe moc|ked, glory it selfe spitted on, innocencie it selfe scourged, and life it selfe killed.

Concerning his resurrection, hee sets downe two points especially:

1. that he shal rise.
2. that hee shall rise the third day.


Iesus tooke vnto him the twelue] Reuealing to them the secrets of his kingdome, foretelling his passion

Theophylact. in loc. for two causes especially:

1. that they might beare it more patiently, praemoniti, praemuniti.
2. to signifie that hee suffe|red willingly: Ioh. 10.18. See Gosp. dom. 10. post. Trin.


Behold] This word of attention, is Pontan. in loc. like the sounding of a trumpet before some waighty proclamation, or like the ringing of a great bell before the sermon of a famous Preacher. And therefore let vs heare this doctrine with an especiall care, which Christ hath commended vnto vs here by such a remarkable note.
We goe vp] Christs passion is called an Iohn 3.14.  12.32. exaltation or ascending. For albeit he could not ascend higher, as God, yet he was exalted by his humiliation, as man, and had a name giuen him aboue euery name: Phil. 2.8.9. Lucifer and Adam by climbing vp, were cast downe: but Christ by casting himselfe downe, went vp.
Or, We goe vp: Coster. in loc. insinuating that his iourney was not easie. Facilis descensus Auerni: Men go sooner downe hil, then vp hill; yet he that hath a good horse, can ride faster vp hill then downe hill. So the 2. Kin. 2.12. charets and horsemen of Israel, assisted by Gods especiall grace, lifting them vp a|boue

the base vallies of the world, runne faster, and are more delighted in heauens vp hill, then the wicked i hels downe hill.
To Ierusalem] Interpreters haue rendred Costr. in loc. sundry rea|sons, why Christ was crucified at Ierusalem, especially Pontan.  Diz in loc. two. First, because there was not enough malice in any other Citie to kill the Lord of life; none but the holy could enuie the most holy. The prophane Gentiles  ig|norant Iewes elsewhere, did not maligne Christ in his words and wonders; Ierusalem onely the Mat. 23.37. Prophet-kil|ler could not indure Iohn 1.21. the Prophet. His holinesse and wis|dome was the fittest obiect for the Scribes and Pharises enuie. Mat. 23.35. That vpon them might come all the righteous blood shed vpon earth, euen from Abel the shadow, to Christ the substance, Hb. 12.24. whose bloud speakes better things vnto vs, and cries owder against them, then that of Abel. Here note by the ay, that as the Sonne of God was cru|cified in the Citie of God; so by good correspondence, the members of Christ are persecuted most by the vicar of Christ.
Secondly, Christ suffered in that eminent place, that his passion and patience might be renowned in the whole world. There was not another stage fit for his tragedie, which is our comedie.
In a Acosa, con. 1. in loc. mysticall sense, Christ and his Apostles ascend to Ierusalem, euen to Ierusalem Galat. 4.26. aboue, the Apoc. 21.2. new Ierusa|lem prepared as a bride trimmed for her husband: but the god of this world, with his company, descend to Iericho, to the lowest hell. Hee that followes not Christ in his course, goes from Ierusalem to Iericho; from heauenly paths, vnto the by-waies of destruction; and so he falles among theeues, that is, as the August. Am|bros. Chrysost. apud Thom. in Luc. 10. fathers expound it, among many diuels and euils, who rob him, and wound him; and in fine, will leaue him dead, except Christ the true Samaritan relieue him, and set him in his right way a|gaine.
And all shall be fulfilled that are written by the Prophets

of the Sonne of man] Pontan. in loc. As the Painter at the first drawes his picture with a coale roughly, then with an accurate pensill, and orent colours exactly: so the holy Ghost in the Prophets and old Testament, shadowed Christs pas|sion obscurely; but in the new, paints it as it were to life perspicuously. The two Testaments are Luke 10.35. two pence, Theophylact. in Luc. 10. bea|ring the same Kings image, though not of the same stampe: for all things being now fulfilled, written by the Prophets of the Sonne of man, our Sauiours picture in|grauen in the Gospell, is more full and cleere then that imprinted in the law. Now God hath shewed vs the light of his countenance: Psal. 67.1. Let vs therefore search the Scripture, for that is the way to Christ, and Christ is the way to God.
For hee shall be deliuered vnto the Gentiles: and shall bee mocked] Hee did particularly foretell the manner of his suffering, Caluin. apud Marlorat. in Mat. 10.19. that his disciples might see, that as God he did foresee these things,  that they might be strengthe|ned at his Crosse, when as they should vnderstand all things to be fulfilled as they were told by Christ, and foretold by the Prophets.

That he should be

betraied, was foretold, Psal. 41.9.
mocked, was foretold, Ps. 69. v. 7.12.22.
spitted on, was foretold, Esay 50.6.
scourged, was foretold, Esay 53.5.
put to death. was foretold, Psal. 22.17.


Christ was deliuered vnto the Gentiles, as we reade in

the Gospell, especially by three:

Iudas.
the Iewes.
Pilat.


By Iudas, out of couetousnesse, as the Mat. 26.15. text expresly; What will ye giue me, and I will deliuer him to you? For a lit|tle siluer, and that not paied, but onely promised, he sold his friend; yea that which is worse, his Master; yea that which is worst of all, his Maker. See the Gospell the Sun|day before Easter.
By the Iewes, out of malice. Matth. 27.18. Pilat knew

well that for enuy they deliuered him.
By Pilat, through feare: for the Iewes said vnto him: Iohn 19.12. If thou set him free, thou art not Caesars friend: for whoso|euer maketh himselfe a King, speaketh against Caesar. And therefore Pilat chose rather to crucifie the Lord eternall, then to displease Caesar, a Lord temporall.
In like sort, all couetous, all malitious, all cowardly professors betray Christ daily. The couetous, who make their coine their Creed, and their penny their Pater no|ster, and their bils their Bible, betray Christ with Iudas. It is but what will you giue them, and they will deliuer vp the Gospell vnto you.
Enuious men, who persecute the Saints, and disgrace their graces, betray Christ in his members with the Iews, euen for meere malice, speaking to their Christian bro|ther as Antoninus Caracalla to his naturall brother; To Gela. Sit diuus, mod non vinus.
Cowardly profssors vse to betray Christ with Pilat. Matth. 13.21. For as soone as tribulation or persecution commeth for the word, they feare more the threats of Caesar an earthly Prince, who can kill onely the body, then the wrath of God, who being King of all Kings, is Matth. 10.28. able to destroy both body and soule in hell.
The second point touching Christs passion, is illusio. Now Christ was mocked in foure places especially.
1. In Caiphas house, where the keepers Luke 22.64. blindfolded him, and smote him on the face, and asked him, saying; Prophecie; who is it that smot thee?
In Herods company, Luke 23.11. when as the souldiers arraied him in white.
In the Common hall, where they Matth. 27.28 stripped him, and put vpon him a scarlet robe.
In Golgotha, when he was crucified. First, as Saint Matthew in the 27. Chap. by the passengers, wagging their heads, and saying; Thou that destroiest the Temple, and buildest it in three daies; saue thy selfe, c. Then by the Scribes and Pharises; Hee saued other, but he cannot saue

himselfe. Last of all, some peruerted his words, affirming that he called for Elias, when as he praied; Eli, Eli, c.
The popish Clergy mocke Christ with Caiphas, in that they blindfold the people, by denying them the Scrip|tures, and then mocke them for their ignorance. Iudges 16.25.Samson hauing his eis out, was a laughing stocke to the Phi|listins: and so the blinde laymen are the Priests pastime. Though a Iesuit or a Seminary buffet them euery day, yet can they not prophecie who smote them. Either Samson must pull downe the Colledges of these Philistins, or else he shall neuer see but thorow their spectacles. They mock Christ with Herod, who retaine foule consciences in a white rochet, who conforme themselues in habit, but re|forme not themselues in heart.
The Babylonian whore mocks Christ with the souldi|ers, in putting on Apocal. 17.4. skarlet, betokening zeale and charity, when her actions are cruell and bloudy.
They mocke Christ with the Iewes in Golgotha, who distort the words of Scripture for their aduantage, ma|king Elias of Eloi. Like the popish dolt, who reading the subscription of Pauls 2. Epistle to the Thessalonians, in the vulgar Latine; Missa fuit ex Athenis, instantly cried out, that he had found a plaine text for the Masse. Or like that foppish Anabaptist, who gathered out of Christs words in English; Mat. 28.19. Goe and teach all nations, and baptise, c. that it is not lawfull for a Clergy man to ride on a faire palfrey; much lesse, as the Bishops, in a stately coach. Or as that Fen-man, alias Fin-man, standing vpon a marsh custom, iustified his not paiment of Tithes out of Paul; Rom. 13.7. Custome to whom custome: but his Pastor replied aptly; 1. Cor. 11.16. the Churches of God haue no such custome.
So the blasphemous mouth spits on Gods face; the tyrants openly crossing the Gospels proceeding, scourge Christ: and all such as slide from the profession of the faith, are said in Hb. 6.6. scripture, to crucifie againe the Sonne of God. And therefore Feru, sr. 1.  . in loc. Coster, Ditz. c. the Church hath allotted this Gos|pell for this weeke most fitly. For at this Carniual gut

tide, many deliuer Christ vnto y^e Gentiles, in their cham|bering and wantonnes, drunkennes  gluttonie, making such as are no Christians to Rom. 2.24. blaspheme Christianitie, seeing such vncomely behauiour and mad meriments among profssors of holy religion.
As a louing wife which hath her husband slaine, to moue compassion in the Iudges, and to make the fact most odious and hatefull, tels of his deadly wounds, and describes his gastly looks, and shewes some garment of his embrued in blood: Pontan. in loc. so the Church at this time doth offer vnto our considerations how Christ her deare Loue, was betraied, and mocked, and spitted on, and scourged, and put to dath; hereby recalling vs from our horrible sinnes, which as another Iudas betray Christ, as another Herod mock Christ, as another Pilate condemne Christ, as another Longinus wound Christ, as another band of Iewes recrucifie Christ.
And the third day he shall rise againe] Diez in loc. Christ is large in he report of his ignominie, but short in this of his glo|ie: for he deliuered fiue points as concerning his humi|liation, but he remembers only two, yea for the matter but one touching his exaltation. And the third day hee shall rise againe. Yet this one is the locke and key of all Christian faith, on which all other articles of holy be|leefe depend. See before the Creed, and after the Gospell on Easter and S. Thomas day.
The Prophets vsually mingle the sweet of Christs ex|altation with the sower of his humiliation; as Gen. 49.9. Esay 53.7, 8. Psal. 4.9. and Christ heere foretold the one so well as the other to Zepper. in loc. strengthen his followers in af|fliction: for as he first suffered, and after entred into glo|rie; so such as beare with him the crosse, shall be sure to weare with him the crowne. Rom. 6.5. If we be grafted with him to the similitude of his death, euen so shall we be to the simili|tude of his resurrection.
And this saying was hid from them Men hardly con|ceiue ill of those whom they loue well; and therefore

the Disciples expecting better things of Christ, could not vnderstand this prophecie, but the Iewes (as Apud Tho|am in loc. Beda notes) hating Christ, and seeking how they might put him to death, easily beleeued him vpon his word, yea one word, and that not so perspicuous as this, but obscure; for when he said, Iohn 12.32. If I were lift vp from the earth, I will draw all men vnto me; the Iewes answered him: We haue heard out of the law, that Christ bideth for euer: and how saist thou that the Sonne of man must be lift vp?
Hence we may note Melancthon. postil. in loc. that the dearest Saints of God haue their infirmities and errors; and lest wee should doubt of it, Saint Luke repeates it againe: They percei|ued not the things which were spoken. Caluin. apud Mar. orat. in loc. Not that we should follow their ignorance, but praise God for our know|ledge, when we conceiue these deepe mysteries of our saluation.
Againe, we may learne from hence Marlorat. in Matth. 20.19. not to be discou|raged, if we do not at the first discerne Gods holy word: for the blessed Apostles after Christs resurrection vnder|stood all these things, as S. Luke reports in his last chap|ter, vers. 45. God at his good time, will open our eyes, as he did the blindmans in this Gospel, and open our eares, as he did of the Prophet, Esay 50. and open our hearts, as he did of Lydia, Act. 16.
In that other part of this Gospell, concerning the bo|dily blind, we may behold a miserable patient, and a mer|ciful Physitian.

In the patient two things are regarda|ble: to wit, his

Outward wants,

Blindnes.
Beggerie, v. 35.

Inward vertues:

Faith.
Gratefulnes.




In his faith obserue the

Beginning, it came by hearing, vers. 36.
Continuance, though he was rebuked, he ceased not to crie, Iesus thou sonne of Da|vid haue mercie on me, vers. 37, 38, 39.
End and fruite, he receiued his sight, vers. 43.




His thankfulnes appeares in two things especially:

1. In following Christ.
2. In praising God.


And his example caused other to doe the like: All the people when they saw this gaue praise to God.

The mercifulnes of Christ the Physitian to|ward this distressed pa|tient, is seene in his

Gesture: vers. 40. He stood still and commanded the blind man to be brought vnto him.
Speech: vers. 41. What wilt thou that I doe vnto thee?
Workes: vers. 42. Receiue thy sight, thy faith hath made thee whole, and immediatly hee re|ceiued his sight.


And it came to passe, that as he was come nigh to Iericho] Christs actions are our instructions: as Christ then, Theophylact. in loc. so we must doe good in all places, as occasion is offered, euen in the streets and high waies, so well as in the Tem|ple. There is nothing in the sheepe but good; his fell is good, his flesh is good, his entrals good, his dung good: so the lambes of Christ must be profitable to all, hurtfull to none.
A certaine blind man sate by the high way side] Luther. Cul|man. Zepper. i loc. Prote|stant Diuines as well as the Fathers and Friers haue con|strued this mystically; for euery man is blind by nature, not discerning the things of God; he sits by the way, but he cannot walk in the way, till Christ open his eyes  di|rect his paths. And it is most certaine that the state of the spiritually blind is more miserable then that of the other blind; for to want the eyes of Angels, is worse then to want the eyes of beasts, as Granaten. in loc. Antonius told that good blind man Didymus.
As the bodily blind is led either by his seruant, or wife, or dogge; so the spiritually blind misled by the world, the flesh and the diuell: the bodily blind will be sure to get a seeing guide, but the spiritually blinde followeth his owne Eccles. 18.30. lusts and the blind guides; and so the Matth. 15.14. blind

leading the blinde, both fall into the ditch.
The bodilie blinde feeleth and acknowledgeth his want of sight, but the spiritually blinde thinkes hee sees as well as any. So Christ in the Gospell: Iohn 9.41. If yee were blinde, ye should not haue sinne: but now ye say, we see, there|fore your sinne remaineth c. The bodily blinde suppli|eth his want of sight oft by feeling, as Gen. 27.21. I sack when hee could not see Iacob, said, Let me feele thee my sonne: but the spiritually blind though hee feele many times in his conscience the flashing, yet nuer auoides the flames of hell fire. The bodily blinde account them happie who see; but the spiritually blind doth despise the Seers, and all such as walke in the right way: Wisdom. 5.3. This is hee whom wee sometime had in derision, and in a parable of re|proch.
To conclude, the want of corporall eyes, is to many Passeratius o|ra. de caecit. diuinum bonum, albeit humanum malum; but the want of faiths eyes, is the greatest euill which can befall man in this life: for reason is our soules left eye, onauent. diaet salut. c. 26. faith our right eye, without which Heb. 11.6. it is impossible to see the way to God. Come to me, saith Matth. 11.28. Christ; credendo venimus, saith Ser. 12 de ver bis Apostol. Augustine, yea Christ Iohn 14.23. comes to vs, and Ep s 3.17. dwels in our heart by faith.
Begging] The Iewes had a Deut. 15.4. law, that there should be no begger in Isral. England hath statutes also to correct im|pudent poore, and to prouide for impotent poore: but as it is obserued, our lawes haue a better prologue then epi|logue; they be well penned, but ill kept: and so this good order is neglected among vs, as it was about Iericho, to the great scandall of Christian religion, and dishonour of our English nation. It is written of the Church hm. against idle|nesse. Athenians, that they punished idle persons as hainous offenders. And the Egyptians had a law, that euery man shold bring his name to the chiefe ruler of the Prouince, and shew what trade of life he did vse. The Aul. Gl. lib. . ca 1. Romans enacted se|uere statutes against such as negligently suffered their ground vntilled. Among the Description of the world. pag. 64 Chinois, euery man is et

about somewhat, according to his strength and yeeres: one laboureth with his hand, another with his foot, some with their eies,  some must be doing with their tongue; and that which is most admirable, they keepe in Can|tane, foure thousand blind men, vnfit for other service, to grinde corne and rice or the people. If either the law were belieued as Gospell, or the Gospell kept as law, such 2. Thes. 3.10. as would not labour, should not eate. Loiterers and stur|die rogues, should be sent either to the Gallies, or pri|sons, or Bridewell, or to some like place where they might worke well: and as for such as cannot labour, it is fit, we that are strong, should help to beare the burdens of the weake, being Ib 29.15. ies to the blind, and feet to the lame.
And when hee herd the people passe by] Culman. in loc. We must ap|prhend euery fit occasion for our good: and when once we haue begun well, we must not faint in our course, but continue, Arboreus m. in loc. though the world rbuke vs, as the people did the blind man here. Let v still cry for mercy, manifesting a liuely saith in our words and waes. In our words, Insn. on|cora. cap 105. ac|knowledging Christ to be man: O Iesu thou Son of Da|uid  God, haue mercy on me. By our waies i forsaking our old wicked courses, and following Christ, that other seeing our good example, may likewise giue praise to God.
The Gospell and Epistle Luther. in loc.  Postl. cum   figuris epst. d. qun|qus. well agree. For i the Epi|stle, S. Paul aboue all other vertues, extolleth loue. Now Iohn 15.13. greater loue then this hath no man. then t bstow his life for his frinds. And yet Christ, as S. Luk eorts in the Gospell, was betraied and mocked, and spitte, nd our|ged and ut to deah een for vs Rom. 5.10. hs eemie. Agaie Saint Paul in the Epistle, next to loue commends in a Chri|stian, faith and hope; both which (as the Gospell iti|mtes) are eminet in blinde Bartimaes, vnfaiedl b|lieuing, that Christ could: and in his greatest dscourage|ment hoping against hope, that Christ would haue r|cie on him; in so much, that Truth it selfe giues this testi|mony; Recie thy sight, thy faith hath saued thee.
If Duke Iosa be renowned in holy Bible, for that hee made the naturall Sune to stand still at his praier in Gi|beon; O what omnipotent faith had this blind man, to make the supernaturall sunne, the Sunne of righteous|nesse, the Sunne that made the sun to stay his course, and stand still in the way, till his desire was fulfilled! O Lord increase our faith and loue, making the one like this in the Gospell; and the other according to thy precept in the Epistle, that being mounted vpon these two wings, we may soare to the place where thine honor dwelleth, and there rest with thee for eermore.
Amen.

FINIS.


Errata.
Pag. 8. lin. 15. a fine, reade . p. 10. l. . reade measurably. p. 24. l. 11. reade are. p. 26. l. 12. a fine, reade same. p. 68. l. 5. a fine, reade a. p. 96. l. 1. in the margin, reade Acts 13. p. 16. l. 10. a fine, reade sti. p. 127. l. 8. a fine, reade wy. p. 187. l. 7. reade Psalm. 135. p. 190. l. 2. in mar|gin, reade . pag. 225. in margin, deletur eremy 17. pag. 230 l. 9. reade Clrius. p. 24. . 4. reade picture. p. 25. l. 15. a fine, reade harust.
Other faults are either so grosse, that they correct themselues, or so small, that they will be soone corrected of other.
I forbeare prefaces and Indices vntill the whole be finished.
Assit me with thine hearty praiers vnto the Father of mery, that it may be for his glory and thy good.
FINIS




