



THE BALME OF GILEAD PREPARED FOR THE SICKE.
THE WHOLE IS DIVI|DED INTO THREE PARTES:

1. THE SICKE MANS SORE.
2. THE SICKE MANS SALVE.
3. THE SICKE MANS SONG.

Published by Mr. ZACHARIE BOYD, PREACHER of GODS WORD, at GLASOGW
AVGVST
Latet vltimus dies vt observentur omnes dies: Sero parantur remedia, quum mortis imminent perscula.
EDINBVRGH Printed by IOHN WREITTOVN. 1629



Psal. 102.6.
I am like a Pelican of the Wildernesse.



TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD IAMES BY THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD, ARCHBISHOP OF GLASGOVV.
RIGHT REVEREND,
_THE Preacher speaking of himselfe, said, that for his preachings hee sought to find out accep|table words,Eccles. 12. v. 10. words of de|light, which in the same verse he calleth words of trueth: where I obserue that words of trueth, may bee words of delight, delight not being con|trarie

to trueth, neither pleasure vnto profit: Such words are compared to goades  nailes,Eccles. 12. v. 11. which CHRIST the great Pastour giveth vnto his Ministers, the Masters of Assemblees, who are appointed by him for to fasten;Bernar. su|per Cant. yea, and to naile mens soules vnto him selfe: Such words are full of substance:Qurit a|a ver|u, cui consentiat a corre|iem,  illumi|nur ad cognitione~, cui innita|tur ad vir|tutem, quo res. nctur ad sipien|tim cui  tur ad de|rem, cui tetur ad su|illa,  sua|tur . they are faire with|out faird.
As it is not good in preaching to make vse of swelled hydropick words of man his invention, neither must man take that for simplicity of the Gospell, which diverse call simplicity, viz. words wan|ting a due  painefull meditation, which is the very digestion of the spirit: Ill stu|died words can not be these acceptable words of Solomon: Of them can bee made no nailes for the fastening of loose and vstable soules.
I ever thought this part of the Ministrie a painefull part, not to be done without great paines: Some speake of a Booke day, but all our dayes should be Booke dayes. If a Pagan could be moved for any thing to say, Ab perdiat diem, alace I haue left a day, what shall he say, who is a labou|rer in the Lords Vineyeard?
They who would doe this worke as they should, must with earnest prayers, painefull reading, and serious meditati|ons emptie their veines of their blood, till palenesse the STVDDIE MARKE bee printed vpon their face: They must watch while others sleepe, and labour at the candle: They must forsake the fea|thers and the downes at the chirping of the birds.Eccles. 12. v. 4.
In some measure I striue to this, though not as I would: Happie is the servant that is vigilant, hauing ever his loines girded and his candle in his hand,Luke 12. v. 35. waiting for the coming of his LORD.
Let it please your Lo. to take in good part this part of my labours, wherein is a boxe of balme, a little te|stimony of my thankfulnesse for the great kindnesse, whereof in my great affliction it pleased you to make mee partake: The bloody persecution in France did scatter many Churches, and mine amongst others: At my coming heere you refreshed mee with your comforts, and placed mee besides your selfe, where I find the LORD'S bles|sing vpon my labours: To Him alone belongs the glory.
And seeing it is the LORDS will that man bee thankfull vnto man, let me heere name three speciall friends to whom neither name not blood haue bund mee, but great loue and kind|nesse in time of mine adversitie, the bond whereof as I hope shall never bee broken. At my first coming to Edinburgh, good Doctour SIBBALD, the glory and honour of all the Phy|sicians of our Land, would haue mee to abide with him:Note. But afterward, a preaching at a fast hauing made mine acquaintance with S^r. William Scot of Eli, that great Scots MECENAS, Pa|tron to great ROLLOCVS, hee after that did keepe me with him, as one of his owne Children:2. Tim. 1. v. 18. the LORD grant vnto him that hee may finde mercie in that day: From S^r. William you brought mee to Glasgow; of that your favour let mee not forget a speciall instru|ment, even that wise and godly man, M^r. Iames Rbertoun, Comisser of Ha|miltoun, with whom I wish that I might both liue and die.
I heere in the dedication of this treatise acknowledge your bounty with a thankfull profession.
And seeing our Bookes are our Chil|dren, the bisb of our braines,Libri Liberi. it is most convenient, that you who haue the Patronage of the FATHER, should also vouchsafe a blessing to the Children. Which looking after. I intreat the Most High to preserue you vnblame|able both in Soule and Body, vntill the day of his appearing.
At Glasgow
the 23 of December, 1628.
Your Lo. in all duetie M^r. ZACHARIE BOYD Preacher of GODS WORD, at GLASGOW.



TO THE READER.
_THERE was never an age more fertile in reproofes and reproches than this: We are come to the dregges of dayes, where it is counted vertue to point out the imperfections of our brethren: Many are like the Flee, that can not rest but vpon a scabbe. Charitable Reader, take in good part these my paines ta|ken for thy profit: As for thee, whose countenance is cast downe, because of GODS graces in others, If thou doe well shall it not bee accepted?Gen. 4. v. 7. but if not, sinne lyeth as the doore: Doe better thy selfe and that shall be my reproofe. It was well said by S^t. Ierome:Hieron. ad Pamnach. Epist. 5. cap. 8. Aut profer me|liores epula  me conviva vere, aut quali|cuque nostra coeula contentus esto: that is, if thou can prepare better cheare let nce partake: if not, bee content with such as I haue.





THE SICKE MANS SORE

PSal. 107. v. 17.
Fooles because of their transgressions and because of their iniquities are afflicted.
V. 18.
Their soule abhorreth all maner of meate and they draw neare vnto the gates of death.
V. 19.
Then they crye vnto the Lord in their trouble: hee saveth them out of their distresses.
V. 20.
He sent his word and healed them; and delivered them from their de|structions.
V. 21.
Oh that men wold praise the Lord for his goodnesse, and for his wonderfull works to the Children of men.

_THis text may be called the sicke mans text.
The division of the words.
The text divideth it selfe in three speciall parts.

In the first is: the sicke mans sore.
In the second is: the sick mans salve.
In the third is: the sicke Mans song.

The sicke mans sore is in these wordes, Fooles because of their trans|gressions, and because of their iniqui|ties are afflicted: their soule abhorreth all manner of meate c.
The sicke mans salve is in these wordes, Then they cry to the Lord in their trouble: he saveth them out of their distresses: hee sent his word and healed them, and delivered them from their de|structions.
The sicke Mans song is a Song of praise in these wordes: Oh that men wold praise the Lord for his good|nesse, and for his wonderfull workes to the Children of men.

1. PART. THE SECKE MANS SORE.

IN the words of the Psalmist here: first the ordour is to bee consi|dered:

Judgements heere goe be|fore mercy, (or for to speak so) take the fore-gate of Mercy: when God was desired by Moses to shewe him his face, God said vnto him that no man could see his face and live.Exod. 33. 1. v. 22. But behold, said hee, there is a place by me, and thou shalt stand on a rock: and it shall come to passe, while my glory passeth by that I will put thee into the clift of a Rocke, and will cover thee with my hand: I will make all my goodnesse passe before thee,v. 19. v. 23. and I will cover thee with my hand whiles I passe by: After I will tak away mine hand: and thou shalt see my backe parts but not my face: Now as the Lord said, so hee did: he passed by, and while he passed he made a Procla|mation. The Lord, the Lord God mer|cifull and gratious,Exod. 34 v. 6. long suffering and abundant in goodnesse and trueth: kee|ping mercy for thousands forgiving iniquitie,v 7. transgression and sinne: Be|hold how in the Lords comming to

Moses, mercy came before, and after iudgement in the words following that will by no meanes cleare the guilty visiting the iniquitie of the Fathers vpon the Children. Note. The Lords slug|gorne in his comming to Moses was mercifull and righteous: first was Mercy and then Iustice: this was the order of Davids Song: I will, said hee,Psal. 101 v. 1. sing of Mercy and of Iudgment: First of mercy  then of Iudgement, like Gods passing by Moses.
But here in my Text Gods order is inverted, for there is first a song of Judgement and after of mercy: what should be the cause of this?
This is as the Apostle calleth it  Multiformis lla sapientia Dei,Ephes 3 v. 10 that is, the manifold wisdome of God, or the wisdome of God that is of many forms: as there be diverse faces and formes of men, so there be diverse hearts  diverse dispositions: some be thrown faced, and some be thrown hearted: with

with the pure thou wilt shew thy selfe pure,Psal. 18 v. 26. froward with the froward: Note. To one that is of a meeke disposition and of a gentle nature like Moses, let the Pastour preach first of mer+cy, as God came to Moses: making all his goodnesse to goe before him: But having to doe with fooles; such as are into my Text, it shall bee wisedome first to sing to them of Iudgement and thereafter of mercy: Note. Gods comming to Elias declared with what method he had to preach to that rebellious people with whom hee had to doe: while hee was in|to the caue of Horeb the mount of God; the Lord bade him come out, and stand vpon the mount before the Lord, and behold while God was comming to him, there came from before him three mighty Mes|sengers for to make awaye to the King of Glory.
The first Messenger was called the WIND:1. King. 1 v 11, A mighty strong winde

rent the mountains and brake the rockes before the Lord: but the Lord was not in the winde: After the winde, came another Poste called an EARTH|QUAKE; but the Lord was not in the earthquake: After the Earthquak came yet one more furious called FIRE; but the Lord was not in the fire: After the fire, came a still and foft voyce wherein was the Lord: By this God teached Elias how he shuld teach that stiffnecked people  how he should bring the Lord to them: viz. that first he should preach Judg|ments; whereby as by a wind the proud heartes like hie Mountaines might bee shaken: and the harde hearts like rockes might be rent: If that did not the turne, let him yet threaten Iudgments like earthquaks which might mak all hearts to quak: If that did not the turne, that hee should preach Hell fire, death and damnation against the Sonnes of men: Now if men did tremble at

the fire, Gods will was that hee should preach with a soft and still voyce the mercyes of God, the promises of the Gospell: This or|der and Methode is plainely sette downe by Saint Iude,Jude. v. 22. Of some have compassion, making a difference; that is, to some first preach mercy: But others save with feare,v. 23. pulling them out of the fire; there is a preaching of Iudg|ment: Note. Act. 4. v. 36. Mark. 3.7. To some, preachers should bee as Barnabas, sonnes of consola|tion: to others they should bee as Iames and Iohn: Boanerges; duo fulmi na belli;*Note. two sonnes of thunder. Ill men like nettles must bee first grip|ped left they burne thee. Gods natu|rall dealing with men is first to offer mercy vnto them if they will repent. Note. This was a Law of warre prescri|bed by God himselfe vnto his peo+ple, when thou comest night vnto a City,Deut. 20 v. 10. v. 1. saith God, to fight against it, then proclaime peace vnto it. But if it will not make peace with thee, but

will make warre against thee, then thou shall be beseidge it. As it was ordai|ned by God in that warre, so shuld it be practised in the Christian warre|fare: while Pastours come from God to a people, they must first proclame peace vnto them: But if they will not make peace: then they must be|seige them with the Cannons of Gods Judgements. Note. If Barnabas cannot winne the Citadell of mens hearts by consolations; let James and Iohn Boanerges Sonnes of thunder besiege their hearts: with the thun|ders of Gods Iudgements they must shoot downe the strong holdes of sin,2. Cor. 10, v. 4. that every thought and imagina|tion may bee taken and brought captive to the obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ.
I know that preaching of Judge|ment is vnpleasant preaching to flesh and blood: Note. But heere is the command,Leut. 19. v. 17. Thou shalt in any wise re|buke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin

vpon him:Ezek. 33. v. 3 Most men will heare one|ly the piping of mercy, Songes of Loves; but ditte their eares from the dinne of Judgements. Note. They like well of Barnabas with his consola|tions: but cannot abide the thunders of Boanerges: Note. None so fain as fools would haue their head clapped: fooles fedde on folly would bee fed in their follie. Note. Infelix Felix, more vnhappy in deede than hee was hap|py in name, could not heare Faul preach:Act. 24 v. 25. Pauls Text was of righteousnes, of temperance and of Iudgement: As he reasoned vpon the point of Iudge|ment, Felix interrupted him crying vnto him in a feare; God thy way for this time, when I have a convenient season I will call for thee. Note There bee many vnhappy like Felix sold vn|der sinne,1. King 22, v. 8. like Ahab, who could not heare Mecaiah Gods Prophet: I hate him said Ahab, for hee doeth not prophesie good concer|ning me, but evill:Note. But who can speak

good to him that doth euill and bee a Trumpeter of Trueth? The word of God bee it of Iudgement or of Mercy, should not bee concealed from them to whom it is ordained: while a man is become a fool in his sinnes, a Sermon of Iudgment is for him: the faithfull Pastour must denounce against him what ever is in his Roll, not keeping vp a word, were it to call him a foole in his face. Note. This was Iobs great comfort in his distresse that he had not con|cealed the words of the holy one:Job. 6. v. 10. the of|fice of teachers,Ezek. 33 v. 3. the Lords servants is to blowe the Trumpet and warne the people with alarmes: Note. They are com|pared to the hewers of wood I have hewed them by my Prophets saith the Lord:Hose. 6. v, 5. Note. As a man that is for to cut a hard oke will first sharpen his axe: so he that is ordained for to hewe downe the old oken hard ini|quities of a people, must sharpen his reproofes and therewith strike

at them, till the spailes flee off: yea till at last the highest Cedars of of sinnes, were they Caesars sinnes, may fall down vpon their sides. Note. Jf a King be afoole against God, feare not to call him a foole that he may become wise: Gard vp thy loynes said the Lord to his Prophet,Jere. 1. v 17. arise and speake all that I command thee, be not dismayed at their faces, left I con|found thee before them: woe to dumme dogges, yee that make mention of the Lord keepe not silence. Note. Isa. 62 v. 16. Sometimes Pastoures are so branded with the reproaches of fooles, because they hurt their galled backes, that they will resolve to preach no more of Iudgement, but to remaine silent: This is their weaknesse, but when the spirit of their calling begins to stirre within them; it shall not lye in their hearts to hold their peace. Note. This was Ieremiahs resolution once: because hee saw the word of the Lord made a reproach to him, and

dayly derision, hee said,Ierem. 20. v. 9. I will not make mention of God nor speake any more in his Name: But did hee so? O no: not: The spirit of his calling kindled such a fire within him, that hee could no more forebeare: His word, said hee, was in mine heart as a burning fire, shut vp in my bones, and I was weary wth forbearing, and I could not stay: A Man of God will call a foole a foole. Note. jt is his calling to sing as well of Iudgement as of mercy: If by want of discretion he spill the tune of GODS musicke, preaching Iudgement, when hee should preach mercy, or preaching mercy, where hee should preach Iudgement, he himself shall be found the greatest foole in the daye of comptes.
This consideration made Paul to pray for wisedome to his disciple, who was become a teacher: The Lord said he, giue thee wisdome in all things: Note. By this wisdome while we preach

to hauty or humbled sinners: we are teached to practise that precept of S. Iude: which is, to make a difference. The Lord give vs the spirit of dis|cretion.
This much concerning the me|thode of the Wordes which wee have read in your audience: where|in first mention is made of Iudge|ments, and after of mercy.
Now let vs come to our sicke Text, or Text of Sicknesse.
In the sicke man his sore, which is the first part of this Treatise vpon the fiue Verses heere set downe, wee haue these three things particular|ly to consider.
First, who are those who are said heere to bee afflicted; Secondly, what is the cause of all their afflicti|ons: Thirdly, what is the particular affliction set downe in this Text.


1. Who is said to be afflicted heere.
Note.IN this part of Scripture wee haue a visitation of the sicke: looke to your bookes, and the first word of my Text shall tell you who is sick: vvho? fooles, fooles saith the Psalmist, because of their transgressi|ons, and because of their iniquities are afflicted.
NoteI read in Scripture of foure sorts of fooles: of these two bee wise, and two be fooles indeede.
First these are called fooles in Scripture, that acknowledge their ownefoolishnesse: 1. Cor. 3 v 18. If any man among you, saith the Apostle, seemeth to be wise in this world, let him become a foole th bee may be wise: Note. This was wise Agurs confession which hee made to Ithiel and Vl, surely, said hee, Prou. 30 v. 2. I am more brutish then any man, and haue not the vnderstanding of a man: I neither learned wisedome nor haue the knowledge of the holy.v. 3.
Note,Secondly, these are called fools in Scripture, who are so in the wic|keds estimation: According to this the Apostle saith,1. Cor. 4 v. 10. wee are fooles for Christs sake: but yee are wise, wee are fooles, that is, we are so esteemed to bee by the worldly wise: After that a Prophet of God had anointed Iehu to bee King, one said to Iehu, wherfore came this madde fellow to thee?2. Kings 9. vi. 1. Act. 26 v. 24. Godlinesse to wicked men is not on|ly foolishnesse but madnesse. The great knowledge of letters hath made thee madde: (said Festus to Paul) what wonder seeing the wisedome of God himlsefe is esteemed folly. 1. Cor. 1. v. 25. Note. In Scripture yee reade of the folly of God, yee reade in Scripture of the folly of preaching, in a worde all spi|rituall wisedome is folly:1. Cor. 1. v, 21. But to whome? S. Paul saith that it is to them that perish.
Thirdly, these are said to be fools who are Gods Elect and chosen ones, but, as we all doe,1. Cor. 1 v. 18. faile in many

things, when they either turne in any point fro~ the trueth which once they did embrace, or when they are slow of heart to believe, or when they run away from God by any sin, then are they said to be fools: their failing is their folly: For the first S. Paul called the Galathians foolish Galathians: for the second; Christ called his two disciples going to Emans fooles,Luk. 24. v. 2,. and slow of heart to beleee: for the third, it is said that the forlorne sonne was madde or by himselfe:Luk. 15. v. 17. because when hee repented, it is said that he came to himselfe againe.
1. Cor. 1. v. 18.Fourthly, the wicked to whome the wisedome of God is folly are called fooles: Note According to this the rich man in the Gospell that made greater provision for his bellie in his Barns, than for his Soule in the Heavens, is called a foole. O foule, this night thy Soule shall bee taken from thee!Luk. 12 v. 20. This was his folly, hee never thought of Heaven till hee was in hell.
It is of these two, viz. of the Godly sinning by weaknesse,  of the wicked sinning by wicked|nesse that mention is made heere: while they sinne they are both fooles and as they are both but fooles, and as they are, so heere are they called, viz. fooles.
The Hebrewe word heere is Guilim, a word that commeth from a root that is not in vse, haveing no signification which is the lyfe of a worde: a roote worthy of such branches: the roote is not in vse, neither are the branches: where|fore serveth the roote of follie? what are the fruites of follie? They are like the apples of Sodome. They maye have some shewe out|wardlie; but have nothing but rot|tennesse for the in-meate. Hee that tasteth them will doe best to spitt them out again. Note. Heb. 6. v. 4. As the wicked wil taste the good gift of God, and after spit it out, so that it doth them no good:

so should the godly hauing tasted the fruites of follie incontinent spitt them out, and after spitt at them with despight, so should they not bee able to doe them evill.
Note.Though fooles bee called from a roote that hath no vse in God his word, they seeme to themselves to bee most fast rooted: in their pros|peritie they both think, and say that they shall neuer bee moved. They will also seeme vnto others of all men to have the strongest rootes.Psal. 37 v. 35. To Da|vid who was on of Gods Seers they appeared for a space like greene Bay|trees. All such greenesse, and great|nesse, is but in thinges earthly: as health, wealth, houour and prefer|ment. But because they are not roo|ted in the heavens, the earth is not able to furnish substance for the vp|holding of such things:Ps. 129. v. 6. and there|for like grasse vpon the house tops they wither before they grow vp.
Iob. 5. v. 3,I have seene, said Eliphaz, the foo|lish

taking roote: but tooke hee root for to continue? No, not: Suddain|lie, said hee, I cursed his habitation: incontinent his children for whose standing and preferment hee solde himselfe to wickednesse were crushed in the gate;Iob. 5. v. 4. neither was there any to deliver them. As for their harvest and expected crop, others did de|voure it, not leaving them the mise|rable stalkes which grew among the thornes.v. 5.
* Thus God doth with the wicked as he did with the Amorite. Thogh in appearance hee high like a Ce|dar, and strong like an Oke, yet hee destroyeth his fruit from aboue,Amos. 2. v. 9. and his rootes from beneath. The folie of sin is like a foolish tale, which as men commonly say, hath neither toppe nor root. The Iesson is this: all sin|ners are but fooles:The do|ctrine. a wicked man were he never so wise in the world is but a foole before God:1. Cor. 3. v. 19. the wise|dome of this world is foolishnesse with

God: wisedome in evill is nothing but guile and craftinesse, guile guil|ded with wisedome like a tombe co|vered with the foile of gold, having nothing within but a contagious corruption.
The vse.The vse let all men that would be wise indeede studie to an innocent life. Note. Tit. 2 v. 12. This is our wisedome that denying vngodlinesse and worldlie lusts we liue soberly, righteously and godly in this prsent world, soberlie for our selves, righteouslie for our neigh|bours, and godly for our good God. What is beyond that is no thing but foolishnesse:Note. hee that exceeds the square of that rule in Scripture language, is a foole.

Obiection.
Heere some may obiect and say, how is this that Scripture speaketh thus? doth not Scripture forbid vs to speake so? Christ speaketh plain|ly, whosoeuer is angrie with his bro|ther without a cause shall bee in danger

of iudgment. And whosoeuer shall say to his brother Racha shall bee in dan|ger of the Counsell; but whoseouer shall say, thou foole, shall bee in danger of hell fire. Note. Behold their three iniuri|es which the Iewes thought to bee veniall sinnes of the Papists: the least is a motion of anger keept close within the breast, which I may call a warded wrath: for such a fault Christ sayeth, that a man is in dan|ger of iudgment, that is, as though wee should saye, in danger to bee brought before the Commissionar an inferiour Judge: for the least sinne is the least punishment.
Note.The second iniurie is, Ra|cha, that is, wrath broken out of warde into wordes: the word is a worde of iniurie, which signifieth, vacuus, a man as wee say that hath not harnes, or braine, a toome hea|ded man. Note. Beza out of Chryso|stome maketh it as the French word Tutoyer, which we call to Thou a man.

This greater iniurie came before the Sanhedrin, which were the Counsell of seventie and two. The third and last iniurie is greatest, viz. when a man not onelie Thou's his brother, but saith Thou foole. Some distinguish these three iniuries after this manner: Note. The first, say they, is ira restricti animi, that is, a war|ded wrath within the heart. The se|cond is, ira effervescens, an anger breaking foorth. The third they call ira erumpens in apertum convitium, that is, scoffing or rayling: for this word, saith Christ, a man shall bee in danger of hell fire: how is it then that in the first part of my Text sinners are called fooles?


The answere.
I answere, that to call a man foole is not simply forbidden;Luke. 34 v. 25. for Christ called two of his Disciples fooles: S. Paul called the Galatians foolish. Note. That threatning then is against them that out of wrath and malice

bring this worde of rayling against their brother. It is in this sense said that the Archangell while hee dis|puted against Satan about the body of Moses durst not bring against him arayling accusation:Iude. v. 9. that is, hee durst not in anger call him a foole, knave or lowne, as one by way of rayling will call his brother. Note. Their is no rayling in my Text: my Text is ra|ther a teaching wherby fooles may learne to bee wise. The doctrine I gather heere is this:The do|ctrine.Note. If hee that calleth his brother a foole deserves Hell: what shall hee deserve that is a foole indeeede? A man may call his brother a foole, and yet not bee a foole: the one is but a simple act, the other is an ha|bite purchased by custome: the greater the sinne bee, the greater must bee the punishment. Note. If God scourged his people,Isay. 66. v. 17. for eating swines flesh, the abomination, and the Mouse, what shall hee doe to these

that eate vp the poore and the wi|dowes house? great sinnes and great iudgments.
The vse.The vse. Note: Let vs beware to be that indeed whereof the simple na|ming of another to bee, putteth the Soule in danger of hell fire. Note. The Apostle his precept is that fornica|tion, and all vncleannesse,Ephes. 5. v. 3. or covetous|nesse bee not once named among vs as becommeth Saints: seeing to name such thinges with a filthie tongue is forbidden, howe much more should wee bee carefull for to avoide to bee that, which is not to bee named?



2. What is the cause of the affliction of fooles.
VVE haue alreadie heard who is afflicted viz. fooles: Now followeth into the order of my Text the cause of their afflictions: the cause is sinne, and iniquitie:

Fooles because of their transgressions  because of their iniquities are afflicted.
It is an ordinarie question made by the most part while they see any in affliction, what coulde bee the cause of such a iudgment? where|fore hath GOD thus wise done? Note. God told this to Ierusalem when hee threatned to destroy. Many nati|ons, said hee,Ier. 22. v. 8. shall passe by this citie, and they shall say every one to his neigh|bour, wherefore hath the Lord done this vnto this great Citie. Note. See howe of nations of passers by, there is not one but hee saith, wherefore? Every man saith vnto his neighbour, where fore? Now what is the answere that God makes to their wherefore? It is into the verse following;v. 9. Then they shall answere because they haue forsaken the covenant of the Lord God: that is, as my text saith, because of their trans|gressions, and because of their iniquiti|es. The lesson is this. The do|ctrine. Our sinnes are the cause of all our plagues: so

long as rebellious Ionah was in the Shippe the tempest increased: It is saide,Note. that the Sea wrought, and was tempestuous; what could be the cause of such tempestuous working?Ionah. 1. v. 11. v. 12. The rebellion of Ionah flying from the presence of the Lord: Take mee vp said hee, and cast mee into the Sea, for I know that for my sake this great tem|pest is vpon you. VVhen Ioshua saw Israel beaten before the men of Ai, hee put dust vpon his head, crying, Oh Lord what shall I say,Iosh. 7. v. 8. seeing Isra|el hath turned their backe before their enemies: now what could bee the cause of that flight? Israel hath sinned and haue also transgressed saide the Lord: therefore they could not stand be|fore their enemies:v. 12, Note. There must ever bee a wherefore of sinne before the therefore of affliction:Iob. 8. v. 11. Can the rush grow vp without myre? can the flagge grow without water? no more can af|fliction grow without sinne. Note. Sin to affliction is like myre to the rush

and like water to the flagge: it ma|keth a division betweene our God  our Soule: God cannot shine vpon the Counsell of the wicked: Note. So soone as men beginne to sinne; the clowds of his glowmes beginne to gather.Iob. 10. v. 14. then thou markest mee, and thou wilt not acquite mee from mine iniquitie:v. 15. if I be wick|ed woe vnto mee. As a man soweth, so shall hee reape: Even as I haue seene,Iob. 4 v 8. said Eliphaz, they that plow ini|quitie, and sowe wickednesse reape the same. Who ever hee bee that takes pleasure in sinne,Iob. 7 v. 3. shall possesse moneths of Vanitie: wearisome nights are appoin+ted for him.The use. The vse of all this is, that wee studie to sinceritie of life if wee would bee free of afflictions. The wicked while they are afflicted are bound with afflictions,Note. like a murtherer cast in the stockes; but godly Ioseph in the stockes is a free man.Note. The sakelesse Soule is ever in libettie: their is no such buckler for

holding off afflictions as innocen|cie of life.Note. If because of their trans|gressions, and because of their iniqui|ties bee away, the words following are afflicted, should bee as scraped out.
Note.Let a man keepe himselfe from sinne vnspotted of this World, and hardlie shall affliction come neere him. Doe what Balaam could doe hee could not curse Israel, though hee was waged for the same. The reason thereof is declared by him|selfe, God hath not beheld iniquitie in Iacob,Numb. 23. v. 21 neither hath hee seene pervers|nesse in Israel: the Lord God is with him, and the shout of a King is among them. Note. So long as God beholdeth not iniquitie into a man, a house, or a nation, the Lord God is there, and they shout as Kings: that is, they triumph over all their enemies. If afflictions come for to trye their forces, they likewise shout as Kings triumphing over Death it selfe, and

the grave, whome they boast with doubled interrogations;1. Cor. 15. v. 55 O Death! where is thy sting? O Grave! where is thy victorie?
Note.What wonder that fooles bee afflicted for their follie; seeing other innocent creatures smart for the same?Note. Doth not Scripture record that senselesse creatures sicken for our sinnes? Thus wee see the walls of an house became leper of a freting leprosie:Levit. 14. v. 44 a wonderfull thing to think how hard stones of the house wall where the sinner dwelt could be|come sick. Because of the transgres|sions and iniquities of fooles in an house, the dead stones in the wall were afflicted.Note. Yea, which is more for the sins of man,Rom. 8. v. 23. the whole creation groneth, travelleth in paine together; as if it were a Woman in her shewers; their sicknesse is vanitie caused by our iniquitie. * Seeing then o|ther creatures that cannot sinne are afflicted because of mans sins, what

wonder if fooles because of their trans+gressions, yea, and also because of their iniquitie hee afflcted?
Observe heere howe the worde because is doubled: First, because of their transgressions, and againe be|cause of their iniquities. Is not this all one? what neede was it then that hee should have thus doubled the worde Because and againe because? Note. I answere that this forme of speach is, as were the dreames of Pharaoh of the kine and of the corne: of one thing hee had two dreames:Gen, 41. v 25. The dreame of Pharaoh is one, said Ioseph; But wherefore was it doubled? Jo|seph aith that it was to shew Pharaoh what hee was about to doe: that is for to assure him that the matter should surely come to passe; God of one thing doubled Pharaohs dreames; for that the dreame was doubled vnto Pharaoh twise,v 23. it is because the thing is established by GOD: and God will shortly bring it to passe. So for to as|sure

vs heere that sinne is the cause of all our afflictions it is saide that men are afflicted, because of their transgressions, and againe because of their iniquities. Note. The word dou|bled is lyke two witnesses for to confirme the trueth.
The first lesson I observe heere is,The 1. doctrine. of the great stupiditie of man, that very hardlie can rightly take vp the cause of his troubles: It must bee told him againe and againe: line after line, commandement af|ter commandement, because after because. Note. The first bell ringes to the preaching and yet wee slum|ber: The second ringes yet we are not ready: The third must ring al|so with a doubled sound and yet we come behind: Either preface or prayer is past before wee come to our place. Note. Wee come to the Lords house as to a place of girth or as to a city of refuge for to saue the the lyfe of our soules: 

yet beholde how sluggish wee are like Lot, who would not leaue his house till hee was pressed out by the Angel: So heere behold thy senslese nature that can not take vp the cause of thy troubles till it be told againe and againe Note. Because of transgressions will not waken the sleeping sinner till it be doubled into an other word, because of ini|quities lyke the doubled crowe of the Cock to Peter: Let all men learne heere the cause of all their woes. The vseNote. Now O man would thou knowe the cause of thy afflictions, it is because of thy transgressions; Hast thou not hard that? Was thou sleeping while I said it? Heare me againe, it is bcause of thy ini|quities: If the because of thy trans|gressions hath not weakned thee,Note. 1. Sam. 3.14. let the because of thy iniquities rouse thee vp, GOD cryed once Samuel, but hee made no answere to GOD;v. 6. hee cryed againe Samuel,

but yet hee answered not to God; The third tyme hee cryed Samuel neither as yet could hee answere vnto God:v. 8. Last of all, the Lord doubled his cry Samuel Samuel:v. 10. Then Samuel said, Speake Lord forthy servant heareth: Many preachings haue many heard, and yet haue not learned the cause of their afflict|ons. Note. Many strokes haue many gotten, and as yet never could take vp the cause of their stroakes, and so they continue into their sinnes like the drunkard in his drin|king, who though in his drunknesse he hath gotten many a sore fall  many a sore stroake, yet can not refraine.Proverb. 23. v. 35. They haue stricken me, will he say, and I was not sicke, they haue beaten me, and I felt it not: when I shall awake yet will I till it againe. Woe to him that is not sensible to his afflictions for to seeke out the cause thereof that it may bee removed. Note. If a sinner hath beene

stricken and hath not beene sicke, if also he hath beene beaten with the drunkard and hath not felt it, it is a sure token that he will yet to it againe: Let all men learne heere in their afflictions to seeke out the cause of their trouble.
Note.When the Philistims sawe them selues miserably plagued with a fil|thie and shamefull disease, they tooke counsell how it might bee tryed, wherefrom their affliction came: They had the Arke of God a prisoner among them: This was the summe of all the counsell. Now therefore make a new cart,1. Sam 6. v. 7. and take two milk kine on which there hath come no yoke, and tie the kine to the Cart, and bring the calves home from them: And take the Arke of the Lord and lay it vpon the cart,v. 8. and send it a|way that it may gee: And see if it goeth vp by the way of his owne coast to Beth-Shemesh, if that bee, then he hath done vs this great evill: but if

not, then wee shall know that it is not his hand that smote vs, but a chance that happened vnto vs. Note. There be many Christians in their afflicti|ons worse then these Philistims, though they see things more than two kine drawing a cart by his owne coast, yet can not say that it is God that hath done it, lesse can they tell that their sinnes haue beene the cause of it, but such a thing fell foorth, such a thing hath chan|ced to be: it happened so vnto me: such was my fortune. Note. This is Philistimes language worthy to be banished with buffets;Nehem. 13. v. 25. as Nehemiah buffeted the little children of the Israelites, and pluckt off their haire when he heard them speaking the language of Ashdod: It so happe|ned: Such was my chance; It was my fortune, is not Christian but Ash|dodian language.Lam. 3 v. 39. This is Gods que|stion, Wherefore is the living man sorrowfull? This is also Gods an|swere,

Man suffereth for his sins; They are worthy to be scourged and buffeted who while they are afflicted speake of fortun or chance: Note. Sathan in his words may teach many Christians to speake: when he desired God to scourge Iob, he said not God send him an hard weird an evill fortoun, or God send him a sudden chance,Iob. 1. v. 11. or ill must hee happen: But, Streach out thy hand  touch all that hee hath: And againe the second tyme:Iob. 2. v. 5. Put furth thyne hand now and touch his bone and his flsh: The Magicians of Egypt cal|led the plague the finger of God,Exod. 8. v. 19. or Gods send. What a shame then should this be for Christians to speake of fortune or chance or hap, seeing the divell and his magicians can call afflictions the hand of God, or the finger of God. Note. Let the ly|ars of Ephraim, say they are not Ephramits, but Shibboleth shal proue then to bee Ephramits. Note. Let the

vngodly deny that they are wicked, and giue thanks with the Pharisee that they are not lyke other men, but by their very language incon|tinent yee shall know: Some fil|thie words or bloody oathes, for toun, hap, chance, or such words will bewray them: By their ac|cent yee shall know, that they are of Galile, that is of this world. Surely said one to Peter,Mark. 14. v. 70. thou also art a Galilean, and thy speach agreeth thereto. Note. The tongue betweene man and man, is lyke an interpre|ter betweene two strangers: The heart of every man is a stranger to every other man: But out of the abundance of the heart the tongue speaketh bee it good, bee it evill: The words are the interpretation of the heart. Note. If Words beguile works, dummy can not lie.
Againe in the doubling of the name of finne before affliction,The se|cond do|ctrine. I obserue that God is loath to afflict till he

bee provoked by transgressions  by iniquities in the plural number that is againe and againe. Note. Till sinnes be multiplyed God scour|geth not the foole:Amos. 2 v. 13. Gods wrath commeth not out vpon man till hee bee pressed with mens sinnes, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaues.
The do+ctrine.The doctrine then is this, God is slowe and loath to come to stroakes till he be provoked againe and a|gaine, yea, and againe also. Note. This is well set downe by the Prophet Amos, who declaring Gods iudg|ments against divers peoples, set|teth downe first men sinning againe and againe, once, twise, thrise, yea, foure tymes before that God be|gan to afflict.Amos. 1. v. 6. The first is Gaza, Thus saith the Lord for three trans|gressions of Gaza and for four, I will not turne away the punishment thereof. The second is Tyrus:Amos. 1. v. 9. Thus saith the Lord, for three tarnsgressions of

Tyrus, and for four I will not turne away the punishment thereof:Amos. 1. v. 16. The third is Edom: Thus saith the Lord for three transgressions of Edom, and for foure I will not turne away the punishment thereof.v. 13. The fourth is Ammon: Thus saith the Lord, for three transgressions of Ammon and for foure I will not turne away the punish|ment thereof.Amos. 2. v. 1. The fifth is Moab: Thus saith the Lord, for three trans|gressions of Moab and for foure I will not turne away the punishment thereof. The sixt is Judah:v. 4. Thus saith the Lord, for three transgressions of Iu|dah and for foure I will not turne a|way the punishment thereof.v. 6. The se|venth is Israel: Thus saith the Lord, for three transgressions of Israel and for foure I will not turne away the punishment thereof. The eight is Bri|tans: Thus saith the Lord, for thir|tie transgressions of Britane and for fourtie I will not turne away the punishment thereof: Our transgres|sions

are thirtie for three, fourtie for foure. See how God delighteth to afflict: One man sinneth and God forgiveth, againe man sinneth and God forgiveth, againe yet man sin|neth and God forgiveth: But at last when men multiplie their trans|gressions God punisheth, saying, I will not turne away the punishment thereof.
The vse.The vse is, let men beware of dou|bling and tripling of sinnes: If ini|quities come after transgressions, it is to be feared that God say for three transgressions and for foure, I will not turne away the punish|ment thereof: They are but fooles that say, Let vs sinne that grace may abound: Though while men sinne, God seemes to them to bee inclosed vp into the heavens, yet hee sees men into their sinnes.
Note.Though he come to iudgement softly with foote of wooll, when he is come he striketh with armes

of yron. The longer the stroake be in comming it commeth downe the sadder. Note. A sudden or hasty blowe is not of such force as a stroake fetcht from necke to heele: Let no man therefore sooth him selfe vp in his sinnes, thinking that there is nothing in God but mer|cie, no,Exod. 33 v. 19. not: As hee is mercifull and gratious, long suffering, abundant in goodnesse and trueth: Hee is also a righteous Lord, a God of iustice, who will in no wayes cleare the guiltie: Bee what men will bee, if they be fooles, because of their transgressi|ons, and because of their iniquities they shall bee afflicted: Otherwise where should bee the GOD of iustice.

Objection.
Heere some man may object that this seemeth not ever to bee true, viz. that man is afflicted for his transgressions, and that for two reasons: first, because there be some

afflicted without cause, Secondlie, because there bee many transgres|sions, who among all men are most free of affliction:Psalm. 34., v. 19 Many are the troubles of the righteous: while the wicked are at their ease in Zion: That some are afflicted without cause, it seemeth to bee cleare in Scripture: God seemeth to say it him selfe, after that he had permit|ted Sathan to scourge Job with many plagues, while hee perceived that in all these troubles Job had still keept fast his integritie, Hee said to Sathan,Iob. 2. v. 3. Thou hast mooved mee against him to destroy him with|out cause: This seems to bee against the doubled wordes of my texte, viz. Because of their transgressions and because of their iniquities they are afflicted.


The answere.
Note.J answere that while God saith to Sathan that hee had afflicted Iob without cause, it is cleare,

Job of these sinnes that Sathan lay|ed most falsly to his charge, viz. that hee was but an hypocrite and an hireling that served God but for rewards: Thus in these words without cause: Job is iustified by God onely in these sinnes where|of Sathan did accuse him. Note. Jt is said of the borne blind that he was afflicted, neither for his fathers sinnes nor for his owne sinnes, but for the glory of God: Jt is certain that if hee had had no sinne hee could not haue beene made mise|rable by blindenesse, but the cheefe cause of that blindnesse,Iohn. 9. v. 3. was, that the workes of God might bee made manifest in him: The question is mo|ved by Jeremie,Lam. 3. v. 39. wherefore is the living man sorrowfull? The answere is subjoyned, Man suffereth for his sins. Note. There bee many for's in mans afflictions, 1. For the mani|festing of Gods glory. 2. For to stirre vs vp to prayer. 3. for to make

men beware of sinne the cause of woe. 4. for to distaste vs of this earth and to waine vs from these transitorie pleasures, least we should say with Peter on Tabor, it is good for vs to bee heere: These all be the ends of afflictions, But the cause wherefore men are afflicted, are their transgressions and their iniquities. Note. There is no ludge|ing for affliction but where their is transgression. Note. Though thy fa|ther should eate the soure grape of sinne, it shall not bee able to set thy teeth on edge:Ezek. 18 v. 4. The soule that snneth it shall die: God shall grind the faces of these that are fatted into their pleasures: but as for the righteous,Isa. 3. v. 10. Say yee to him that it shall hee well with him.
The vse.The vse of all this is, that we studie to sinceritie of lyfe, that when this lyfe shall bee spended and en|ded, wee may heare that joyfull voice of our master, Faithfull ser|vant

enter into thy masters ioy:Math. 25. v. 21. To God be glory for ever.
The other difficultie is in this, viz that fooles are not ever afflicted because of their transgressions: Are fooles ever afflicted? But will yee say: What then are the wicked, who are often of greatest health, so that their eyes stand out for fat|nesse? The prosperitie of the world seemeth so bee theirs.
Jndeede often this is true:Esth. 3. v. 15. while the King and Esther sit downe to drinke, the citie Sushan is perplexed: How then is it said heere that fooles are afflicted?
Note.I answere the godly haue all their troubles and teares heere, but it is not so of the wicked; In that God spareth so many of them in this world, it is a cleare argument that there is a judgement to come.
Note.Though incontinent God scour|geth not wicked men for their sins, yet he thinkes vpon them, as Ne|hemiah

in his prayer desired him to thinke vpon wicked Tobjah and Sanballat:Neh. 6. v. 14. My God, said he, thinke thou vpon Tobiah and Sanballat accor|ding to these their works: Let sinners thinke vpon this, that God though hee spare for a space, yet hee thin|keth vpon them: If these who are fooles by transgressions and iniqui|ties are not in this world afflicted because of them, they shall be af|flicted into the world to come.
Note.If thou be a hid sinner  yet is in no wise afflicted, thy day is comming. So long as this world lasts. Isa. 13. v. 21. Zim and Ochim doolefull cre|atures will rejoyce: one divell will daunce to another: But when the daunce is ended, then shall be mi|serie for evermore. Note. Againe, let vs remember heere that all these that are afflicted heere for their sinnes, are not therby exeemed: Jt may be, thou bee pyned and pinched with povertie, with gouts, and with gra|vels,

and at the end of all goe to hell: Many are deceived, thinking that if they suffer much in this world, God will challenge them no more heerafter: this is a com|mon follie worthy of affliction.
Note.Take heed to thy selfe, O man how thy afflictions work vpon thee: If they make thee to grone and to cry vnto the Lord, if thou find them spurres vnto prayer, and to all ex|ercises of godlinesse: If in a word they make thee become a new man for to detest that which once thou loved best, well is thee: God hath sanctified thy affliction: But if thy disease be so that it refuse the reme|die, if thy afflictions worke not vpon thee for to purge out the pride of life or for to chase out the spirit of vn|cleannesse, thy fornications  adul|teries. Note. It is a token that GOD is keeping thee for a more fearefull judgement. Note. It is written of King Ahaz,2. Chron. 28. v. 22. that in the tyme of his distresse hee did more yet trespasse against the

Lord: that said, hee is poynted out with a Nota, This is that King A|haz.
For to draw to an end, Let vs ob|serve two generall thinges in the words of the first verse: First I ob|serue that the sinnes of these fooles are not particularized heere, but in generall it is said, because of their transgressions and iniquities.
This is for to be an aw-band aboue the heads of all men, least they should sinne in any particular ma|ner against God, wee faile all in ma|ny things: If it had beene said heere, Fooles because of their extortions or of adulteries are afflicted, the proud Pharisee would thinke to goe free:Luke. 18. v. 11. Lord I thanke thee, said hee, that I am not lyke other men, who are a|dulterers, extortioners, c. Note. But was hee free of pryde or of hypo|crisie? That was his transgression, for being free of one sinne or other hee was not without the compasse

of trangressours: David was not an idolater, but hee was an adulterer, that was his transgression. I reade not of Ashan that hee was an a|dulterer,Ioshu. 7. v. 21. but because hee was a theefe, hee was stoned, and burnt for that transgression:Genes. 4. v. 8. Cain was not a theefe, but because hee was a murtherer, the Lord made him a vagabond.Gen. 9 v. 2. Cham was not a mur|therer, but because hee was a scor|ner God cursed him.Gen. 9. v. 21. Noah he was not a scorner, but because he was a drunkard God scourged him with scorning.Act. 5. v. 3. Ananias  Saphirah were not drunkards, but becaus they were lyars, they fell both downe dead at the Apostles feere. Iudas and Iulian were not guiltie of all these fore-said transgressions, yet because they were traitours and Apostate they died shamefully. Many of our wee|men if they can say, J am neither whoore nor theese think that all is well.
The second generall observation J make here, is, that in generall sin|ners are said to bee afflicted in this verse: indeede thereafter the affli|ction is specified: viz, sicknesse.
Note.But in this generall word afflicted, I find as it were a meeting of Gods judgements with mens transgressi|ous: as all sorts of sinnes may be included into these words transgre|ssions and iniquities: so all sorts of iudgments may bee contained into that word afflicted: If one affliction be not fearefull to the sinner another will bee terrible This is Gods aw|band aboue the heads of men.
The do|ctrine.The doctrine J gather heere: is, that as there bee diverse sortes of transgressions and of iniquities, so there bee diverse sortes of iudge|ments that are all in readinesse at the first call to helpe the Lord, to helpe the Lord against the iniqui|ties of men. Note. If God but cry vpon his plagues: aying, whome shall

I send and who will goe for vs? There is not one but it will come our before the Lord, saying, with that evill Spirit, send me when God is angry against man for sinne,1. King 22. v. 21 the famine will say send me, and I shall eate him vp: Send mee faith the pestilence and I shall destroy him: send mee saith the sword and I shall hewe him in peeces. Note. These bee Gods three great Captaines, which are appoynted by him to runne through the world for to scourge men, because of their transgressions and because of their iniquities.
Note.Not only those three, but all the creatures of God are in readinesse in coats of armes for to execute his will against transgressours.
Note.There is no creature of God ei|ther aboue or belowe, but when they see God angry for sinne they will desire to be sent for to revenge the Lords quarrell against sinners: The fire saith,Gen. 19. send me and I shall

burne Sodom:v. 24. Exon. 14 v. 27. Num. 16 v. 31. Iona. 1. v. 4. Dan. 6. v. 24. 2. King. . v. 24. 2. King. 2. v. 3. Act. 1. v. 23. send me saith the wa|ter, and I shall drowne Pharoah  his host: Send mee saith the earth, and J shall swallow vp Dathan and Abiram: The winds crye send vs, and wee shall chase and chastise Ionas for his rebellion: The lyons cry send vs and wee shall roare  devore the enemies of Daniel: The Deares cry send vs, and wee shall destroy the mockers of Elisha: The dagges crye send vs and we shall eate the flesh of Iozahel: the lyce crye send vs, and wee shall bring downe the pryde of Herode.
Note.Againe, there bee legions of dis|enses waiting vpon his nod, for to afflict sinners: Send mee saith one, and I shall strike him blind: Send mee saith another, and I shall make him dease: Send mee saith another and I shall make him dumbe: Send me saith another, and I shall lame him: Send mee saith another to his head: Send mee to his heart will

another say: Send mee to his lights and to his lever will others say: Thus migrims and phrenesies, fe|vers, and fluxes, gouts, gravels, ca|tarres, quartaines, and cataractes, armies of diseases will at Gods com|mand runne vpon miserable man,Isa. 1. v. 6. till from the sole of his feete to the crowne of his head there be nothing without or within but boils, botches and putrifieing sores.
See what diseases, feesters, fevers, fluxes, c. See what beasts, and vnbeasts, Beares, dogges, lyons, lyce, c. These with all the ele|ments are ready to afflict man, be|cause of his transgressions and because of his iniquities.
Note.Moreover, not only will other creatures bee in readinesse for God for to afflict and execute his ven|gance against sinners, But even sin|ners them selues will runne as Posts this earand for to be against them selves for the Lord.
Math. 27. v. 5. 1. King. 16. v. 18 2 Sam. 17. v. 23.Send me, said Iudas and I shall hang that traitour Judas, that betrayed his maister: Send mee said Zim|ri and I shall cast Zimri into a fire: Send me saith Achitophel and I shall hang Achitophel for abuse|ing of his wisedome: Send me saith King Saul and I shall put a sword through King Saul, to teach all the Kings of the earth obedience to the King of Heaven: See what armies God hath for to afflict all men in all sorts of afflictions, because of his trans|gressions, and because of his iniquities.The vse. The vse of all this is, that we stand in awe and feare to offend so great and so high a Majestie: Jf any man be guiltie of many transgressions,  of many iniquities, God as yee see he are hath many judgements ready at his nod, for the afflicting of such fooles:Proverb. 26. v. 13. A whip for the horse, a bridle for the asse, and many strips for the fooles back. The Lord giue vs wisedome in all things, to God be glory for ever.







THE SICKE MANS SORE. THE SECOND SERMON.

PSAL. 107. verse 18.
Their Soule abhorreth all maner of meate, and they drawe neere the gates of death.
Verse 19.
Then they cry vnto the Lord in their troubles, and hee delivereth them out of their distresses.

_IN my former sermon: (Beloved in the Lord) the cause of the sicke mans sore hath beene declared in these words, that because of their transgressions and because of their iniquities they

are afflicted. Note. I wish from my heart that all sinners could thinke well vpon this, that sinne is the very seede of affliction for the godly, and of fearefull iudgement for the wicked. Note. Every man while he sin|neth thinketh to escape, even as God could bee false: As God is a righteous Lord hee will not suffer sinners to escape vnpunished.
Note.As the shaddow followeth the body, so there is a thing that fol|loweth sinne, which Job calleth a rod,Iob. 9, v. 34. Dan. 5. v. 4, which the wicked man never thinketh of before he hath done: when the lowne hath faulted then is hee beaten: When Belshazzar is drinking, then God is writing his dittay vpon the wall, Note. After the wicked hath sinnsed the hand of Gods justice shall catch him by the hairie scalpe,Psal. 68. v. 21. which shall make all his joynts to tremble.

The particular affliction where|with the sinners of this Text are said to bee afflicted.
NOW according to my divisi|on made in the former ser|mon: It followeth that wee knowe with what particular affliction fools in this text are said to bee scour|ged for their sinnes: The rodde is sickenesse, sore sickenesse, deadly diseases: This is plainely set downe into these words: Their soule abhor|reth all maner of meate, and they drawe neere the gates of death.
The sickenesse as yee see, is not some light trouble, a tooth ache, or an head-worke; as wee say, but a deadly disease declared in these words, Their soule abhorreth all ma|ner of meate, c.
Beholde heere J say the descripti|on of a deadly disease: First it be|gins with want of appetite: after

that the sicke man draweth neere the gates of death.
Note.The first doctrine J obserue heere is,The do|ctrine. towards man, in that hee maketh sickenesse to come before death, that man being forewarned may stryue to bee fore-armed: Behold how God stealeth not a dint vpon these fooles that are heere sicke.
Note.God in justice might strike the sinner dead in an instant, as if hee were an oxe felled with the housle of an axe: If God should slay vs all vpon the sudden, and as we say make vs even shoot to dead, hee should be righteous and we should get shame and confusion of face: But such is the mercy of God that often he forewarnes sinners, making them to sicken by degrees: first by taking away their appetite, and thereafter by making them to ab|horre all maner of meate: then their hands become feeble and their

knees waxe weake as water, thus all their joye by litle and litle doth wither away: After that they are thus warned, God draweth them neere the doores of death: This is Gods custome to send some fore|runners to tell that the decree is co|ming foorth against sinners,Zeph. 2. v. 2. except that they gather them selues, and search them selues for to prevent his judgements: Hee sent vnto Ni|nive his Prophet to giue them a charge of fourtie dayes either to Iona. 3. v. 4. re|pent or to be destroyed: Note. Kings hornings get but commonly fixe dayes, God gaue them fourtie dayes leasure to consider whether it was good or no to returne home againe to God: After that God had sent vnto Jerusalem his Prophets both great and small for to receiue the fruits of his vineyard whom they abused: Hee sent at last his owne Sonne, saying, They will reverence my Sonne, but they killed him, and

cast him out of his owne vineyard as being the heire: yet for all that God would not destroy them: Thereafter hee sent the Apostles to preach,  to doe miracles amongst them, yet for all that they would not repent. Note.After as Joseph their owne wri|ter records they gote warning from God of their woe to come: First a Comete before the destruction of Je|rusalem was seene into the aire, hauing the forme of a sword; for all this they would not yet repent: After that a voice was heard into the temple, saying, Let vs gee out of this place: for all this they would not yet repent: Last of all there was a certaine man that night and day ranne about the temple, crying Voice from the cast, and voice from the west, voice from the four winds: woe to the Citie and to the Temple: As at last he was crying woe vnto me, he was slaine by the cast of some stone, and incontinent thereafter

the temple was burnt and the Ci|tie taken and destroyed. Note. What need J bring testimonies from for|raine nations: haue we not eyes to see what God hath done to Britan? What cryed the famine vnto vs into this land, when in the most glorious streets of this Kingdome it made the poore to fall flatlings to the ground?Psal. 91. v. 6. What cryed the Pestilence that walketh in darkenesse? while the best cities of this land were almost laid waste? And now what cryeth the sword drawen our of the scabert? Can we say but that we are well forewarned?
Note.Though God should come this yeere, and sweepe vs quite away, none of vs can say that our God hath beene too hasty to take vengeance.
Such forewarnings by sickenesse, by famine, by pestilence, by sword, are given to sinners to let the world see that God is true in his oath,

viz. that as hee liueth hee taketh no delight into the death of sinners. Note. But because, if GOD should giue to all such forewairnings the wicked world, yea, the best of vs would become secure: Therefore the Lord often will take away both godly and vngodly into a moment, that every man may be continuallie v|pon his watch, least hee should be taken away vpon the sudden, and so dye without preparation: while the Philistims were seeking to see Samson sport,Iudg. 16 v. 27. the house fell downe vpon them, and they died into an instant:Levit. 10. v. 2 While Nadab and Abihu brought in strange fire before the Lord the fire of God consumed them into a moment:2. King. 1. v. 10. v. 11. Fiftie men with their Captaine, and againe o|ther fiftie men with their Captaine that came to lay hands vpon Eli|as were consumed into an instant with fire from heaven:Iob. 1. v. 19. All Iobs chil|dren were smothered at a feast:

The Aegyptians in their greatest rage against God his people were all drowned into a moment.Ezod. 14 v. 27. Act. 5. v. 5. Ananias and Saphirah shot to dead, while they were lyeing against GOD: Lots wife in an instant was turned into a pillar of salt.Gen. 19. v. 26.Note. All these are set out in scripture to giue warning vnto sinners, not to lippen to the last, as if one Gods mercy at the last gaspe were enough for al their sinnes. Note. Not one of all these fore said persons gote once leasure for to say Lord haue mercy vpon mee.
What can thou tell O man but thou mayst die vnder the fall of an house with Samson  the Philistims? Jt may bee thou be burnt with a blast of powder as Nadab was with fire?Iudg. 16. v. 29. Levit. 10. v. . What if Satan get licence from God to raise a wind, which shall smite the corners of the house, whereby in an instant thou shall be overwhelmed?Exod. 14. v. 21. The LORD may drown thee with the Aegyptians into

the sea. Note. J knew a man in France fall downe dead as hee was washing his hands into the basen, for to goe to dinner after the Communion. I knew a man in Scotland, who died at the dinner hauing the cuppe in his hand not feeling any sicknesse of before. What doe all these cry vnto vs but that we ever be prepared. Note. Is not our lyfe a vapour, a breath into our no|strils, which departeth so soone as the Lord but saith,Iam. 4. v. 14. Isan. 22 Psal. 90. v. 3.The vse. Returne yee children of men? The vse of this for great com|fort to these that are afflicted with long diseases. Note. Yee that haue such sicke persons at home, whose names are prayed for heere, take home to them this comfort, that they are much beholden to Gods mercies that pro|ceedeth in such a maner with them, whereby they may haue tyme to repent and recken with their God, What if God had slaine them vpon an evill thought, word, or worke? * It is a fearfull thing to goe di|rectly

from sin to judgement.Note. Well is the man that hath tyme to craue mercy from his Iudge. Comfort your sicke with this: let them see how they are beholden vnto God for his delays. After that, tell them what hath made them sicke. Note. The Physitians can discourse and tell diverse naturall causes: But alas, this is too sparing|ly told to the sicke that they suffer for their sinnes. The Physitian will say the humour must first be pur|ged: but the Minister must say, sinne must first bee purged.
Many never send for the mini|ster till the physitian can doe no more. This they will verifie, Note. vbi medicus desinit, ibi Deus incipit: where man leaveth off, there God begin|neth. O foole, God should be begun at in thy sicknesse. Seeke first the minister the interpreter one of a thou|sand, that he may cry to God for remission of thy sinnes the cause of thy sicknesse. If this cause bee not

removed, the physitian shall by his drogges waste both thy health and thy wealth. Note. My counsell is, that thou proceede orderly into thy cure: Bee first friends with thy God, and he shall direct the Physitian: Other|wise the tyme shall come that thou shall say to all wordly meanes, as Iob
said to his fectlesse friends:Iob. 13. v. 4. we are all Physitians of no value.
Let vs now visite this sicke man in|to his bed, let vs see what aileth him: my text saith that his soule abhorreth all maner of meate: the He|brew word Taban signifieth proper|ly abomino, that is to abhorre, a|voide or scunner at a thing that standeth against our heart. Note. His sicknesse is so sore, that all sortes of meate stand against his stomack: ewe men in health can eate of all  of meate: Some like not flesh some cae not fish, some abhorre one thing, and some abhorre ano|ther. But for a man to abhorre all

maner of meate, so that he can taste nothing, as the sicke man of my text, it declareth the greatnesse of the disease: This is then the afflicti|on heere sent against man, because of his transgressions his soule abhor|reth all manner of meate, that is GOD taketh the appetite from him.
The doctrine I obserue heere, is this, The do+ctrine.Note. God hath many whips wherewith he can chastise his owne children and scourge the wicked: Let all other plagues be removed, let vs see what GOD can doe to man in matter of meate.
Note.First God can giue thee meate e|nough, and yet scourge thee with such a niggard heart, which like an hungry steward will not vouchafe vpon the stomacke its owne due: Such a man wee call a wretch, or worlds worme, that is feared to eare of the earth least the whole earth bee not sufficient for it.
Note.J compare such a man to a cur|rish dogge, lyeing vpon a heape of hay, that neither can eate himselfe, neither suffer the beast to eate that would eate. * Heere is the plague of povertie, or rather plague of plen|tie, magnas inter opes inops, to bee poore in the middest of wealth.
Note.Secondly God can scourge a man in his meate, when he both giveth him meate and a heart, and a hand to take it, and a stomacke to digest it, but hee beseigeth the heart with hunger, by taking the passage of his throate; there he will set downe a squinacie, crowels, or boils for to hinder all sorte of victuall for to be caried to his enemies that are lying into the heart, rebellious i|maginations that haue lifted vp a banner against the Lord: God will take this passage of the throate,Iudge. 12. v. 5. as Iephre tooke the passages of Jordan for the overthrowe of the Ephra|caits, Note. Thirdly God will giue meate

vnto men, but will take away the strength and foison of it, which is called,Levit. 26. v. 26. to breake the staffe of bread: Ac|cording to this he said to his peo|ple threatning them for sinne, yee shall eate much and shall not bee satisfied, Note. When Gods plague after this maner is on meate, men are like these leane  evill favored kine that Pharaoh sawe in his dreame eate vp the fatre fleshed kine that were fed in a meadow, who after they had fed so fatly,Gen. 41 v. 21. it could not be knowne that they had eaten them, they remained as leane and evill favored as ever they were before. Note. See how God can plague his creatures with leanuesse, even while they feede in fattest medowes. Note. But againe let the Lord bee pleased: let him blesse a little portion were it of pulse, it shall haue greater force to feede thy body then all the Kinges dain|ties with Gods displeasure. Note. Thus Daniel and his fellowes, whose por|tion

was but pulse,Din. 1. v. 15. were fatrer and fatter in flesh then all the children, which didcate the portion of the Kings meate.
Note.Fourthly, God can plague man in meate, when hee suffereth a man to become foolish, either for to tarrowe of his meate, because he get|eth not such meate as he would haue hee wll take no meate at all, and so depriveth him selfe of Gods com|forts: this wee see often into little children. Note. Others more foolishly will make vowes not to eate till they haue done an evill turne, like these Jewes, who banded to|gether, and bound them selves vn|der a curse,At. 23. v. 12. that they would neither eate nor drinke till they had killed Paul: This was Sauls follie, he dis|charged the people all sorte of meate til the battell was ended, he band them vnder a curse: but what came of it? The people vexed with hun|ger, did eate flesh with blood:1. Sam. . v. 37. Thus Gods command was broken by oc|casion

of such a foolish injunction.
Note.Fifthly God can scourge man in meate while he cursed the meate, which man desire against his will: It is said of Israel,Psal. 78. v. 18. v. 19. that they tempted God in their heart, by asking meate for their lust: yea, they spake against God: they said, can God furnish a table in the wildernesse: Thereafter it is said that the Lord heard this and was wroth:v. 21. What did hee into his wrath? By his power hee brought in the south wind.v. 26. Hee rained flesh vpon them as dust: and feathered fowles lyke as the sand of the sea:v. 25. So that they did eate  were filled: But how soone came judgement, the Psalmist sayeth, that while their meates was in their mouths,v. 30 the wrath of God came vpon them and slewe the fattest of them,v. 31. and smote downe the chosen men of Israel.
Behold the end of all their good cheere: Behold how shortly their greening was cooled,
Note.Sixtly God can scourge man in





meate, when hee maketh meate to discord with man: From this is the proverb, That which is one mans meat, is an others mans poyson: It is a righteous thing with God to putte discord betweene man and his cre|atures, when man hath sinned against his God: The least discord between man and food, declareth that man is at feade with his God.
Note.Seventhly, God can afflict man in meat, by withdrawing all meat from man: This is famine, a feare|full plague: Jeremie calleth it a punishment greater then the pu|nishment of the sinne of Sodome:Lam. 4. v. 6.Note.Lam. 2. v. 20. Lam. 2. v. 12. In that famine of Jerusalem the ten|der hearted weemen for lack of bread did eate their children of a spanne long: The little children came to their mothers, crying, where is bread? And after that they swooned and fell downe dead, and their mothers did eate them:Lam. 4. v. 7. These who in tyme of abundance were Nazarits, purer

then the snowe,v. 8. and whiter then milk, in tyme of famine their visage be|came blacker than a cole, their skinne withered, and became lyke a sticke. Jn Samariah two weemen made paction for to eate their two chil|dren, first the one and then the o|ther. Note. Eightly God can scourge man in meat, while hee letteth him eate till hee surfet: Thus when Isra|el lusted after flesh, the Lord gaue them flesh and they did eate vntill it came out at their nostrils:Numb 11. v. 20 v. 23. But while the flesh was betweene their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord wat kindled and smot the people with a very great plague:v. 34. from thence the place was called Kibroth-Hattavah, that is, the graues of lust.
Note.These that surfet either in meat or drink till they sicken are plagued in their meat and drinke:Isa. 5. v. 22. woe vnto them that are mighty to drink wine,  men of strength to mingle strong drinke. Last of all God scourgeth man in

meat, when by sore sicknesse hee maketh a man to losse his appetite, or when he maketh his soule (as my text saith) abhorre all maner of meate.
Note.The Lord in his justice can put a man at variance and discord with that meate, which once hee loved best: yea, hee will sowe such seed of discord betweene man and his meat, that man will bee at deadly feade with his food: yea,  abhorre it, of whatsoever sorte it can bee: were thy fare never so daintie or deli|cate, the Lord can make the soule of the sicke man to abhorre it,
Note.The do|ctrine.The doctrine I obserue heere is, that there is no such loue and friend|ship amongst the creatures, but if the creature offend God, God can set them at variance. * God that put an evill spirit of dissention be|twixt Abimlech and the men of Shechem,Iudg. 9. v. 23. can put stryfe and con|tention betweene a man and the meate hee loveth best. Note. Hee can

make the best meate to be vnto man after he hath abused it, as hee made Tamar to bee to Amnon af|ter his lust was satisffied:2. Sam. 13. v. 15 his last ha|tred was greater then his former loue: Hee abhorred her at last after whom he sickned for lust: Heere is such hatred against meat: Their soule abhorreth all maner of meate: yea, of meat, which once they lusted most after. Note. God will not suffer his e|nemies to haue the vse of his crea|tures. Jf man cast out with GOD, God can make man cast out with his meat: yea, and cast it: yea, and make his drinke to cast him vpon his backe. Note. God may for a space delay, and suffer sinnes to haue a stomacke: But what saith hee into the Psalme? when I see a convenient tyme then will I execute judgement.Psal 37. v. 2. GOD is not slacke while he de|layeth, but hee stayeth till sinne bee ripe.
The vse of this is,The vse. let vs never offend

God in our meat. Note. Let vs beware to make of our bellyes Kibroth Ha|tavab, graues of lust.umb. 11. v. 34 What is a gluttons belly but a graue of lust, wherein hee burieth the good cre|atures of God? Let all men learne heere not to set their affection too much vpon that which shall goe to the draught. Note. He that loveth his meat or drinke better then his God, God shall make him hate his loue: yea, and abhorre it. What is a man given to his belly, but a belly-god? Stinke must hee, whose God is his belly. Fye on the follie of that foole that for meat forsaketh God, and cleaveth vnto his belly, which God one day shall destroy: yea, and shall make of it a nest of wormes. Note. Of|ten in this lyfe hath it beene seene that God hath marked the abused belly with some judgement, for to bee a prophecy of torment vnto o|thers, least they should bee like vn|to them. Note. Gods judgements vpon

others should bee vnto vs, as if a messinger had beene sent from the dead for to giue warning to the gluttons, Brethren, least they also should fall into the like torment.
The second doctrine I gather heere is this:The do|ctrine. It is a great benefite of GOD to man to haue his appetite, so that hee may eate of all maner of meat.
The vse:The vse.Thou hast a stomacke, thanke God for it: abuse it not in gluttonie or drunkennesse: St Paul hath a notable speach:Tit. 2. v. 11. v. 12, viz, that the grace of God hath appeared vnto all men, teaching vs. what is the lesson? That de|nying vngodlinesse, and worldly lusts, we should liue soberly, righteouslie, and godly in this present world. Note. Sober|ly, in regard of our selues: Righte|ously, in regard of our neighbours: and Godly in regard of our God. Note. See how in these three severall dueties, fobrietie is sent before, for to prepare a place in the heart for the

Lord, who can not dwell into an heart full of surfet.
The do|ctrine.The third lesson J obserue heere is, that sinne is the cause which ma|keth a man to losse his appetite.
The vse.The vse.Note. Let every man that sin|deth a decay in this benefite, con|sidder how this euill is come vpon him: I remember of a comfortable laying, which that worthy and lear|ned man my Lord of Plessis Mor|ney, whom I knew in Sanmur, was wont to say concerning the sight of his eyes almost lost,Note. Is say a quel ieu ie les ay pardus; J know (said he) at what play I haue lost them.Note. Hee had worne-them away with great reading: Hee was not bleare eyed as many amongst vs by much drin|king Well is the man that hath such bosome and secret comfortes while hee is afflicted.
Health is a great benefite and would bee meekill made of: Let vs so spend it that while it is spent

wee may haue some comfort to re|member how wee haue spent it.
Seeing my text is of health  of sick|nesse, let mee say something against these that are enemies both of their owne health, and of other mens.
To you first J addresse my speach, who are drinkers of strong drinke,Note. or rather strong in drinking. Men of strength to mingle strong drinke,Isa. 1. V. 22. to scoll as wee say: How call yee such scols?Note. Scols of health. What folie is this, that a man should losse his health by drinking the scolls of health? what sicknesse is this when a man is sick of healths: the very names of this sin declareth the madnesse of men. What meaneth thou  man, to say before a drinke, that will make the sicke: This is to such a mans health? A scoller, whose schoole is the ta|vorne, is not a scholer of Christ that sayes learne of mee.Math. 1 v. 29. J never heard tell that Christ scolled to any mans health: and yet hee is the man that

onely can in all things say learne of me: J will not follow S^t Paul him selfe in all things: hee desired not to be followed in all things: But bee yee followrs of mee, (said hee,) as I am of Christ:Note. Take my counsell O man, follow not the fashions of this world: If thou would bee a man of health be not a drinker of healths.
Note.Bee a scholler of Christ, but bee not a scoller of strong drinke: Drinke soberly, but scoll not.Note. A scoll is a thing sacrificed to idols: viz. to bellyes that are drunken mens gods, belly gods.Note.1 or. 10 v. 27. The counsell of S^t Paul is wise: If any of them that beleeveth not, (saith hee,) bid you to a feast, and yee bee disposed to goe; whatsoever is set before you, eae, asking no que|stion for conscience sake:v. 28. But if any man say vnto you, this is offered in sa|crifies vnto idols, eate not for his sake that showed it, and for conscience sake?
Note.That which hee said of eating that may J say of drinking: Drinke

of any drinke that is set downe be|fore you, but if a scoll come to the table, drinke it not, because it is a sacrifice offered vnto the stinking i|doll of the belly. Let vs not onely flee all evill, but all appearance of evill. Note. What hurt to health such scolls haue bene, the conscience of many will beare mee record: I wish that the force of Gods word could sweepe that out, which mans cor|ruption hath brought in.
Note.When the brasen serpent made by Gods command was abu|sed; good Hezekiah brake it in pee|ces and called it Nehushtan,2. King. 18. v. 4. that is a lumpe of brasse. Seeing scols haue beene so vilely abused, let vs breake them in peeces: away with all ap+pearance of evill: This much con|cerning these enemies of health, who by excessiue drinking, drowne their spirits and the gifts of GOD within them.
There be now another sort of drun|kardsNote.

who spoile their health with reeke and smoke: Tobacca-men, who goe about to smoke the soule out of the body, as if it were a foxe chased out of his hole: this fire may be called as the fire of Nadab was called:Levit v. 1. viz. strange fire. Note. I speake not of the vse but of the abuse of Gods creatures:Note. my reproofe is a|gainst these that spend the tyme with plussing of reeke, which should be better imployed. Note. What count should such firie pipers make to God if death in an instant should feaze vpon them with that fire pipe at their mouth? If God should say to that man, what was thou doeing while I sent my servant death for thee? Will that bee a gratious an|swere: Lord I was spending the tyme that thou gavest mee for repentance, at such and such an exercise. Note. I will not insist against this sinne that was once a great streanger in this land.
Note.Onely this will J say for the pre|sent:

this taking of reeke seemeth to be a gracelesse thing. Jf a man come in into a house and take but a drinke: he wil first pray to God for a blessing
Note.But there is no grace for Tobacca, as if it were not a creature of God: Every creature of God is good,1. Tim. 4. v. 14. and no|thing to bee refused, if it bee received with thanksgiving: Away with such new inventions, whereof the event is this, the soule abhorreth all manner of meate. Away with these creaturs which are nor received with thanks|giving. Let vs now proceede in our text.
And they drewe neere the gates of death.
VVEE haue heard how all the sicke mans appetite, is lost: That which followeth is, that they drawe neere the gates of death.
Note.See how the living man sickneth and decayeth: See how his sinne go|eth

downe by degrees: first he can not eate, after that, all natural strength failing him, hee draweth neere the gates of death: yea, so neere that with Job he is not able to swallow downe his spittle.Iob. 7. v. 19.
The do|ctrine.The doctrine J obserue heere, is, that sicknesse commeth formest,  death followeth after. Note. There is no disease that commeth to a man, but it is like a warning peece of pre|paration for death.
The vse.The vse when ever wee find our ap|petite decay:Note. let vs remember the doores of death.
The do|ctrine.Againe let vs obserue heere that the Psalmist speaketh not heere of any light disease: as of a tooth-ache, or of some little throwing of the bel|ly, but of a deadly disease, wherein all the cunning of the physician is gone.
Note.See what doloures the sinne of man is able to bring vpon him.
Note.Sinne while it is in doeing goeth merrily on, like a ship falling into

calme waters with flaunting failes; but tary till the revenging tempest of Gods wrath come  rush vpon the sinner, and tumble him vp  downe, then is hee forced to know that there bee some great power pro|voked: but let vs see what is vnder|stood heere by the gates or doores of death.
By the gates or doores of death, some vnderstand the graue: when your graues are opened for to re|ceiue your bodies then are the gates or ports of death opened, that yee may enter in. Note. The graue maker is deaths porter. A man is said to bee neere the gates of death, when he is so sicke that there be more appearance of death then of lyfe. Some are so sicke that they must make their Testament: Some are yet neerer: yea, so neere that no hope of lyfe being left, the living will cut off their winding-sheete.
The last yeere,Note. 1 Sep|tember when J came out

of that fever in all mens opinions deadly,Anno 1626. I found my winding sheete cut off, lying in my studie amongst my bookes: In such a case man may well bee said to be neere the gates of death, when at every moment wee thinke that his breath should goe out.
The do+ctrine.In this drawing neere the graue, J obserue also the weaknesse of man.
Note.Were hee never so strong, death at last will drawe him with sicknesse to her portes. Note. Samson for all his force yelded vnto this draught. Let mee dye,Iudg. 16 v. 30. (said hee,) with the Philistims: there is neither force nor bewtie, nor wisdome able to resist this draught. Note. Man in his name may learne his weaknesse: The He|brewes call him Enosh, quasiger di|us  mortifera agritudine in quam  peccatum incidit, that is, from iseases wherevnto hee hath beene made subject by sinne. Note. Eliphaz speaking of mans weaknesse, faith

that wee dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust,Ioh. 4. v. 19. which are cru|shed before the moth. Note. See what an house thy soule,  man dwelleth into: It is but a little lodge so ruinous, that if a moth but creepe vp vpon it with the weight thereof it will be crushed.
The vse,The vse.let no man lippen to his strength or youth. Note. While thou art into thy greatest force, remember that God can cause thee to be cru|shed before a moth, which shall drawe thee perforce in at the doores of death, for to dwell amongst the crawling wormes.
Others by the gates of death heere vnderstand the power that death hath over all the living. Note. They call the power of death, gates of death, quia judicia olim in portis exerceban|tur, because the magistrats in whose hand was the civill power, sat into the portes of the City, while they did exercise judgement. In this sease

Christ said that the gates of hell should not prevaile against his Church:Math. 16. v. 18 By the gates or portes of Hell is to be vnderstood the power of hell: Note. So heere by the gates of death, learned interpreters vnderstand the power of death.
The do|ctrine.The doctrine J obserue heere, is, that great was the power of death before the coming of Christ. Note. It is heere set foorth, as a King or a magistrate, sitting with great power, rule, and dominion. This impire it keept ever till Christ came, who tooke part of our flesh and blood, that through death hee might destroye him that had the power of death,Heb. 2. v. 14. v. 15. that is the devil; and deliver these, who through feare of death were all their lifetyme subject vnto bondage: Let vs remember, then that death before Christs death had portes of power: But so soone as the Captane of our salvation came,Heb. . v. 10. hee cast downe the portes and dang death from the

portes: yea, hee beseiged death: yea, hee overcame death even into the graue, deaths dungeon and strongest hold: yea, not onely that, but also hee put the devill, that had the power of death to such a straite, that hee was forced to quite his castell, for to goe lodge into swine.
The vse of this is our great comfort against the feare of death:The vse. What neede wee now to feare death, see|ing Christ our fastest friend hath conquessed the portes of death.
Note.When a Christian seeth Christ hee groweth bold: yea so, that hee will boast death and the graue, say|ing, O death!1 Cor. 15 v. 55. where is thy sting? O graue! where is thy victorie?
Heere againe I obserue,The do|ctrine. that hee saith, that the sicke fooles drawe neere the gates of death: they drawe neere and yet enter not in. Note. The lesson is this, so long as there is lyfe in a man there is hope: all is not lost that is in perrill:Philip. 2 v. 27. Epaphroditus was sicke nigh

vnto death, yet GOD had mercy on him.
The vse.The vse of this is, so long as there is lyfe in man in sickenesse,Note. let both spirituall and bodily dueties be done: let prayers be made and other law|full meanes sought, whereby the precious lyfe of man may be pre|served: Say not there is no remeed, all hope of lyfe is past, and therefore wee neede not care what bee done to him. Note. Mans extremitie is Gods opportunitie: when man lest looketh for it, GOD at his will can bring backe the sicke man from the doores of death.
The vse.The best vse wee can make of that, that sinners sicken,Note. and at last drawe neere the doores of death, is, that we remember that we all haue this voyage to make. Note. We are all day|ly drawing neerer and neerer vnto death,Eccles. 12. v. 2. vnto our long home, as Salo|mon saith: and therefore the neerer our bodies drawe to the doores of

death, let our soules drawe neerer the portes of Heaven. Note. All things giue vs warning that wee must flit and remoue: thy beard, thy face, thy skinne, thy acquaintance, the season of the yeere: are all crying we are subject to changes. Note. The houres, the dayes, the nights, are all as it were vpon horsebacke posting to their end. Note. The Heavens crye vnto vs our powers are shaken and wee waxe old as doeth a garment:Psal. 102 v. 26. See yee not that sand running out of my houre glasse:Note. Jt cryeth vnto you that tyme is running away with your lyfe: As yee see that sand running out, so is also the tyme of your lyfe run|ning away: and now yee haue neere by an houre of lyfe lesse since J reade my texte: and shortly shall yee goe out with lesse naturall lyfe than yee came in: The Lord increase our spirituall lyfe. J wish J could let you see the vanitie of this lyfe, that yee may learne to looke for a

better. Note. There is a swift motion into man from lyfe to death: My dayes,Iob. 7. v. 6. said Job, are swifter then a weevers shittle: yea, swifter then a post: yea,Iob. 9. v. 2. v. 26. they are swift as ships, as the Eagle that hasteth to the preye. Note. What is man but a broken leafe driven to and fro with dayes of trouble, as with mightie tempests? And yet for all thi, while hee is driving swiftly vnto death he dreameth that he is drawing neere to the doores of life.
Note.Put thy house to an order, yee must make your testament, are fearefull wordes to a naturall man. Note. Most men even while they are a-dyeing de|sire to dreame of lyfe, neither with|out some wrath will they suffer them selues to bee wakned out of this dreame: and yet doe what they can they are ever drawing nearer and nearer the doores of death. I wish that these doores were ofter into our memorie then they are. Note. If yee will take heede and considder, I shall

let you knowe two pages that God hath commanded ever to be watches in man, so long as hee hath lyfe for to advertise him that hee must die: The one is called the pulse, which God hath set into the arme of man, knocking night and day, for to tell him, that at the last knocke hee must enter in at the doores of death.
The other page is called the breath which God hath set into the breast of man:Note. this reciprocation of the breath is like reciprocatio serrae, the drawing to and froo of a sawe.
Note.This breath O man is night and day going to and froo like a savve: man is the tree: when the tree is cutted then must it fall: and where it falleth there shall it lye,Eccl. 11. v. 3. whether in a myre or vpon the cleane: As a man dieth so shall he be for ever: If being well prepared hee enter in at the doores of death, happie shall his lyfe bee for evermore. Note. Yee who

of before did never obserue these two watching pages: the pulse and the breath; take warning by them that dayly yee drawe neerer to the gates of death.



THE SECOND PART. THE SICKE MANS SALVE.
WEE haue hard in the first part of the verses, which wee haue reade concerning the sicke mans sore: Now it followeth that we heare of the second part, wherein is the sicke mans salve: it is contai|ned in these words:v. 19. Then they cry vnto the Lord in their trouble: Hee saveth them out of their distresses:v. 20. He sent his word and healed them: and de|livered them from their destructions. In the words J see tvvo speciall things, first the sicke man crying to God for helpe, secondly GOD delivering the sicke man.
The first is in these words: Then they cry vnto the Lord in their trouble: the second is in these words, Hee saveth them out of their trouble. c. Heere then is both mans part and Gods part: Mans part is in these words, then they cry vnto the LORD: Gods part is in these words, He sa|veth them. c.
Heere first in mans part let vs ob|serue,The do|ctrine. that while hee is neere the doores of death, hee cryeth vnto God for lyfe:Note. where we may learne that it is lawfull for a man, beeing in danger of death to begge his lyfe from his GOD:Isa. 38. v. 10. This Hezekiah did while hee was sicke of his boile: He weept before God in his bed, and besought him that hee would spaire him for a space.Deut. 3 v. 25. Moses had a great desire to liue and to en|ter into Canaan:Psal. 0 v. 24. This was the pray|er of him that compiled the hun|dreth and two psalme, that GOD would yet let him liue: I said O my

GOD take mee not away in the mid|dest of my dayes: In the Kings Psalme the Prophet saith vnto GOD, He asked lyfe of thee, thou gavest it him. I confesse that men had great need to bee wise in this sute: Note. For if a man desire lyfe for to eate  drinke and make good cheere of his pro|visions laide vp for many yeeres, it were better for him to die before such riots. Note. Lord keepe me from the gift of lyfe, except it bee that J may amend my lyfe: lyfe should bee desired that it may bee better spended.
The vseThe vse of this doctrine is, that every man in his sicknesse try, where|fore hee desireth his lyfe. Note. Jf it be for to glorifie God, and to redeeme evill spent tyme, to doe some more good in the world; such a desire is godly: such a request is holy, whe|ther it be graunted or not. Note. Well is the man that hath gotten lyfe, and thereafter so liveth and learneth

to die that hee may dye to liue. Let him whom God hath afflicted with sore sicknesse, and thereafter hath brought even from the doores of death: let him I say learne to be circumspect in his wayes. Note. When Christ met afterwarde with the sicke man, whom hee had cured at the poole of Bethesda, hee gaue him a godly counsell: Behold,Iohn. 5. v. 14. (said hee) thou art made whole: sinne no more lest a worse thing come vnto thee. Note. It is a token of a deadly disease, when the phisicke can not worke.
Againe heere I obserue the sluggish|nesse of mans heart in prayer. The se|cond do|ctrine. He will not pray till hee bee at the ex|tremitie, even at the doores of death:Note. then, and not till then, saith my text, they cry vnto the Lord. Note. Why would they not cry, while they perceived their appetite decaying? why would they not cry, while their soule began to abhorre all maner of meate?Iob. 6. v: 5. Do|eth the wild asse bray when hee hath

grasse? Or loveth the oxe over his fod|der? No not. Note. So long as a man hath the grasse of prosperitie, and the fodder of wealth, hee can nei|ther loue, nor bray, nor pray.
Proverb. 7. v. 3.The young man will not quite the harlot, till a dart strake through his liver. Note. If the vntamed colt be not sore ridden and beat hee can not bee broken: Hard hearts like hard knots must haue hard wedges.
Note.A small wind is notable to fanne away meakell chaffe: A hautie heart will not stoupe for a little distresse. Jt is not the little touch of affliction that will waken a snorting sinner. Except it bee an imperious crosse, which cause him smart, hardly will hee yeeld; so head strong a thinge is sinne.
Note.So long as the Mariners can worke amongt their cordes, they runne, rale, reele, and sweate in the tem|pet: But after that they haue reeled to c fro, and staggered like drunken

men, when all their running is gone, then as it is said in the psalme, they cry vnto the Lord in their trouble:Psal. 107 v. 28. yea, though the ship reele and crack, as thought it should bee crusht:Note. yet Jonas will not waken, till a Pa|gan pull him vp and buffet him with rebukes.Ion. 1. v. 6. what meanest thou O sleeper? Arise call vpon thy God.
The vse. The vse.Note.While God giveth vs warning by any disease, let vs take it as a precept of warning from GOD, and prepare our selues for death.* Jt is to bee too venturous not to cry till thou be at the doores of death: that is, to put craig in per|rill: wise Salomon forbiddeth a man to delay a day. Note.Proverb 7. v. 1 This was his watch|word: Boast not thy selfe of to mor|rowe, for tho knowest not what a day may bringe foorth: Age hodie quod moriturus agas, Doe that to day that thou would desire to bee doing in the day of thy death.
But alas! what order for all this

haue wee taken with our soules, though wee know not how neere wee are to the doores of death? Who amongst vs can say with the Psalmist,Psal. 108 v. 1. My heart is prepared, my heart is prepared? Alas for our heart, it is like the field of the sloathfull,Note. and like the vineyard of the man voide of vnderstanding:Proverb 24. v. 31 I went by it (saith Salomon,) and loe it was all growen over with thornes, and nettles had covered the face thereof. Our hearts for the most part are either pricked with the thornie cares of the world, or burnt so with the burning net|tles of lust, that we remember not our latter end. Note. So soone as wee come out of the burning nettles of youth, wee fall into the pricking thornes of worldly cares, the sick|nesse of colde and olde age.
Except that wee take heede to our selues in tyme, our damnation shall come, as one that travaileth,  our destruction like an armed man.
Note.For this cause, let every man rouse vp him selfe at the first touch of affliction, and no more put the Lord, as it were to paines, for to stretch out his arme still. Why should yee bee striken any more?Isa. 1. v. 5, said God to his people: Note. Though God spare man in his sinnes for a space, yet at last shall hee not disdaine to bee crossed of dust  asses. Note. I will tell thee  man, that if thou sit the Lords first summonds, Hee vvill send to thee a new charge, which shall make thy griefe to grow.Levit. 26. v 81. If yee walk stub|bornly against mee, (said the LORD) I will bring seven tymes more plagues vpon you according to your sinnes: If seven will not worke, God hath seventie seven at his command, every one readier than another, to say with that spirit, send me. Jf for the gentle corrections of his rodde thou will not turne, Hee shall scourge thee with scorpions, till hee cause thee cy: If a sinner overcome a little

affliction, and come out of it, not being bettered thereby, Gods armie shall bee stretched out still by some greater judgement. After that Ha|naniah had broken the yoke of wood, which was about Ieremiah his ecke, for to bee a token of a great judgement, God commanded to tell Hananiah,Ier. 28 v. 13. Thou hast broken the yokes of wood, but thou shalt make for tm yokes of yron.Note. If yokes of wood can not daton stif-necked sin|ners,Note. the Lord shall change wood into yron: malo nodo malus cune|us, for a hard knot he can make a hard wedge: nill wee will we, God will haue his blowes felt.
Th 3 doctrine.Againe heere in that a sicke man at the doores of death, is said to cry to God, I obserue a powerfull work|ing of the spirit of God in his owne children. Note. While they are at the doores of death and can not speake vnto man for weaknesse, yet are they said to cry vnto the Lord.
Note.At such a tyme all the force of nature is spent, and words are said to be swallowed vp:Iob. 6. v. 3. yet such are said heere to cry vnto the Lord. Where|frae commeth this force to cry? Not from nature: It is from the spirit within. Note. While the godly man is at his last gaspes, and hath layd speach before men, even then is a voice of power within him, crying through the heavens vnto God.
The vse.The vse.Note. In confidence of Gods assisting power, let vs comfort our selues against the houre of death, the houre of our greatest weaknesse: Heere is the ground, while all na|turall strength will faile his owne children, yet Gods strength will not faile them:Psal. 73. v. 26. My flesh and my heart faileth (said David,) but God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever. What can make a man cry at his last gaspes, but this strength of GOD in the heart?Note. This is a great mercy, that while there is no

force in nature to make a man but speake vnto man, there shall be into his heart a spirituall force, which shall make him cry vnto his God. The wicked also,Note. when they drawe neere the doores of death, will cry vnto the Lord: that is, they will gaspe, gaze, grinne, glowre, and grone: yea,Iob. 3. v. 24. powre out their roarings as waters: And such is the great mercie of God that for plaine pittie he will grant vnto the wicked man his lyfe. So hee pittied Ahab clothed with sacke|clothe, hauing nothing but the out|ward skinne of repentance: Because the Lord sawe him rent his cloaths and put sackcloth vpon his flesh,  fast, and lye in sackcloth, hee said to Elijah,1 King. 21. v. 29 Seest thou how Ahab hum|bleth him selfe before mee? Therefore I will not bring the evill in his dayes: See what God did to a wicked man but outwardly humbled. Note. Such is the mercie of our God, that hardly can hee punish sinners in his justice.
Note. As he did to Ahab, so will hee doe to a wicked sicke foole: when he heareth him groaning, and seeth him gaping for lyfe, lyke a hungry dogge gaping for a smush bone, he will cast vnto him that bone of life, and let him gnawe vpon it for a number of yeeres. Note. The wicked man loveth not God, but looketh for health as a dogge will looke for a bone that hee seeth into a stran|gers hand: as the dogges eye is ever vpon the bone, and not vpon the stranger, so is the wicked mans eye ever vpon his lyfe and not vpon God. Note. When the dogge hath got|ten the bone, he runneth to some corner and gnaweth vpon it, and never regards any more the stran|ger that cast it to him: even so the wicked man, as it were, gnaweth vpon a number of yeeres, which God hath cast to him, but after he hath once gotten that which hee glowred so meekill for, he looketh

no more vpon God.
The gift of naturall lyfe as J see is a gift both given to the godly and the wicked: they will both come to the doores of death, and God will bring them backe againe to lyfe. Note. But wouldst thou knowe whether or not thou hast gotten that gift in mercy or but for a greater judgement? Trye whether or not thou amendeth thy bygone lyfe. If thy loue be greater to God then of before: If thou de|pends more vpon his providence then of before: Jf thou walke more circumspectly, and more carefully into thy calling then of before: Jf thou make greater conscience of thy thoughts then of before thou did of thy words and workes: If that bee, well is thee; The Lord in mercy hath added as vnto Hezekiah that tyme to thy dayes. Note. But if af|ter thou hast made so many faire promises to God in thy sicknesse: so many vowes to redeeme that

evill spent tyme: yet if after thou hast gotten health, thou forget thy miserie and remember it, as waters that passe away, and so returne to thy old bayas againe to bee friends with thy old sinnes, neglecting thy for|mer vowes; assure thy selfe that thy lyfe is prolonged but for a curse, that thou may see the evill to come:Isa. 57. v. 1 Isa 63. v. 4.
Note.Though God spare the wicked for a space, yet the day of vengeance is in his heart. God is fully mynded to breake him vvith his tempest,  to make him perish, like his owne dung for ever. Note. A vvicked man in his greatest glory is like Amalcke of vvhom Balaam prophecied, saying Amaleke was the first of nations,Numb. 4. v. 20 but his latter end shall bee that hee perish for ever. Note. Many never vveepe for sinne till their soule is in hell.
The 4 doctrine.Againe heere obserue to vvhom the sicke fooles are said to crye: i is to the Lord: Then they cry vnto the Lord. Heere vve haue to learne to vvhom

wee should cry in our trouble: Jt is vnto the Lord.August. in sal. 74. S^t. Augustine saith very well: Nn est quod fugias  Deo irato, nisi ad Deum placatum: there is no refuge from an angry God, but vnto God being pacified: whom haue I in Heaven but thee?Psal. 37. v. 25. Ier. 17. v. 5. v. 6. said David. Cur|sed be the man, (saith Jeremie,) that trusteth in man, and whose heart de|parteth from the Lord: for hee shall bee like the heath in the wildernesse, and shall not see when GOD commeth: But blessed is the man that can say to God with Jeremie,Ier. 17. v. 7. thou art my hope in the day of evill.
The vse.The vse, let vs learne wisdome at these sicke fooles come to their witts againe: In all our distresses let vs runne to the LORD. Note. Who is so powerfull to helpe as hee? who is so mercifull to helpe as he? It shall therefore be our best in the tyme of out prosperitie to make our acquain|tance with him,Note. that in affliction wee may the more boldly goe and

cry for his helpe. * If God bee a stranger vnto vs, wee will thinke shame to imploye him: but if he be our friend,Proverb. 18. v. 24The 5 doctrine. wee shall finde that of Salomon to be true, There is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother.
Againe in that the afflicted are said heere to cry vnto the Lord,Note. but not vntill they bee so straited with sick|nesse that there is no more appea|rance of lyfe: J obserue the profite of affliction: yea, of sorest sicknesse: It is a powerfull meanes for to chaise a man home to his God. Note. While the Mariners of the ship, wherein Jonah was, perceived the tempest arise,Ionah. 1. v. 5, they were busy in doing what men could doe: they cast out the wares that were in the ship to lighten it of them, but seeing that the sea wrought still and was more and more tem|pestuous, they tooke them to their prayers: Every man cryed vnto his God.Note. When their Gods could not answere they wakened sleeping Io|nas,

who should haue beene the cock of the ship for to craw day vnto o|thers: him they exhorted to cry  to try what his God could doe: Arise, said the poore pagan,v. 6. Call vpon thy God, if so bee that hee will thinke vpon vs that wee perish not.
There was no crying vnto God in|to that ship, vntill the ship was like to bee broken: Jn the great distresse the pagans that knewe not God be|fore, seeing the perill, boasted the Prophet to his prayers, saying, what meanest thou O sleeper! Arise and call v|pon thy God? Note. When there is no ap|pearance of helpe from any creature, then men are forced to runne to God.
Note.So long as man can see a crea|ture, that can helpe him, hee will runne to it as to his best refuge. Note. Jf hee be mynded to conquesse houses or lands, hee will cry vnto his cof|fers: Come out thousands of silver  gold and buy this: But if he be drow|ned into debe, and cast into pri|son,

then and there he will cry vn|to the Lord. Note. So long as the forlorne sonne had a pennie into his purse, he thought never of home; but when he was forced to feede with the swine, he said,Luk. 15 v. 7. I will returne to my father a|gaine. Note. So long as wee haue peace in our land, and Barnes full of corne and purses full of money, we ly in securitie lyke these of Lish:Iud. 18. v. 7. But if the foraine enemy come and depriue vs of such comforts, then we shall crye vnto the Lord. Note. So long as Ieho|shaphat in the battell sawe his partie to be equall, he fought as he could: But so soone as hee sawe him selfe neere straited by the enemie,1 King. 2. v. 32 then hee cryed vnto the Lord. Note. So long as Hagar had water into the bottles, she and Ismael dranke together, en|joying the creature: But so soone as all was spent, then she weept and cryed vnto the Lord. Gen. 21. v. 16.Note. So long as the Raven can find a fleshy carion, hee will quietly feede vpon it: But

while hee is straited with hunger, hee beggeth his meate from God:Psal 104 v. 21. The young Lions, (saith the Psalmist) roare ater their prey: and seeke their meate from God. Note. All things, men, beasts, fowles: yea, Papists in their greatest pinch are forced to quite all other vaine hopes for to cry vnto the Lord.
Note.I remember that in the tyme of the French persecution, J came by sea to Flanders, and as I was sailing from Flanders to Scotland, a fearfull tempest arose, which made our Mariners reele to and fro,Psal. 107 v. 27. and stag|ger like drunken men: In the meane tyme, thre was in our ship a Scots papist, who lay neere me, while the ship gaue a great shake, his ordina|rie cry was O Lord: J observed the man, and after the Lord had sent a calme, I said to him, Sir, now yee see the weaknesse of your religion: so long as yee are in prosperitie, yee cry vnto this Sainct and that Sainct; Jn our greatest danger J heard you

cry often, Lord, Lord, but not a word yee spake of our Lady. J compare a Papist in his pilgrimages to crea|tures, to a sheepe that is hunted of a flie: it runneth from bush to bush: every bush catcheth a lck, till the silly sheepe bee threed-bare and tir|red of all his fleece, sinne lyke a cleg-flee maketh the soule to startle like a beast: there is no sure refuge but in God. Away then with Papistrie and with all that draweth a man from the Lord vnto any other: The high|est point of tribulation, or some great danger of death, wakning a man, will tell a man that there is none that can helpe but the Lord, and that hee onely is to bee called vpon: Call vpon mee in the day of trouble, (said the Lord:) Whom haue I in heaven but thee? said the Psal|mist: All things are for the Lord, and from the Lord, and all things in their troubles must come to the Lord, as the hunger-bitten Aegip|tians

came all to Joseph for meate. Thus yee see the great good of gree|vous afflictions: They chase the cre|ature till it cry to the Creator: I will goe,Hosea 5. v. 15. (saith the Lord,) and returne to my place, till they acknowledge their offence, and seeke my face: In their affli|ction they will seeke mee early. This is heee declared in these words of my text, Then they cry vnto the Lord in their trouble.
The vse.The vse, let vs rejoyce in tribulati|on, seeing God hath made it a spnrre vnto prayer. Note. Man is like waters: Putrescunt ni movcantur aquae, waters spill and stinke if they stand without any motion; so will the soule stinke without affliction. Before I was affli|cted, (said David,) I went astray, but now I learne thy statutes: Indeede it is true,Heb. 12 v. 11. that no affliction for the present seemth to bee joyous but grievous: Ne|verthelesse afterward it yeeldeth the pcable fuit of righteousnesse to these that are exercised thereby.
Note.This is a quiet fruit of righteous|nesse when the soule is moved to cry vnto God. Cryes in prayer vnto God are the quietnesse of righteous|nesse. I confesse that both the wicked and the godly will crye in their di|stresse: but the wicked cry like dogs beaten with a staffe: the godly crye into their hearts, like children with Moses, to whom God said, why cry|est thou vnto mee? Let vs praye the Lord that hee would rouze vp these sleepie soules of ours that sleepe so oftin sinne, like Jonah in the hatches: Note. Well is the man to whom God shall send some affliction crying to the sinner as the Ship-master cryed to Jonah:Ion. 1. v. 6, what meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, crye and call vpon thy God. Note. It is goode that man while hee is fore|warned by any affliction strive to bee friends with his God. Men may re|bell for a space, and may turne the grace of God into wantonnesse, yea and harden their hearts with Pharaoh

against his plagues: But at last when all their excellencie is swept away like a spiders web,Iob. 4. v. 21. as Eliphaz sayeth, they die without wisdome: As a man liveth ordinarly, so dieth hee: Noe. He that liveth a foole shall readily die without wisedome: a fore-warning affliction doeth goode to the godly man: it maketh him to be fore-ar|med: But as for the wicked man though God send sicknesse after sick|nesse, and delaye his death, yet hee is not a whit the better. Note. But while hee liveth hee letteth the debt run on, like a spender or waster, who carelesly puts more and more vpon the score. Jt were good for the wic|ked that hee had never beene borne, as Christ said of Iudas:Mat. 2. v. 2. or that hee had died in the birth: yet seeing life in itselfe is a benefite, while it is a|bused by those that have gotten it by crying vnto the Lord, it is righ|teous with God to punish them in rigour for the abuse of his bene|fite,

which should have beene to them a large time well imployed in repentance, where-with as with a brush they should have clensed their hearts from the scailles of wicked|nesse.
Againe heere some may obiect, how is it that the godly man beeing sicke,Obiectio~ and neere the doores of death shuld cry so earnestly for life? Should not a godly man bee glad to goe to GOD his Father,Eccl. 12. v. 5 Psal. 16. v. 11. to his long home, where are pleasures for evermore?
What see wee heere, but the back-parts of Iehovah? Are wee not in this world as David was in Kedar,Ps. 120. v 5. and in Meshech, or as Israel were captives in Babilon? Is not this earth a strange land,Ps. 137. v. 4. wherein wee can not sing the praises of our God? Are not our Harpes heere hung vpon the willowes?v. 2. Our Musick is dumbe.
I answere that indeede if the godly well prepared as they should bee when sicknesse commeth vnto them,

they would not crye for health of body: but their chiefe crye should bee,Rev. 22, v. 20. Come Lord Iesus, come, and fetch a|way my soule that panteth after thee like a chaed Hart,Ps. 4. v, 1. desiring the rivers of waters: The chiefe desire of a god|ly heart is all in this wish,v. 2. when shall I come and appeare before God? Item, I desire to bee dissolved, and to bee with Christ.
Note.But for some reasons the most godly whiles will seek life from God: some desire to live, because they de|sire yet to doe some better service for God, than hitherto they have done: they are sorie that in their cal|ling they have not beene so busie as it became them to bee: the desire of their life is onelie that they may redeeme the time by dooing some one good turne or other for their God.
Note.Jn my iudgment this chieflie made Hezekiah to weepe,Isa. 38. v. 14. to croude, and to chatter while hee heard the mes|sage of death. This chiefly made

the Psalmist crye,Ps. 102. v. 24: Take mee not away in the midst of my dayes.
* Others even of the number of the godly will crye for life, because they finde not themselves so well prepared for to come before the face of their Iudge: they see that as yet they have not put the affaires of their Soule to an order.
It is likelie that this also made He|zekiah to weepe so fore, that he chat|tered at the words of the messinger of death: God by Isaiah bade him put his house in order:2. King. 20. v. 1. if that had beene already done it had not need|ed Gods command: seeing then his house was not set in order, which is but an easie matter, it would seeme that his soule was not so set in order as that hee found it ready to com|peare before the iudgment seat of God: O how fearefull is that tribunall for an vnprepared soule! Note. What ter|rours are these, sinne, and sicknesse, death, the grave,  an vnprepared soule.
The vse.The vse of all this is seeing there is nothing more certaine than death, and nothing more vncertaine than the time and place thereof, let vs e|ver be vpon our guarde ready to flitte and remove out of our tabernacles of clay:Iob. 4. v. 19. My time is in thine hand said Da|vid:Ps. 31 v. 16. Wee cannot tell how soone our glasse shall end. Note. Let vs therefore resolve with Hezekiah in all the way of our pilgrimage,Isa. 38. v. 15. to goe softly in the bitternesse of our soule.
The do|ctrine.Againe, in that it is said that the sicke men cry vnto the Lord in their trou|ble let vs observe the perversnesse of our nature. Note. Troubles make vs to crye, bodily afflictions rouze vs vp to crye: but alas while wee sinne we keepe silence: while the Thiefe is cut|ting a purse hee is quiet: but while hee is scourged for his fault, hee will shoute for every stripe:Note. While Satan is forcing vs with his tentations to offend our God, wee often yeelde therevnto without any crye to our

God: Jt is then especially that wee shoulde crye vnto him when wee finde sinne comming against vs to force vs to offend our God.Note. God in his word hath set downe a notable Lawe for a Damsell betrothed to a husband: I will let you heare the Law.
If a Damsell,Deut. 22 v. 23. saith the Lord, that is a virgin bee betrothed to an husband, and a man find her in the Citie, and lye with her:v. 24. Then yee shall bring them both out to the gate of that Citie, and yee shall stone them with stones that they die: the Damsell because shee cryed not: and the man because hee humbled his neig|boures wife.v, 25. But if a man finde a be|trothed Damsell in the field, and the man force her, and lye with her: then the man only that lay with her, shall die. But in the Damsell there is no sinne worthie of death:v, 27. for hee found her in the field, and the betrothed Damsell cryed, and there was none to save her.
Now what is to bee inferred vpon

this? This is the matter. Note. The soule of a Christian is as a Damsell, a vir|gin betrothed vnto Christ the blessed Bridegrome of our soules:Iob. 3. v. 27. Sathan the tempter is like a Russian comming to force and defile this Damsell: Jf the soule crye not while Sathan is vsing violence, the Soule and Sathan shall die: the soule because it cryed not, and Sathan because hee forced the Soule: But if while Sathan is v|sing violence rhe soule cry vnto God for help, then Sathan shall only die: yea though in that case the soule in something should bee defiled, yet shall shee not die, because she cry|ed vnto the Lord.
The vse. Note.The vse of this is, that whensoever wee shall perceive Sathan comming with force for to deflore, or defile our soule Christs Damsell, we incontinent crye with all our force vnto GOD. Lord help mee: Lord leade mee not into tentation: O God of my m prevent mee and keepe m from these snares: bee

thou a shelter for mee, and a strong tower from the enemie. This was Pauls do|ing when hee feared to bee forced with that bodie of death, hee cry|ed,Rom. 7. v. 24. Miserable man that I am who shall deliver mee from this body of death?
Note.This was the practise of Joseph while his Mistresse saide to him; lye with mee;Gen. 39. v. 9 hee cryed vnto God. How should I doe this wickednesse; and sinne against God?
* Hee that will not crye to God before hee sinne, Gods plagues at last shall cause him crye for his sins.
* Well is that man and that wo|man, that can crye to God for to save them from the houre of tenta|tion,Note. If a Damsell was forced in the fielde, her sinne was not thought worthye of death: because it was supponed that shee cryed, but that there was none to help her. But it is not so with our soule, whe|ther it crye in the Citie, or in the field: if shee cry shee shall find that

there is a God for to help her, and therefore if shee be forced, shee can have no excuse: Well is that soule that is continually crying to God in prayer. Note. Jf a palliard knowe that a woman will crye hee will feare to make an onset: but if hee see her smyle, hee knoweth that hee hath found his match: It is so with Sa|than that great palliard, and the soule of man. If Sathan knowe thy soule to bee a crying soule, a soule that will tell all his tetations to Christ her husband, hee will feare to tempt that soule: Satan is feared for Christ, hee beleeveth and hee trembleth.Iam. 2 v, 19 But if hee see a soule that is quiet,Note. a soule that heares his filthie language and smileth vpon him with a wan|ton eye, there the vncleane Spirit knoweth that hee hath founde his match.
Note.Well is that soule that Sathan finds weeping for offending Christ her husband. Note. O what a difference

is betweene a soule whose eyes are drumly with teares of repentance and a soule whose eyes are wanton' light and smyling, eyes filled with spirituall adulterie?Note. Remember this vse O man, when ever Sathan shall come to tempt thee vnto sinne, then crye thou vnto the Lord vnto Christ thy husband, and Sathan that filthy Russian shall flie awaye in haste: so long as wee breath let vs pray that the Lord would lead vs into the land of righteousnesse.Ps. 143. v. 10
Last of all,The do|ctrine. in that these that are troubled crye to God, J observe a comfort for these that crye in trou|ble: when a man can once crye to God in his trouble, it is a token that God shortly will deliver. Note. One that is pined with the stone gravell, so long as hee but whineth for the dif|ficultie hee hath in making water, the Surgeon will not cut him, but will say let him bee till hee crye: from the time once hee beginneth to cry

then is it time to cutt: that once done he is delivered from his paine.
NoteThere is in man a stone harder than the Stone of the bladder, viz. the stone of the heart: The heart stone is of sinne: the bladder Stone is but of sand. Sinne gravell is a stone gravell: for hardnesse there is no flint so hard as a hard heart.Note. As the Stone gravell is from sand, one pickle ioyning to another, till at last manie pickles beeing knit together in a lumpe become a confirmed stone; even so the heart gravell is from one sinne joyned to another, till they be in an huge number toge|ther like a cluster. At last in length of time by custome they harden toge|ther: from thence is the confirmed stone of the heart. Note. So long as this stone is not very painefull in affliction, but onely maketh the sin|ner to whine, the Lord will let that sinner suffer still: for a space hee will delay his cure: but if once the

paine bee so that it cause the sinner to cry, God that most cunning Sur|geon will cut out the cause of his cry.
Note.Behold the trueth of this into my text, Then they cry vnto the Lord: there is the cry: and he delivereth them: there is the cure.
The vse:The vse.Let vs try our soules in trou|ble whither they cry or but whine: if the soule but whine in afflictions, it is a token that deliverance is yet far off but if the soule once begin to crye, God is ready to deliver.Note. By our pray|er to God we shall know the mind of our God in our troubles,  the wor|king of our afflictions:.Note. In this crying to God there is a great difference, the wicked cryeth more for his sore than his sinne: the godly man cryeth more for his sin than his sore. Note. So to doe is not the practise of a prentise. The Lord teach vs both how wee should cry to our God, and wherfore chiefly we should cry. To God bee glorye for ever, Amen.


A SHORT MEDITATION against mans securitie in life.
Note.AS intensive colde in time of frost maketh water to congeale and bindeth all vp; so that the earth is neither fit for plowing, or sowing: so into the hearts of manie there is a frost, yea a lying frost, so that the fallow ground of their heartes can|not bee riven vp.Note. An excessive cold at Gods service stayeth the pleugh of Gods grace. Note. Yee all woulde thinke it an vncouth thing to see pleughsly in frost in the moneth of May, and yet more into August.
Note.The yeere is but of the age of twelve monethes, Maye is but the youth thereof: and yet if in that mo|neth there should bee no appea|rance of fruites, what would you thinke of such a yeere? Note. And yet alas many of vs who have past the June, yea the August of our age are as yet frozen in the dregges of our

sinnes, as though the beames of Christ the Sunne of righteousnesse had never shined vpon our soules.
Note.What is this that wee cannot remember our mortalitie? * One sythe cutteth down both Prince and people.Note. How manie Kings of this land are dead, and but one alive? The rest are gone for to give account how they have swayed the scepter, when they sustained the person of God. Note. All the glorie of the grea|test, except they bee godly shall pe|rish like the snuffe of a candle that is trodde vnder-foote. Let vs there|fore so live to die, that wee maye die to live. Note. If wee digge not the Myne we shall never find the trea|sure. Note. If wee could lay this to our heart, wee should bee swifter than Hazael in running to our God.




THE SICKE MANS SALVE. THE THIRD SERMON.

Psal. 107. v. 19.
Then they cry vnto the Lorde in their trouble: hee saved them out of their distresses.
V. 20.
Hee sent his word, and hea|led them, and delivered them from their destructions.

_IN my former Sermon it hath beene declared, what the sicke fooles did while they were neere the doores of death: it is saide: Then they cryed vnto the Lord: Jn this Sermon wee shall heare Gods part: It is in these words

ee saved them out of their distresses: hee sent his word and healed them: and de|livered them from their destructions.

The division of these words.
Jn these wordes I see two things: first, God after hee hath heard af|flicted sinners saveth them, and de|livereth them out of their distresse: secondly, it is set downe by what meanes hee delivered these sicke persons, in these wordes, hee sent his word and healed them, and delivered them from their graves, or destructi|ons.
The do|ctrine.As for that it is saide in the first part of my dyes Text, that God saved these sicke out of their distresses J observe the great mercie of God: there is no sinne, or sicknesse I see so great, but if the sicke sinner can crye to him, God hath mercie for him: as it is of sicknesse, so of all other affliction. If man can crye vnto God,Note. God is readie to send

succour. This Moses declared well vnto Jsrael:Deut. 4. v. 27. The Lord, said hee, shall scatter you among the nations, and yee shall bee left few in number: and there yee shall serve gods,v. 23. the workes of mens handes, wood and stone, which neither heare nor see, nor eate nor smell: there is Gods iudgment against mans sin: But shall the LORDS arme bee stretched out still? Will not God bee any more mercifull? heare what is subioyned:v. 9 But if from thence thou shalt seeke the Lord thy God thou shalt find him, if thou seeke him with all thy heart, and with all thy soule. Note Manie a time had the sicke fooles of my text offended his Majestie, yet here is mercie; they cryed: and hee saved.
Note.God sometimes indeed while hee hath beene often provoked by the sinnes of men after diverse delive|rances, will seeme to bee more hard to bee intreated, that men maye beware to be relapses from such he will hide his face for a space: Verily, said

Jsaiah,Exod. 33 v. 6.thou art a God that hideth thy self, O God of Israel the Saviour: hee may hide himself for a litle, but not long.Note. While hee heareth the heart-cryes of his creature, hee is forced to draw the curtaine, and shew him|selfe vnto it.
Note.He that forbade man to hide him|self from his owne flesh, can not long deny himselfe to a sicke sinner cry|ing in his distresse. Of this we have a notable speach in the Psalme, I sought the Lord and hee heard mee,Psal. 34. v. 4. delivered mee from all my feares: They looked vnto him, and were lightened, and their faces were not ashamed.v. 5. Now let vs see the kirnell of that comfort in the verse following;v. 6. This poore man cryed, and the Lord heard him; and sa|ved him out of all his troubles. Note. Be|hold a progresse of seeking, and of deliverance: first hee sought God: secondly he looked vnto God: third|ly the poore man cryed: So first God mett mans seeking with deli|verance

from the feare of trouble, secondly, while man looked vnto him hee made him to bee inlighte|ned, so that hee knew both who did afflict, and wherefore hee did afflict him. But last of all, while God saw this sinner humbled like a poore man and heard him crye, then hee saved him from his troubles. This poore man cryed, saith the Psalmist, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles. See how the Lord at the first saved him not from all his troubles, but by degrees till hee cryed vnto him like a poore man crying for an almes. Note. The harder health is more come by, the more it is set by: a disease easily cured, is easily in|curred. The sooner a sinner bee hel|ped, if hee returne againe to his sinnes, hee shall find God the slow|er to come to his helpe againe: God will let him seeke and looke and cry, yea, and crye againe to teach him better manners.
This wee see in the booke of Iudges to have beene Gods doing with Isra|el. Note. The Israelites beeing oppres|sed by the Philistimes, and Ammo|nites in their miserie they sought vnto God: they looked vnto him: yea, and they cryed: but what an|swere got they at the first? God sent them vnto their false gods at the first and yet vpon their repentance hee hee pittied them: The wordes are so weightie that they are worthie to be heard: these be they euen as they were writen by Gods pen-man: when the Israelites sawe that they were so sore afflicted by their ene|mies, it is said:Iudg 10. v. 10 They cryed vnto the Lord, saying, wee haue sinned against thee, both because we haue forsaken our God; and also serued Balaam: let vs now heare what answere God made vnto them:v. 11. Hee said vnto them, Did I not deliuer you from the Egyptians, and from the Ammorits and from the Children of Ammon, and from the Phi|listimes?

The Zidonians also,v. 12 and the Amalelikites, and the Maonites did oppresse you, and yee cryed vnto mee, and I deliuered you out of their hands:v. 13. yet ye hae forsaken mee and serued other Gods: Behold their relaps: what saith the Lord to that?v. 14. I will deliuer you no more: Goe and crye vnto the Gods which ye haue chosen, let them deliuer you in the time of your tribulation heare what a hard answere: Now what did the Jsraelites?v. 15. They said to God, We haue sinned, doe thou vnto vs whatsoeuer seemeth good vnto thee, deli|uer vs onely we praye thee this day: as if they should haue said Lord but for this one time: Thus after they had cryed they amended their life by putting away the strange Gods from among them and serued the Lord: what did God then? Note. It is said that his soule was grieued for the miserie of Israel:v. 16. So at last they got help, but after many prayers and after the amendement of their life. O

the great mercy of our God!Iob 7. v. 20. The vse. O the preseruer of man!
Let vs make vse of this by ap|plying it to our present purpose which is concerning these that are so sicke that they seeme to bee neere the doores of death Note. While God delayeth to bring them from their sicknesse notwithstanding of all their prayers, and of all our pray|ers private or publicke, let vs not grudge, neither let the sicke mur|mure. God while hee delayeth their health, hee as it were sayeth to them,Iudg. 10. v. 13. as hee said to Israel, I will deliver you no more: yet if the poore patient persist to murne before him God will not faile to give him full contentment at last. Note, God afflicteth not willingly the children of men: no not: his soule often is grieved for the miserie of Israel. Note. How can hee but deliver repenting sinners, seeing their miserie grieveth his verie soule?
It is not wonder that God repen|ted

himselfe to have made man, be|cause that hee is the chiefe matter of his griefe. Note. As for the Devils they grieve GOD by their sinnes; but he is not grieved for their torments: God gladly shall cause scourge them with scorpions: Note. But as for his owne children heere hee is grieved, and grieved againe, first for their sinnes but most for their sufferings: hee is grieved for their sinnes, as a father for his childrens faults: and againe he is grieved to strike them. Note. Last of all hee is most grieved after that hee hath striken them. Note. These bee won|derfull wordes, his soule was grieued for the miserie of Israel: God that for|gave David his sinne could as gladly have spared him in his iudgments: but the wicked were looking on wondred how God did spare: and therefore or his honour, and for his names sake he could not let David go vnpunished: So soone as David had said,2. Sam. 12. v. 13 I have sinned against the Lord:

Nathan answered that the Lord had put away his sinne: but as for afflicti|ons and troubles hee could not put them awaye, because by that deede hee had giuen great occasion to the ene|mies of the Lord to blaspheme.v. 14. Note. Jf all the wicked were blind God would often spare to afflict his Children.

An obiection.
Heere some may obiect and saye that this our Text is not ever true: Js it not cleare that God delivereth not all men from the gates of death, though they cry vnto him?


The answere.
It is certaine that it is not aye done: Note. For if men by crying to God were ever brought backe from the doores of death; death should bee a rare thing among men. Note. If life could bee had for crying to GOD, the World should be deafned with din: for all that a man hath he will giue it for his life Jt is but one of a thou|sand that can say with S. Paul I desire

to be dissolued: what then shall we say to our Texte wherein is said that when the sicke man cryeth then God deliuereth? Note. Surely this is not euer done, but if it be once done to a man in his life, they be fewe here of anye age but once in their lifetime God hath brought them from the doores of death: If God once hath done this to thee by thy owne experience subscribe to the trueth of my Texte.
Note.Neither doth my Text say that this is done to all, left that anye should beguile himselfe, saying, I may sinne, seeing as yet I haue neuer bene so sicke as to be at the ports of death: before J die I must first be neere these portes and be broght backe againe to health and so shall liue a space and afterward die: No not, God hath not astri|cted himselfe by promise to anye that he shall get but an houres sicknesse before he die.Levit. 20.1. If a Nadab and an

Abihu come in with strange fire be|fore the Lorde,Act. 5 9.3. Numb. 16. v. 32 Note. Gen. 19. v. 26. God in an instant will slay them with fire from hea|ven. Ananias and Saphira dyed ha|ving a lye against God in their mouth: Dathan Abiram were swallowed vp into an instant: These are set downe in scripture as Pillars of Salt to tell to the Passengers of this world that they looke not back to Sodome but haue euer their eyes vp|on their God.
Note.As for the godly in their sicke|nesse if at last when their glasse is at the running out they crye to God for life, God shall giue them an answere that shall content them: he shall let them see that death is better then life: Note. Moses desired to liue and to goe to Canaan, Gods desire was that he should die for to goe to the heauens: Note. Behold how God desired better for Moses, then Moses for him selfe: The death of the righteous was the wish of Ba|laam:

let mee die,Numb. 23. v. 10 said hee, the death of the righteous: The death of the saints is a Precious thing: It is pro|mised to them as a releese of all their distresses,Iob. v. 17. as a rest from their la|bours, a refreshment to their wearied bones: there the weary be at rest saith Iob, speaking of the graue: they rest in their beds saith Isaiah:Isa. 3. v. 2. This was Gods promise to good Iosiah made by Huldah the Prophetesse: I will gather thee to thy father,2. Chron. 34. v. 28. said the Lord, and thou shalt be gathred to thy graue in peace: Note. Thus the godly man (except it be that God will haue him neere to him selfe as Enoch,Isa. 57. v. 1. or that he should not see the ill to come) getteth his full of dayes: such a man shall come to his graue with his gray haires in a full age like as a shocke or ricke of corne commeth in his season: Iob. 5 v. 26. Note. What is a gray headed goodly man but as a field that is ripee for the Lord Iohn. 4. v. 35. The countrie saith Christ is all white spea|king

of the cornes in their rypnesse: Note. A gray headed godly man is like ripe corne ready for the Lords Barne-yeard, that is vp into the heauens. Note. Prou. 16. v. 3. According to this, Salomon speaking of the hoarie head, saith that it is A crowne of glory if it be found in the way of righ|teousnesse.
The last thing I shall touch heere concerning Gods deliuerance from sicknesse or from any other troubles is, a counsell I would giue to these that haue bene deliuered: Note. The coun|sel is this, hath God once brought thee from the doores of death to life? or hath hee deliuered thee from any imminent danger? Be wise in times to come: Be thankefull and sinne no more: sinne no more for feare of worse. Note. This was Christs counsell to the man whom he had healed at the poole; while after|ward he found him into the Temple he said vnto him, 5. v. 14. Behold now thou

art made whole: sinne no more, lest a worse thing come vnto thee.
Note.There was neuer a man deliuered from so filthie or from so fearefull a disease, but if he returne to his sinne like a dogge to his vomite,2. Pet. 2. v. 22. God can make a worse thing come vn|to him: Note. This like a wakener cryeth to all; stand in awe and sinne not.
Sinne at the first is like a little chet or young plant of the first yeeres planting, yee may easily nip it in two with your naile:Note. sinne doubled is like a plant of two yee|ares growth which requireth the strength of the hand: But sinne trip|led is like a tree of three yeeres growth, of faster roots then of be|fore: Last of all it commeth to passe that that which with thy sin|ger most easily thou might haue pluckt vp once, can not now be shaken with all the force of thy body.
Note.It is goode to correct and re+buke

sinne while it is young and will blush for shame. Note, A little correction of the rod will chase away folly out of the heart of the yong child: Note. But old follie, hardened fo|lie, brasen browed folie returned after many deliuerance, after many mercyes must haue a tit in a towe: such a one will proue a wagstring: Prov. 27.22. Bray a foole in a mor|ter among wheat with a pestell, yet will hee not quite his foolishnesse. After that the Theefe is burnt on the cheek or behind the shoulder for his pick|erie, because hee escapeth with his life, so soone as hee is free hee saith as the drunkard saith after that his winesicknesse is past, yet will I till it againe. Note. But how is hee answered? Gods iudgment, yea a worse than of before maketh an answere like an Eccho, yet will I till him againe: thus as Christ saide of the man that was repossest with mas ye Devils, so may be said of him, The last state of that man is worse than the first.




By what meanes God is said heere to heale deadly diseases.
NOW it followeth that wee see particularly with what salve God healeth the sicke mans sore. It is set downe into these words: Hee sent his word and healed them, and delivered them from their destructions.
Note.The Word here as you see is Gods malagma, or healing plaster. Note. Gods worde sent to the sicke man is the messinger of health, a medicine sent from God for curing of all diseases.
Upon this part of my Text, J shall gather eight, or nine severall do|ctrines.
First,The 1. doctrine. in that God is said to send his word for healing of sicke men, J observe the great Majestie of God: hee healeth men by a Messinger, so that hee needeth not to come him|selfe, but onlie to send a Messinger, called his worde: A noble man in

the bed of sicknesse neere vnto the doores of death hauing sent for the Physitian would not be content that he should send a messenger, and not come himself; the most wnderstand|ing haue no more knowledge then is needfull: Note. Elisha Gods Prophet was beguiled in this: he sent Gehazi his seruant with a staff for to quicken the dead child of the Shunamite, but all in vaine: Jt behoved him to come him selfe: and when he was come what paines had hee before life could bee gotten? King. 4. v. 33. v. 34. First, hee went into the chamber where the dead chyld was, and shut the doore vpon them twaine, and prayed vnto the Lord: he beganne with prayer Then he went vp vpon the bed and lay vpon the Child, and put his mouth vpon his mouth, and his eyes vpon his eyes, and his hands vpon his hands, and he stretched him selfe vpon the child: what wrought that, will ye say? after that done, it is onely said

that the flesh of the child waxed warme:v. 34. there was no appearance of life yet, but onely that the cold dead flesh grewe a little warme. After Elisha returned and walked in the house to and fro:v. 35. See what difficul|tie he had: after that the went vp againe vpon the bed and stretched him|selfe vpon him.
At that last action it is said that the child neesed seuen times, and the child opened his eyes: See what toes-and froes the man of God had be+fore life could be gotten: Note. Though he should haue walked to and fro and streatched himselfe vntill now, except that God had sent his word,v. 31. Elisha should haue said as Gehazi said that was sent with his staffe The child is not awaked:
Note.There is no force in man against death to make either voice or hearing.
Heere then let vs obserue the great power of God who by the message of his word cureth such deadly dis|eases:

A Physitian may helpe a sicke man by application:Note. but what can he doe by explication. Note. Mens wordes are but wind: wordes can not worke: Note. Mens wordes are but of dead letters: But the word of god is quick and quickening:Heb. 4. v. 12. it is migh|ty in operation, the Power of God to salvation both of soule and of body:Rom. 1. v. 16.Note. That which is able to saue both soule and body from Hell fire may easily be a power for to heale the sicke body: Note. The Centurion after that hee had sent a man for Christ to come and cure his sick seruant, hee bethought himself what power was in Gods word, and therfore he sent back word againe to Christ that hee should not come him selfe but only send his word. Tell him said the Centurion to his friends whom he sent to him,Luke. 7. v. 6. tell him; Lord trouble not thy selfe: for I am not worthie that thou shouldest enter vnder my roofe: wherefore neither thought I my selfe wor|thie

to come vnto thee: but saye in a word, and thy servant shall bee healed:v. 7. Saye in a word that is,Note. send a word, and it shall heale him.
I read of Ioseph that he was cast into the stockes in a prison: But by what meanes was he deliuered. Note. It was by Gods word:Psal. 105. v. 18. The psalmist saith that they hurt his feete with stockes, and that he was laide in yron:v. 19. But how was he deliuered? there he laye vntill the time that his word came: Note. God had giuen to Ioseph the word of his promise in a dreame that he should be a sheafe before whom all others sheaues should bowe:Gen. 37. v. 7. yea that before him the Sunne and Moone and elleuen starres should doe reuerence. Note. So soone as the time of that word came the stockes could keepe Ioseph no more: Note. As Ioseph lay in the stockes so must the sicke man ly in his bed, vntill the the time that his word came; then shall he goe free: Heere behold the great

power of the word of the Lord.
Note.Turne thee yet againe and behold the power of this word in a greater cure In Ezekiel J see a strange worke wrought by this word: In a valley there was a huge great number of bones both bare and drye:Ezek. 34. v. 2. loe, saith the Prophet, they were very drye: God hauing showne them to his Prophet said vnto him, Sonne of man can these bones liue? The Prophet said Lord thou knowest, as if he had said there is very little appearance: Note J will make them liue said the Lord:v. 4. But how? By my word: I will send my word vnto them: Prophe|cie vpon these bones, and say vnto them, O ye dry bones heare the word of the Lord:v. 5. v. 6. Behold I shall cause breath enter into you, and ye shall liue: And I will lay sinewes vpon you, and will bring vp flsh vpon you and couer you with skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall liue: Note. As soone as the Prophet had giuen the bones this first charge of Gods word, at that first prophecie

there was a noise, and behold a shaking and the bones came together euery bone to its owne bone:v. 4. But there was no breath in them: Note. Behold how the first charge of the word made onely the bones to be conueened, and to be couered with flesh and skinne: Note. But how shall life be gotten? God must send his word againe: God sent his word to the wind for to fetch breath for the quickning of these dead men: Prophecie vnto the wind said the Lord, Prophecie Son of man,v. 9.  say to the wind: Thus saith the Lord God, Come from the four winds, O breath;  breath vpon these slaine that they may liue. At that second charge of the word the wind fetcht breath which entred into them and all those bones lived and stood vp an exceeding great armie. Note. He who by his word prophecied made dry bones to creepe together, and by this word made the winde to breath life into them, may easily send vnto sick men a word that will heale

them thought they were even at the doores of death.
The do|ctrine.Secondly in that the word of God is said heere to be the meanes whereby God healeth the sicke, J ob|serue the diuersitie of the operation of his word: what ever God hath to doe, let him but send his word and it shall be done. Note. When he made the world he vsed no other hand but his word:Gen. 1. v. 3. v. 6. let there be light: let there be a firmanent. Note. Gods word LET wrought all the creatures: He said, and it was; and as he said, so it was. Note. The word of God is like a Mine of diuers veines either for to help Gods friendes or for to hurt his foes, as the cloudy pillar was darkenesse by day vnto the Egyptians,Exod. 13. v. 21 and light in darkenesse vnto the Jsraelites. Note. As that Pillar was a darke cloud by day behind Israel for to hide them from the Egyptians; and a bur|ning Pillar of fire by night going be+fore Israel for to let them see the

waye. Note. So the word that God sends is euer for the good of Israel. It is a quickning spirit and sauour of life to life vnto these that are saued,2 Cor. . v. 16. but it is a killing letter and a sauon of death to these that perish. When Christ had a will to ding his enemies vpon their backe he sent his word to doe it:Iohn. 18. v. 6. I, with I am he, he made them goe backward to the ground. Note. With his word he dang his enemies vpon their backe and with his word he raised vp Lazarus his dead freind out of the graue.Iohn. 11. v. 44.
Gods greatest wonders were done by his word.Note. When Israel at Massah and Meribah tempted God in their thirst for to get water: God directed Moses to find water: But how? was it by sending him for to delue downe in the ground for to find some water spring? No not: Note. He sent him to a Place where naturally was rather fire then water euen to a hard flint Rocke. But how

was that water gotten? Note. God sent his word vnto the Rocke:Numb. 20. v. 8. speake vnto the Rocke said the Lord to Mo|ses, and it shall giue forth his water. Thirdly seeing Gods word is of such power that for all things it is a sove|raine remeedie:The do|ctrine. let vs beware to doubt of its power Note. These gluttons that cryed for flesh are branded with this blot:Psal. 48. v. 19 They spake against God, saying Can God furnish a table in the wilderenesse? Note. Beware to say Can God? were the difficultie neuer so great in appearance.Numb. 2. v. 11. Moses his doubt made him double his stroke against the Rocke, while he should haue spoken to the stones, who for a word would haue wept and shed teares to be drinke vnto Jsrael, he in steade of speaking to the Rocke scourged the Rocke once and againe.Cor. 10. v. 4.
That Rocke was CHRIST, and who would haue thought that euer Moses would haue scourged Christ? for that deed particularly he

neuer bowe the Lord by his prayer for once to let him set his foot in Canaan, the type of Heauen? Because he dishonored the word of faith with doubting he neuer entered into the land of promise.Numb. 20.10. The wordes of his doubt were these, Here now, yee rebels; must wee fetch you water out of this Rock. Hezekiel his answere to God was better, when the Lord inquired of him if the dead bones could liue? O Lord said he thou knowest.Hezek. 37.3. O but God thinketh much of his word. Note. God hath said a great word, Heauen and earth shall passe away but my word shall not passe away. Mark. 13. v. 3 Christ speaking of the power of this word said that a word spoken with as great of faith as a graine of mustard seedeMat. 13. v. 20. Luk. 17 v. 6. should remoue a mountaine hence to yonder place S. Luke saith that such a word should be able to pluck vp by the roots a sycamine tree and plant it in|to the Sea, a most vnfit place for plan|ting. * See how Gods word can

cause a tree take roote in an element which naturaly is more bent to pluck vp trees by the roots: shall we doubt of the power of this word were our distresse neuer so great? No not: Note. There is such a power in this word that in time of miracles it made the shadowe of the Messinger to heale these that were sicke: while Peter passed by:Act. 5. v. 15 The people brought foorth the sicke into the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that at the least the shaddow of Peter passing by, might ouer-shddowe some of them. Such was their faith that they stroue for the shadowe of Peter, and all that but for to be cured of a bodily dis|ease, O if men now a dayes were as bent for to come to this word of God, as they were for the shadow of a man! Note. The power of this word within S. Paul put such vertue into his nap|kins that wypt the sweate from his body,Act. 16. v. 12. or the teares from his eyes that these to whome they were

brought, were cured of all their dis|eases, yea, and thereby euill spirits were cast out of some: Note. Such vertue came from the shadowes and clothes of such men that men might belieue that they were sent with this word that healeth the soule. These miracles were done by the word and are writen for our learning that we may belieue Gods word to be true.
Fourthly,The 4 do|ctrine. seeing this word sent by God should be receiued by faith, it must also be preached with faith, let him that speaketh it,Note. speake it with boldnes not fearing the face of man:The 5 do|ctrine. hee must not be like the Trumpeter who trembleth while hee foundeth alarmes for to stirre vp the courage of others. Fifthly, seeing it is Gods word, that is the word of power: let him that heares a word preached consider well vvhose worde it is: Note. The touch stone of spoken wordes is the writen word: This was the nobi|litie of the men of Berea, they tried

the word after it was preached: they searched the scriptures daily,Act. 17. v. 11. whether these things that were preached were so, or not.
The 6 do|ctrine.Sixtly, in that it is said in my Text, that the word is a messenger of health, a messenger sent from God for to cure diseases, we should make it welcome. When Eglon a Pagan King heard Ehud saye, Iudg. 3 v. 20. I haue a message from God vnto thee, it is said, that he arose out of his seat, that is, hee stood vpon his feete for to beare reverence to the worde of the Lord. When Hezekiah heard many sore wordes of threatning sent to him from God, All that he said, was, Good is the worde of the Lorde: what then should we say of the word of health, the healing word, which is sent for to cure both soule and body viz. the worde of the Gospell? Goode is the Gospell, goode is the Gospell, the word of health, may all sicke sinners now say: This is that word sent for to cure

the diseases that would not yeeld vn|to the dead letters of the law;Note. Blessed are the feete of these that fetch Go|spell, the word of good tidings. Seuently seeing the word sent from God;The 7 do|ctrine. is God his appointed meanes for the recouering of health,Note. when euer we are sicke: if wee pray for health let vs intreat God to send his word vnto vs, but seeing the word now commeth not downe from hea|uen in a voice thorow the aire, but is committed to a messenger, we must not looke for revelations, but seeke that word from the messenger, Gods interpreter to whom it is betrusted: we must looke for a blessing from the word spoken by him who is cal|led of God. Note If God had not bidden Ezekiel prophecie vnto the bones, the bones had neuer stirred for all his preachinges. Note. If profite had called him to be a Prophet, his prophecie had neuer bene able to quicken these slaine: But because he prophecied

not till God bade him prophecie, so soone as hee prophecied, the sent word vnto the scattered dead bones, they all got life and stood vp an exceeding great armie.Note. Men that run and speake vnsent, find that their speach take no effect: Note. Cer|taine of the vagabond Jewes, exor|cists, and among others,Act. 19. v. 15. seuen sonnes of Sceua who was chiefe of the Priests tooke vpon them to adiure a de|uill that was in a man and that by Jesus whom Paul preached: But what said the divell? Iesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are yee? Note. Thus God as yee see hath appointed cer|taine men for to carie the word that he sendeth, such a man the sickenesse of a man will knowe:Note. But if men runne vnsent, though they should preach Jesus whome Paul preached, the diseases like diuels shall say to them But who are yee? yea the disease shall leape on them and ouercome them and preuaile against them as the diuell did

to the exorcists. Note. When Gods word is sent for to heale: most ordi|narly it is sent by a rare man, a pa|stour whom Elihu calles one of a thou|sand: I know that by the word that God in my Texte is laide to send may bee vnderstood the power of God: Note. God indeede can heale men without a pastour either to speake to them or to pray for them: but ordi|narly he sendeth this word of hea|ling by the mouth of some rare in|terpreter: The words of Elihu are plaine for the clearing of my Text:Note Behold first how he bringeth in the sicke man in his sickenesse.Iob. 33 v. 16. Hee is chastened with pine vpon his bed,  the multitude of his bones with strong paine:v. 20. So that his life abhorreth bread, and his soule dainty meat:v. 21. His flesh is consumed away that it can not be seene, and his bones that were not seene sticke out:v. 22. His soule draweth neere vnto the graue, and his life to the buriers. Be|hold his sickenesse. Note. But how

shall he be cured?
Let him send for a faithfull mini|ster: If there be a messenger with him,v. 23. an interpreter, one among a thousand, to shew vnto man his vprightnesse;v. 24. Then he is gracious vnto him, and saith, de|liuer him from going downe to the pit. I haue found a ransome.v. 25 His flesh shall be fresher then a childs: he shall returne to the dayes of his youth. Consider well these words and they shall giue light to these words of my Text, He sent his word and healed them, from this may be gathred that he must be a rare man that caryeth the word sent for health: Hee must be a man sent of God that caryeth the word which God sendeth for the healing of the sicke.
Note.Little good may be looked from the preaching of many, because they preach vnsent: they preach not the word that is sent, which is the word of power: they may preach Gods word but they preach not a sent word: they take Gods statuts in their mouth,

but God shall reproue them say|ing what hast thou to doe to declare my statutes,Psal. 50. v. 16. or that thou shouldest take my couenant in thy mouth? Note. When God was angry at Ahab he desired to send out some against him: while he was vpon this thought he looked to all his creatures saying,2. Chro. 18. v. 19. whome shall I send? and who will goe for vs? that said; An ill spirit came out and said send me. Note. There be many like the ill-spirit who will not waite till God send them, but will preueen him saying, send me. Note. The world now runnes to be sent. Note. There be none so ready to preach as these whom God neuer sent. Note. Jn this they are worse then the diuell who before he went out; heard God first say Goe forth and doe so 1. King. 22. v. 2. See how the diuell would not goe to the Lords vvorke vvithout a commission and a warrand. Note. These vvho run and speake vnsent shall find their speach take no effect: It is the sent

vvord that is the vvord of conversion, and of health. Note.A people had great neede to be|queath themselues to God, that he would keepe them from a Pastour that commeth vnsent.
Note.I will giue you two tokens of a Pa|stour that carieth the sent word of God: the one is inward into the mans selfe, the other is outwarde and ap|peareth amongst the people.
Note.First the Pastour himselfe must haue in his owne bosome a warrant from God that he is called to beare the word that God sendeth: this war|rant he shall knowe in two things:

Note.First he shall find within him a drawing desire to serue God in such a calling: this is for the generall.
Note.Secondly he shall haue a privie particular draught within him mo|ving him to desire to be with such a flocke.Note. Not so much for to cloth him selfe with their wooll and feede him with their rents, whereby he

may haue a life by them, as that he may winne some poore soule to the loue of Jesus, or drawe some clogged heart out of the snares of the diuell: that when he hath ended his ministrie he may say, Behold heere I am, and the children that God hath giuen mee:

Note.This is the inward calling with|out which if a man goe to speake the word,Sam. 6. v. 7. he shall be like Vzza who putting his hand to helpe Gods Arke was stricken dead with a breach into an instant. Because hee wanted a calling, God slewe him for doing that which otherwise was good in it selfe.
The second token of a Pastour sent with Gods word to any particular people,Note. is an vncorrupt desire of him by the flocke, not because he is their carnall friend or of their blood or be|cause he is such a mans sonne, or be|cause some guider of the parochin favoureth him: but because they see him furnished with giftes and

graces whereby their soules may be helped vnto God:Act. 16. v. 6 When S. Paul was at Troas A vision appeared vn+to him in the night: There stoode a man of Macedonia, and prayed him saying, Come ouer into Macedonia and help vs: Note. We must not now J confesse looke for visions: But certanely if God hath called a man effectually to bring his word for the well of a people, he will make these of the flocke that are most godly to pray him to come and helpe them as the man of Macedonia did vnto Paul.Note.
Jf these things be away it shall proue at last that such a man was neuer a Pastour but a hireling: what euer words he preached, shall in end ap|peare not to haue bene wordes sent from God.
The 8 do|ctrine.Eightly let vs obserue here whose word it is, that being sent healeth the sicke folkes of my Texte. It is the word of God: Jt is in my Texte

called his word He sent his word and healed them: his word then and not mans word. Note. Long shall a man continue jogging before that he wa|ken a sinner by words of mans braine.
Note.The words of men being but wind can no more waken these that are soule-sicke of the lethargie, then the tempest could waken Ionas. Note. But the word of God like that ship master will rouse vp a sinner with reproofes and chase him with glowmes to his God: Note. The flowers of eloquence neuer so sweet smelling are not able to reviue the dying soule:Note. what are mens wordes, though writen in letters of golde, but words of no vertue: Such words may be like Agrippa clothed with great phantasie, but they shall neuer almost perswade a man to bee a Christian: they may skippe about a dead soule as the Priestes of Baal skipped and cryed about their dead sacrifice, but all in vaine, their god was on his iourneye, or a|sleepe,

there was none to make an|swere: there is no comfort to the soule from the words of man? Note. Pa|pists traditions are but mens words, and wordes that God neuer sent vn|to men, and therefore are not able to comfort a man vpon his sicke bed: they are liveles without any power or force: but the word of God is lively and mighty in operation:Iohn. 6. v. 63. My words, said Christ, are spirit and life.
The vse.The vse of this doctrine is, let all these that are sent by God to carie his word to a people to sicke or to whole,Note. let them take heed that they deliuer Gods word as Gods word with the mind of the sender: Note. Such must neuer faine nor flatter vnder the paine of damnation. Note. When it was told to Micaiah that he should prophecie good things to wicked King Ahab because all the rest of the pro|phets had done so,King 22. v. 14. what said Mica|iah? As the Lord lieth, said he, what the Lord saith vnto me that will

I speake. Note All the rest of the prophets made preachings of their owne head for to please the King: But Micaiah only preached the word that was sent: Note. In this Baalam shall con|demne manye that preach as their humour carie them in feede or in favour as the matter toucheth their particular:Numb. 24. v. 12. v. 13. said I not vnto thy messen|ger said Baalam to King Balak: if Ba|lak would giue me his house full of gold and silver, I can not goe beyond the commandement of the Lord to doe either good or bad of mine owne mind? But what the Lord saith, that will I speake Note, Because he had a couetous heart  loued the wages of iniquitie, though hee transgressed not in his wordes, he was but a villaine: Note. Hee caried the sent word and spake the word that was sent, but because he spake it not as it was sent in sinceritie of heart, Ba|alam is branded with infamie for euer.
Note.Jn this last age many are become worse then Baalam: his greatest

fault was that hee loued the wages of iniquitie, but as for his doctrine amongst the Moabits, it was sincere, he fattered not the King: he would not curse where the King com|manded, but blessed where he was commanded to curse; till the King in wrath did smite his hands together, commanding him to flee to his owne place:Numb. 24.10 1 called thee to curse mine ene|mies said the King, and behold thou hast altogether blessed them these three times: Note. Who amongst vs in open viewe before a King dare thrise trans|gresse a Kings command for the ho|nour of his God? Note. Mens preachings to great men are become like the Echo's of their affections, the last syllabe at least must be theirs. Note. Others great flatterers are like these greater Echos of longer breath that vvill go out the vvhole verse in repetitions. What is an Echo? vox, sonus, aura, nihil: Mercifull God what shall become of this age wherin the sent vvord of God

the vvord of reproofe is concealed, smothred and chocked, as though God durst not be angry at the sinnes of grands?Note. Mercifull God vvhat shall become of this age, vvherein the sent word of God is thus despised, except it be decked with words of mans wis|dome? J take this to be a fearefull plague vpon this land: Jt is righ|teous vvith God that so he repaye home againe the loathing of his sent vvord: Note. It is iustice on his part that these that delight not in the word of God vvhich is the only sent word, should bee giuen ouer to eares itching after humane eloquence, and delicate phrases made of wordes that are but winde. Note. Such vvordes like sweetest meats may vvell make men sicke, but shall neuer make the sicke to become whole.
Ninthly,The 9 do|ctrine. in these vvords of the Text,Note. hee sent his worde, I obserue that the vvord that a faithfull mini|ster speaketh either in preaching

to sicke or to vvhole or in praying for the sicke are vvords sent from God: Note. Such vvordes are not in vs by nature, but by grace: they are sent vnto vs and by vs vnto you: how shall they preach except they bee sent?Rom. 10. v. 15. saith the Apostle: yea how shall they speake except that the word be sent vnto them? O Lord said Moses,Exod. 4. v. 10. vvhile God vvas sending him to speake to Pharaoh, I am not elo|quent, or as in the Hebrw, I am not a man of vvordes: but I am slow of speach and of a slowe tongue: because he vvanted vvords of his ovvne hee doubted: But GOD that sendeth vvordes to his ovvne in neede told him, that it vvas he that had made mans mouth Note. When God sendeth a man hee will send words into that mouth that hee hath appointed for his seruice.The vse. The vse seeing it is so whensoeuer in our preachinges or in our prayers any good word come not of our mouth that be sent for

to doe good t your soules, remem|ber that the word is not ours, but a present that GOD hath sent to you by vs, who are nothing but the Lords stewardes, to whom the dis|pensation of his mysteries is commit|ted. Note. Now for so many good words that hee hath sent vnto vs in sick|nesse and in health, in povertie and in riches, in ioye and in sorrow, let vs give vnto this God all glory, praise and honour for now and ever|more. Amen.





THE SICKE MANS SALVE, THE FOVRTH SERMON.

PSAL. 107. v. 20.
Hee sent his word and healed them, and delivered them from their destructi|ons.
V. 21.
O that men would praise the Lord for his goodnesse: and for his wonderfull workes to the children of men.

_IN the last part of my for|mer Sermon, we have heard what salve the Lord sends for to heale the sicke mans sore: it is set downe in these words, hee sent

his worde and healed them. Out of these words wee did gather diverse doctrines. 1. That great is the Ma|jestie of God, that maketh his word a worthy messenger for all his af|faires. 2. That great is the power of Gods word that cureth all sorts of sicknesse. 3. Seeing God is so powerfull by his worde, that wee doubt never of his power, or of his promise. 4. That seeing this word should be received by faith it should also bee preached by faith. 5. Se|ing it is only Gods word, that is this worde, let him that heareth the word consider well whose word it is. 6. Seeing Gods word, is a mes|senger of health, wee should make it welcome, and blesse the feete of these that carrie it. 7. Seeing Gods word is his appointed ordinarie meanes, when vvee sicken let vs pray God to send vnto vs this messenger of health. 8. It hath been observed that there is no word, but GODS

vvord, that can make the sicke man vvhole: there is no health in the vvordes that are forged in mans braine. 9. It is God that preacheth orpraveth, in and by his faithfull ser|vants. Note. Hee that hath made the mouth, is hee that putteth his vvord into the mouth. This farre haue vvee proceeded in the doctrines vpon these vvords, hee sent his word, and healed them .

And healed them
Let vs now consider what is it that God healed by his word: It is said heere that hee healed them, viz. these that vvere sicke, without anye exception of disease, hee healed them saith the Text.
Let vs first heere observe the great power of GODs word,The do|ctrine. No man by a word can heale any disease, but there is no sort of dis|ease but God can heale it by his word. Note. If it had beene saide, fooles because of their follie had the fever,

and God by his word healed them. Some would have doubted if this word could haue healed also of the fluxes: No, not: while it is saide that God healed them in generall; it is to bee vnderstood of all sortes of diseases.Note. 1. King. 20. v. 23 Our God is not only a God of the mountaines, but also of the valleyes. Note. The Papists that run to Saints for health, not finding any that can cure of all diseases, have ap|pointed them slaves to runne to di|verse Saints for diverse diseases, to one they must go for S. Iohns ll, to another they must goe for frenesie, to another for leprosie, to another for barrennesse, to another for sicke horse, to another for sicke kine, to another for their swine: Note. I neede not goe farre: Beholde into the same house where J preach, that place of S.  mooles: in my time J sawe a deepe hole at the side of that stone, where the miserable igno|ra~ts of this land had digged for to get

the dust of that pretended Saint: as if it had had power for to give health. Mercifull God what blindnesse of ignorance was that? What could be the cause of this? Note. This was the cause; The poore people could not find the worde, Gods messenger for health: The Bible was a clasped booke then: the Antichristian seales were as yet not loosed: they heard nothing but mumbling of Masses, wordes that they vnderstood not: wordes that could not heale their hearts sicke of sinne,Note. and what won|der that like hennes they came sera|ping and scarting among the graves, seeking if they could find any pickle of comfort to their comfortlesse soules?Note. Blessed bee our God that hath sent his word to this place for healing of sicke sinners, whereas of before they were wont to bee sent to seeke comfort from the dead, that had no comfort for themselves.
Notes.Gods word is a salve for all sorts

of sores. To come to my doctrine there is no disease vncurable to the word, when it shall please God to send it. Note. I confesse that there bee diseases like devills, some of a kinde that are more hardly driven away than others. This sort of devils said Christ,Mat. 17. v. 21. cannot bee cast out, but by fa|sting and prayer, to the worde of prayer fasting behoved to be ioyned,
Note.Not that the word wanted force for to chase out these Devills, but because of vs whose prayers are slug|gish while the bellie is full. A full bellie maketh the spirit lumpish: fulnesse of food sends vp such thicke vapours, which become clowdes betweene the face of God and our prayers, so that they can not passe thorow.
The do|ctrine. Note.Againe seeing Gods word is his appointed meane whereby hee not onlie giveth health to the body, but also to the soules of his children, let vs not wonder that Sathan the ene|mie

of mans salvation bee a great enemie to this word, to the teach|ers, and to the hearers.Note. There is not a Sermon made to a people, but Sa|than is affraide to losse a soule, for this cause especiallie hee beares a great ill will at Pastours, because they ca|rie the word of health. Note. Such men are the Lords Ensigne-bearers, against whom Sathan shooteth his greatest peeces. Note. If they fall, the men of health fall: the sicke can no more get salve for his sore: for this cause let no man wonder that Sathan raiseth slanders vpon Preachers. Note. This maketh that Dragon often to stretch out his taile that hereby hee may sweepe downe the lights of the World, which shew vnto vs the way of salvation. Note. Jf once hee can make this word of God to bee ill spoken of, and by the reeke of calumnie darken the light, or make it to bee loathed, hee thinkes that hee hath wonne a field.Note. As for you who take vpon you any profession

of godlinesse by frequenting Ser|mons and often hearing of this word.
Beware that by a scandalous life yee make others to loath that which is Gods also appointed meanes for the healing of soules:Note. Woe to them that make the worde of God to bee ill spoken of.
The do|ctrine.Againe seeing the word is so po|wefull a meane for to recover the health that is lost, it must also bee a most powerfull preservative of health.
The vse.The vse: seeing it is so, let vs make meekle of Gods word in our health: for it is the word of health, the mes|senger of health, the word of good ti|dings: What better tidings would a sicke man have than that hee should bee healed. * There was such a de|sire of health in Christs dayes, that the people throged so about him, that some not being able to enter in at the doore of the house where he was, clambe vp vpon the house, 

vncouered the roofe above his head,Mar. 2. v. 4. and let downe the sicke into beds by the hole they had broken vp.
Note.Jf wee knew the vertue of Gods word: before that wee were debar|red therefrom by a multitude, wee should vncover the roofe of the house where it is preached, that we might bee let downe by cords: as wee loue our health, wee should loue this word of health. Note. All men wish for health, heere is the best preser|vative, feare God: and heare his word diligentlie. Note. If thou losse a preach|ing needlesly, it is a wonder if thou contract not some disease:
Note.If thou also be sluggish to come to Gods house, or if thou come, but yet heares carelesly and receiues not the word with greedinesse, that is a spirituall lumpishnesse of heart, a forerunner of some painefull disease: Note.Men ordinarly before some sicknes find a certain heauinesse with want of appetit: There is no surer token

of a fearfull disease to come, then a lumpish loathing of Gods word. It is of the word as of the Sacrament, Jf the Sacrament of the supper be eaten vnworthily by the children of God, though God after their repen|tance forgiue them the sinne yet he will chastise them with diuers dis|eases:Cor. 11. v. 30. for this cause, said the Apostle, many are weake and sickly amongst you and many sleepe, Euen so when the word is heard negligently without due preparation for this cause many are plagued with diuers diseases:
Note.There is no such token that God will keepe the health of a people as when a people hath appetit of the word and heares it with greedinesse:
Note.These delicate soules that are not content with the sincere word of God, except that it be saused into the entising words of mans wisdome can not be but sickly soules: Note. Such men must be filled with some filthinesse within, which bursteth out into scabs

which scripture calleth the itching of the eare:2. Tim. 4. v. 3. Prou. 27. v. 7. Thus as Solomon faith The full soule lotheth the honi combe, euen Gods word that is sweeter then the honie combe: But to the hungrie soule euery bitter thing is sweet. Note. A morsell of drye bread is more plea|sant to a hungry man then wild foule is to him that is Blewe burstex as we say: Note. This land, (let me be familiar) is as it were Blewe bursten vvith abun|dance of Gods word: Note. We are well fed but it is not seene on vs: Be|cause we are filled we loth the honie combe: Note J see no greater token of great diseases to come vpon this land then this, Scotlands appetite of Gods word is lost.
Let vs heere also obserue the craft of Sathan who in all things goeth about to counterfeit God in his doings:The do|ctrine. Heere in my Text it is said that God healeth the sicke with wordes: he sent his Worde and healed them: Sathan goeth about to

make men beleiue that he can heale diseases also with words which wee call Charmes. Note. In my iudgement it it is from this place that by an Apish imitation he hath learned the first in|uention of charmes or of healing by words.Note. This of before did I neuer ob|serue: Often did I wonder where frae he had taken the vse of healing by words: Note. All that Sathan doeth in draweing oules vnto him, he hath learned it out of GODS wisdome by counterfeiting the Lords workes as the Magitians that turned their rods into Serpents as Moses turned his rod into a Serpent: Exod. 7. . 12. Note. Exod. 7. v. 12. But as Moses his Serpent swallowed vp the serpents of the Magicians, o Gods word shall at last swallowe vp and de|stroye the devils charmes: Note. Sathan is an Apish creature striuing euer to counterfeit God in all his actions:Note. So from God hee learned to teach men to make sacrifices to himselfe, as if hee had bene the God of the world:

Note. As God is euer turning euill vnto good so Sathan is euer turning good vnto euill.
Out of this place in my iudgement are all witches charmes by imitation. Note. Jf yee would have the definition of a Charme take it in these words, It is a word sent from the deuill for healing of these that put not their trust into God.
O, but will ye say, they doe good and helpe vs, O follie, if God in such a case remoue his heavie hand, it is for to lay it on againe with a greater burden: such a deliuerance is by breaking the prison to be clogged with more fearfull fetters: Heere is Gods precept Psal. 50.15. Call vp|on me in the day of trouble: Heere is a promise; and I will deliuer thee O but will yee say, in all that they say, J heare no thing but good wordes: O foole, if the baite were not sweete the fish would not plucke: the poi|sond gloves must bee most sweetly per|fumed, The most deadly drinke must

bee most sugred: There is no such liquour for the mouth as the deuils posset, sweet in the mouth, but death in|to the belly. Obserue also that it is a righteous thing with God to suffer Sathans wordes haue power, to giue such a bodily benefite to these that loue their health better then God: He that seeketh his health by vnlawfull meanes loueth his health better then God: And therefore iust and righ|teous is hee,Rom. 1. v. 28. when hee giueth ouer to a reprobate mind these that like not to re|taine God in their knowledge. Note. A mind voide of all iudgement, is a plague ordained for all these that desire not to retaine God in their know|ledge: Because they receiued not the loue of the trueth that they might be saued,1. Thess. . v. 10. for this cause God sent them strong delusion,v. 1. that they should belieue a lye: Note. If men and women will not de|sist from seeking such vnlawfull meanes, but leauing the word that God hath sent for health, will bee|take

themselues to the word that the deuill hath sent, let them knowe that God hath plagued them with strong delusion, because they haue not the loue of the trueth: Note. What rage is this for a man to goe and seeke health from the devill in his sicke|nesse? Is it not as Elijah said con|cerning Ahazia who in his sicknesse sent vnto Baalzebub,2 King. 1. v. 3. because there is not a God in Israel: Note. These that thinke that there is a God in Israel will neuer seeke to be healed by the deuiles wordes. Note. So long as God would speake to Saul, Saul sought not to Sathan: Note. After that God was departed from him and would an|swere him no more, then hee ranne to the deuill of Endor:1 Sam. 28. v. 7. But what com|fort gote hee there? euen that which the deuill himselfe abhorreth, viz. torment before the time. Which made him fall straight way all along on the earth.v. 20. These were the cheefe wordes of the deuils comfortes To+morrow

thou shall be with mee. Note. So must they bee heal that desire the deuill to send wordes for their health.

An obiection.
Heere some curious spirit may ob|ject that where as it is said heere that God sendeth his worde and healeth the sicke, and that therefore in sick|nesse this word should be sought vn|to, that seemeth not to be needfull: My dayes are they not numbered? a man can not dye before his dayes, what needs a man then in sicknesse seeke his life from God?


The Answere.
Jt is certaine that mans time is determined: mans dayes are boun|ded like the sea Note. To mans age God saith as hee saith to the waves of the Sea.. v. . Hitherto shall thou come but no further: and heere shall thy proud aes be stayed. Note. The proudest dayes of mans age are sayed at a certaine hitherto: when they are come to that,

they can wnn no further. Note. But yet till they come there, man must vse the meanes where by his life may be preserued: Note. God promised to adde to Hezekiahs yeeres other fifeteene:Isa. 38. v. 15. Hezekiah knew well that God would keepe his promise and yet for all that he left not off to eate and to drinke whereby his life might be preserued. Note. This is most for|cible against these that obiecting against predestination, say most pro|fanely, that if they know they were predestinate to life eternall they should not care what ill they doe: why? because they would be assured not to goe to Hell: Note. First that were great ingratitude to giue the goodnesse of God such a meeting:
Note.What ignorance is this, that a man should not know that the good|nesse of God leadeth him to repentance and not to sinne more and more?Rom. 2. v: 5. Againe though God hath promised to him life eternall and that God

can not lye, yet man should no more neglect the meanes of his spirituall life then Hezekiah neglected the meanes for keeping of his naturall life:Note. As for vs though wee knowe that our life can not ouerreach our spanne, yet seeing the day of our death is concealed from vs we may lawfully cy to God for help in our troubles: Jf we be sicke let vs intreat God to send his word the messenger of health, that with the liuing as Heze|kiah said, wee may praise his name? Isa. 38. v. 19 But if so be that our day be come, that God say to vs concerning life, as he said to Moses concerning Cana|an, let it suffice thee, speak no more vnto me of this matter,Deut. 3. v. 26. then let vs resolue to pray with Simeon that the Lord would let his servant depart in peace.



Luke. . v. 29.And delivered them from their destructions.
IN the former wordes wee haue heard what good the sicke per|sons haue gotten from God by their

prayers, viz health. Hee sent his word and healed them. Jn these words the spirit of God letteth vs see from what ill by his word he hath delive|red them, viz. from destruction, and deliuered them from their destructions. Behold in the coherence of the words two things, first a positiue good viz. health Secondlie a deliuerance from a great, ill viz. from their destructions.The do|ctrine. Heere obserue the great wisdome of GOD, who for to stirre vp men to thankfulnes letteth men first see what great good he hath done to them; Se|condly from how great a miserie he hath delivered them: Note. The miserie wherefrom a man is deliuered, being set in viewe besides the benefite re|ceived is a commendation of the guift. Note. As a candle seemeth clearest in the darkest house: and as the starres are brightest in the darkest night, so good received ap|peareth most, when wee see from what ill we haue beene delivered.
Note.The greater the danger hath beene, wee esteeme the more of GODS deliverance. Note. If any man hath saved our lyfe by drawing vs out of the water, wee being almost at the last gaspes, wee would thinke of it so long as we liue: but to bee helped out of some shallow place, where was no danger of the death, for such a benefite a light grand-mercy is thought to bee enough. Let vs behold heere in the word destructions the greatnesse of Gods deliverance. Note. The word destructi|ons like death or darknesse commen|ding lyfe or light, setteth out the greatnesse of the positiue benefite in those words: Hee sent his word and healed them.
Let vs consider the word in the original: the word which is heere turned destructions signifieth dit|ches or graues, which are deathes lodgings.
The graue in the first language hath

diverse names. 1. the most proper is Keber. 2. Bor, that is a pit or ditch: arcer subterraneus, a prison vnder the earth. Note. The estate of all the dead by nature is miserable: they are all in prison, and there must they lye, till the trumpet of the resurrecti|on blow the blast of libertie. Note. At that sound the earth shall open, and in its owne language shall say to the dead, goe out my prisoners I am not able to keepe you any longer. 3. the graue is called Sheol, a petendo from eeking, quod ore hiant,  dilatato re|pleri expetat. Note. Of all beggas, death and the graue are the greatest: they ever seee and are never satisfied.
They are the two daughters of the Horse-ach,Note. Proverb 3 v. 15. . 16. which evermore crye, bring, bring: The graue is one of these that never saith, t is enough. 4. Jn the text which J haue redde, it is called Shechithah, from a word that signi|fieth to kill, or corrupt, or destroye: According to this the word heere

is turned destructions: Hee delivered them from their destructions, that is, from their graues.
The do|ctrine.The lesson J obserue, of all the names of the graue, and particular|ly of this in my text, is, great is the horrour of the graue: naturally all flesh abhorreth it. Note. When the wic|ked man that is in God his debt booke is buried, hee is like one catcht and clapt vp in prison: The barres of death are about him as about a Theefe in a pit. Note. This is a part of wicked mens penaltie, the graue is vnto them the very porch of the prison of Hell.
Note.This is the prison appointed for all desperate banquerupts laden with debt and danger, vnable to satisfie the last farthing. Note. Many may goe to the graue free of all worldly debts, whom God shall challenge and arrest of an infinite summe, which they shall not bee able to paye, though they had all this world at their dispose.
Note. Such shall be the end of all pro|digall

ding-thrifts, who while they lived, turned the grace of God in wan|tonnesse: while they are caried to the graue, they are caried to their destru|ctions.
Seeing the graue is naturally to all men a destruction;The vse. let the conside|ration thereof stirre vs vp to a god|ly lyfe: Jt is a place most fearefull to flesh and blood. Note. Job speaking to God concerning the graue, for which hee was preparing him selfe, declareth in most powerfull wordes what a dwelling place it is,Iob 10. v. 20. v. 21. Cease then, (said hee,) and let mee alone, that I may take comfort a litle, before I goe, whence I shall not returne, even to the land of darknesse and the shaddow of death;v. 22. a land of darkenesse, as darke|nesse it selfe, and of the shaddow of death without any order, and where the light bee as darkenesse. Note. Those bee the most pleasant fields of the graue, viz. a land of darkenesse, where the light, (as Job saith) is as darkenesse

it selfe:Iob. 7. v. 5. There shall all flesh be clo|thed with wormes, and with clods o dust. Note. There is the place of silence: Many there be lying together heapes vpon heapes,Iudg. 15 v. 16. as Samson said, but there is not a word of conference.
NoteSo long as men liue together on earth, they haue both companie  conference,Eccles 9 v. 9. whereby they may swee|ten the daes of the lyfe of their va|nitie. O but so soone as they are gone to their destructions, such peri|shing shadowes of pleasures flee away:Eccles. 9 v. 10. There is no worke, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisedome in the grae whether they goe. Note. Job is very plaine concerning this: As the cloud, (saith hee,Io. 7. v 9. v. 10.) is consumed and vani|sheth away, so hee that goeth downe to the graue, shall come vp no more: hee shall returne no more to his house, nei|ther shall his place know him any more.
Note.Bildad considering mans morta|litie  his necessitie of going downe o the graue, said, wee are but of

yesterday,Iob. 8. v. 9.and know nothing, because our dayes on earth are a shaddow, that past man must goe to his destructi|on, viz. to the graue: Thus as yee see, the graue of its owne nature is properly a destruction: Such is it also to all those who in their lyfe were not partakers of grace. Note. To goe to the graue without grace, is to goe to destruction.
Men may striue by artifice to make the graue pleasant by painted and carved stones,Note. but when men haue done their best it is nothing indeed but a painted destruction. Note.Ion. 2. v. 2. While it glistereth like the Heavens with|t. t is but the belly of Hell within.
Note.As for the man of grace, though he should be deprived of the graue, hee hath one thing to cover him, which the whole world can not take from him, Coelo tegitur qui non habet vrnam: he is covered with the Hea|vens, who wanteth a graue:Isa. 57. v 2. the god|ly in their graues rest in their beds.
Note.Behold what a mercifull God we haue, whose cursings by grace be|come blessings. Note. The graue at the first was appointed by God as a ward house for malefactours, and now behold how it is turned by grace into a bed of downe, a resting place for the wearied bodies of the Saints. Note. See how God in his most fearfull judgements hath ever some comfort infolded for the comfort of his Saints, as a kirnell within a hske. Note. For them hee can keepe light in darkenesse, and also bring light out of darkenesse. Note. For them he can in that which is not, find out that which is, by calling things which are not as though they were: yea, which is most for his owne, even in destruction, hee will keepe salva|tion. Note. In the graues of the godly, which by nature are destructions, there is a sort of salvation, which shall bee seene at the great and last day of the resurrection.
The vse of this doctrine is to sold,The vse: first for se godly, secondlie for the wicked: As for the godly let them bee thankfull vnto God, who hath changed their destructions into beds of rest, where they shall sleepe most softly vntill the great blast of the last trumpet. Note. This is one of the spe|ciall comforts which God hath pre|pared for the godly man in his bed of languishing, that God will make all his bed in his sicknesse:Psal. 42. v. 3. Behld heere a greater comfort: In death God will make all the godly mans bed: The graue to him is but a bed made for him by the Lord. O man of GOD for thy graue bee thankfull vnto God.
Note.When death is drawing neere, comfort thy selfe with this, that God is preparing a well made bed for thee in the graue. Note. Blesse him who hath turned thy destruction into rest.
Note.As for the wicked, let the fearfull word of my text, viz. destructions; let it bee as it were a Remembrancer

vnto them, that there is a thing af|ter this lyfe prepared for them which God his word calleth destru|ction. Note. While they heare of it let them come out of their chaire of ease for to be friends with God in time. O mercifull God,Note. what terrour must this bee, while a man on his death bed perceiveth nothing but GODS wrath, a gapeng graue, and an vpre|pared soule? Let this memorandum rouse vp all slippry soules so to liue in this lyfe, that they losse not that lyfe which is to come. Note. No man can tell how soone his glasse shall runne out. Note. What a follie is this for a moment of pleasures to losse eternitie, and to goe to destruction. Happy then (I see) is the man that liveth well here: Blessed is he whose GOD is the Lord: Thrise happy is hee that hath faith in Christ, for in the very graue he shall find salva|tion. Note. Hee hath a cordiall antido against the poison of destruction,

who hath Christ to bee his salvati|on: Christ our salvation hath de|stroyed this destruction. Note. He hath gotten such a victorie not only for him selfe, but also for all his Saints, that the least and weakest of them may defye both death and destru|ction with those words of boast:1. Cor.  5 v. 55 O death where is thy sting? O graue where is thy victorie? Note. Death like that vi|per of Malta may hang vpon a god+ly mans hand:. 8. v. 3 but in the day the Lord shall purge the world with fire: the godly man shall shake death from him, as S^t. Paul cast the vper from him into the fire without any hurt: But as for the wicked that are not in Christ their graues are their destructions:Psal. 49 v. 14. death in the graue feedeth on them as on sheepe: Note. To euery one of them death may say as Christ said to death I shall be thy death.Hs. 1. v. 14.
While Christs friends with Lazarus are said to sleepe into the graue,Iohn. 11. v. 1. the wicked man there is but a destroyed

creature: While he is there he is in destruction, Note. hee is in abstracto mall into evill it selfe, Note. hee is no+thing there but the Carion of a cre|ature.
VVoe be to him to whom the graue is a destruction: Let therefore all men ste so to liue, that while they goe to their graues, their graues may bee a bed of rest vnto them.Isa. 57. v. 2.
Note.Jf the graue bee a destruction to thy body, the place of damnation is prepared for thy soule.Note. Let Epi|cures, while they liue, sport, and say, Hell is not so te, nor sinne so heavy, nor the divell so blacke, nor GOD so severe as Preachers prattle: The day shall come, when they shall find it farre other wayes. Note. Shall GOD suffer the whole creation to groane vn|der the burden of our sinnes?R. 8. v. 20. Shall GOD him selfe be pressed vnder the weight thereof,Amos. 2 v. 13. as a cart laden with sheaues? and shall he not be avenged of vs in death except we repent?
Let vs therefore, least our graues after death bee our destructions a|mend our lyfe in tyme: Let vs ab|horre the filthie shape of our sinnes: Let vs lay hold on GOD his mercy and CHRIST his merits, which are two shoulders that shall carie away all the weights of wickednesse.
Note.Well is that soule,Col. 2. v 14. whose Bill Bond before death is cancelled and crost: Note. With great joy may he goe to the graue, to whom the LORD hath said,Isa. 44. v. 21. I haue put away thy trans|gression like a cloud, and thy sinnes as a mist: Lord make our eyes nim|ble to rip our hearts to the bottome that wee may bring out our sinnes from thence, that they may get a dead stroake before wee dye.
Heere let vs obserue who is hee that is said heere to haue delivered the sicke from their destructions,The do|ctrine. it is the Lord: The greatnesse of the worke declareth plainly that it could bee no other then the Lord: when

Iohn and Peter went a fishing after Christs resurrection, Christ appea|red vnto them; after they had toiled the whole night in vaine, at last at Christs command they cast the nets: Christ at the first they knew not, but by the great draught of fishes they began to know him: the disciple, whom Jesus loved considering the draught,Iohn. 21 v. 7. said vnto Peter, it is the Lord: So may a man who hath beene de|livered from his destructions easily know that none could deliver him but the LORD: the text is plaine heere, and hee delivered them from their destructions.
Heere is a lesson of the great power of God, the angell of the covenant said well, when he sawe Sarah laugh|ing at the promise, is any thing too hard for the Lord. Not.The do+ctrine.en. 18 v 14. Christ speak|ing of the hard entrie of rich men into God his kingdome,N.Mark. 10. v, 27 compared it to the passing of a Camell thorow the eye of a needle: this thereafter

hee made more cleare, saying, with men it is impossible but not with God, for with GOD all things are possible: This great power heere appeareth in that,The .vseNote. when the sicke man is hard at the doores of death vpon the ve|ry brime of destruction, yet the Lord by his infinit power delivereth him from his destructions.
The vse is this, when ever we find our selues perplexed,The vse.Note. let vs haue re|course to him that is only able to helpe vs: Who can deliver from de|struction the abstract of ill, but God who is salvation, essentially that which is good, yea goodnesse it selfe? No man can deliver his friend from feare in the dayes of evill, when the ini|quities of his heeles shall compasse him about.
Though men were never so wealthy boasting them selues in the multitude of their riches;Psal. 49. v. 7. none of them can by any meanes redeeme his brother, nor gius to God a ransome for him: All the gold

of ndia is not able to deliver a man from his destructions, no not to pro|long his lyfe but an houre. N te. Hee only who gae the lyfe is able to preserue the lyfe: He only who gaue the lyfe is able for to take away the lyfe:Psal. 68. v. 20. vnto God the Lord alone be|long the issues from death, and also the issues vnto death. Note.Psal. 90 v. 3. In his mouth alone are the quickning or killing words, returne yee children of men, either from lyfe to destructions, or from destruction vnto lyfe: and there|fore in all our distresses and great|est sickenesse, let vs haue our recourse vnto him,Psal. 37 v. 2. v. 25. saving with the Psalmist, whom haue I in Heaven but thee? and there is none on earth whom I desyre besyds thee: my fish and my heart fail|eth, but God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever.
We haue heard how those that were sicke drewe neere to the doores of death, and how GOD, while none could help them delivered them from

their destructions in bringing them from death to lyfe, from sicknesse to health. Note. Before I passe foreward to the last part of the text, I desyre you all to consider well, that albeit God in great sicknesse by his word recall vs from the graue, once or twise, yet for all that we must care|fully remember our mortalitie: Note for though at diverse tymes God either in sicknesse or in dangers, by sea or by land hath by his power delive|red vs from the graue, wherein long since wee had beene rotten; yet for all that at last these bodies of ours must come to the hands of the bu|riers, who shall lay vs downe into our destructions.
Consider and weigh well the mat|ter O man,Note. though God should pro|long thy dayes, so that every one of them should bee lyke that day o losual, when the sunne stood still v|pon Gibeon and the moone in the valley of Atlon, 10 v. 12. yet should all those dayes

come to an end. Note. The standing sunne at last must goe downe: Note. yea though God should bring backe the shaddow of thy lyfe many thousand degrees, at last it shall goe downe in the diall of thy mortalitie. Note. Though the house were never so strong, at last it must decay and drop thorow.
Note.There is no ludging for eternitie in things below. Note. Methuselah with his nine hundred three score and nine yeeres is followed with,Gen. 5. v. 27. hee died, as well as hee who lived but an houre.
I wish that this my sermon could bee to you like the house of mour|ning, which Salomon calleth better then the house of feasting: his rea|son is,Eccls. 7 v. 2. for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his hear: A feast is made for laughter,Eccl. 10 v. 19. which will not admit the companie of so graue mediations. Ne. Laughter will not suffer the living to lay his end to his heart.
Oh that yee all could lay well this my sermon to your heart,Note. before that death by sicknesse come and make a breach,  by that breach runne away with your soules! Note. Alas it is hard for men in prosperitie to be moved to thinke that they shall be moved:Psal. 3 v. . I said in my prosperitie, (said David,) I shall never be moved. Note. O how hard it is for men and weemen that haue hearts desire, and wealth at will, to desire to bee dissolved. Note. They are so ta|ken vp with their pleasures in this lyfe that they haue no leasure to think vpon death. Note. Men take no heede to the graue that is before them: though they be even vpon the brinke or brimme thereof, they can not thinke that they shall fall therein, though thousands haue fallen before them.
J compare the most part of this world to men walking over a field so covered wich fo, that they can not perceiue the way: when they thinke

to run they fall into a pit with a jumpe.
Note.It is even so of men in prosperi|tie, while their eyes are dazeled with the brightnesse of their pleasures  profits, which as sow cover all the way, before that ever they be aware, they rush downe into the ditch of death.
Note.Many like Mariners in a mist make ship wracke in the calme sea. Note. The Lord bee our Pilot and so direct our soules into this perillous navigation; that at last by death wee may arriue into the haven of the Heavens, where wee may liue with GOD for ever. Well is the man that is ever wating for his GOD. Note. Well is him that can say with David,Psal. 13 v. 18. when I awake I am still with thee.





THE THIRD PART: THE SICKE MAN HIS SONG.
VVEE haue heard of mans mi|serie in the sicke man his sore, wee also haue heard of God his mercy in the sicke mans salve: Man being sore sicke cryed vnto God by pray|er, and God heard him and hee sent his word and healed him: Now it followeth that wee see what man his duetie should bee toward his GOD, for delivering him from such miserie: The duetie is set downe into those words, Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodnesse, and for his won|derfull workes to the children of men: this is the sicke man his song.
Heere let vs obserue what is the duetie of him who hath received health and lyfe from God in a most dangerous sicknesse, it is heere set downe, viz. that hee should praise God

for his goodnesse, c. Note. God seeketh nothing from man for his benefits but thankes and praise:
The do|ctrine.Math. 11. v. 30.The doctrine is this, GOD his yoke is easy; if by our owne wickednesse wee make it not vneasy: there is no yoke so easy as God his yoke. See how for all his blessings hee requireth but thankes. Note. After that the Physitian of the body hath vsed his cure, whether it cure thee or not, thou must giue him gold: after that thy God hath cured both thy soule and body; He seeketh but thankes, He craveth but a grandmercy from the heart: Note. And yet alas, hee who doeth most, and seeketh least, is least considered, and worse payed of his due.
First heere obsetue that the duetie of him who hath received his health from God is to praise God for his goodnesse, and for his wonderfull workes: our GOD for all requireth nothing but thankes:Note. Hee hath no neede of our guifts: As hee hath no

neede, so neither doeth hee seeke a|ny thing from vs:Psal. 50 v. 8 I will not, (saith hee,) reproue thee for thy sacrifices, or thy burnt offerings to haue beene con|tinuallie before me:v. 9. I will take no bullocke out of thy house, nor hee goates out of thy foldes:v. 10. for every beast of the forrest is myne, and the cattell vpon a thousand hils.v. 11. I know all the fowles of the moun|taines: and the wild beasts of the field are myne:v. 12. If I were hungrie I would not tell thee, for the world is myne and the fulnesse thereof.
Behold how God will not seeke a|ny worldly thing from man,Note. for all the world is his, and the fulnesse thereof. What is it then that hee would haue for all his benefits? The Lord declareth him felfe what hee would haue: Offer vnto God thankes|giving, and pay thy vowes vnto the most high v. 14. Thankefulnesse as yee see, is the onely impost that God requireth of vs. Note. So soone as man hath re|ceived a benefite from God, hee is

bund to repare to his GOD with thankes:Note. Every new benefite should bee vnto his soule like Sela in mu|sicke, a note of intention,Sela fro~ Salal to lift vp. Vatable or a lif|ting vp the voice.
The vse.The vse, seeing the Lord for all his blessings given vnto men requi|reth nothing but praise, let vs praise him from our hearts Note. Seeing God thinketh more of thanks then of the world and of the fulnesse thereof, let vs bee carefull in this poynt of duetie. Note. As the bird vpon the bush welcometh the day with a song, so soone as it beginneth to spring, so should wee welcome our God with thankes, so soone as wee see the least of his benefits begin to spring.
Note.For to inforce this duetie vpon vs, wee must consider that GOD aboue all things respecteth his praise, hee will reveale great secrets to a man. Note. This made him reveale all his heart vnto Abraham: for the loueGen. 18. v. 17. of his praise hee will saue a people

that is worthy to bee destroyed: for my names sake,Isa. 48. v. 9. (said hee,) will I deferre my wrath, and for my praise will I refraine it from thee that I cut thee not off. Note. Moses his strongest argument, while he interceeded for the people, was grounded vpon God his praise, while hee had a purpose to destroy his people: Lord, (said hee,)Numb. 4. v. 13. what will the Aegyptians say? By this we may see how deare God his praise is vnto him. Note. Behold how before hee should want praise hee will deferre his wrath, and refraine it from sinners that deserue to bee cut off.
Seeing then wee know that ourThe vse. God aboue all things it most desi|rous of praise,Note. wee should be most desirous to doe that which hee de|sireth: My father, (said the servant of Naaman,)2 King. 5. v: 13 If the Prophet had bid thee doe some great thing, wouldest thou not haue done it? How much more may I say to you, if GOD had bid

you doe some great thing would yee not haue done it? And now seeing hee requireth nothing but praise, who should refuse it. Note. Js it not more easy for vs to praise GOD then it was for Naaman to wash him selfe seven tymes in the Jordan? Note. Man may praise God, in his hote bed, at his table, in the fields, in his gar|den. Note. If the heart were sanctified it should bee no paine but pleasure to praise the LORD JAH. Note. In this is the chiefe happinesse of Saints and Angels aboue, they praise God continuallie.
Praise as yee see is that which GOD chiefly requireth of man for all his guifts, whether of wealth or of health. Note. But how J pray you is this duety payed? The wordes of my text giue notice: Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodnesse; c.
Note.The word Oh declareth plainely the vnthankfulnesse of man.
When fooles because of their

transgressions were afflicted, it is said: Then they cryed vnto the LORD in their trouble. Note. But after that God hath delivered them, is it said that they thanked GOD for their health? Not: what than? Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodnesse, c.
Learne the lesson:The do|ctrine. Jt is a common thing to cry to God in any adver|sitie: the reprobate will cry to God in his distresse:Note. but only those who are truely godly giue thanks for be|nefites received. Note. Ten lepers in their miserie, lifted vp their voyces, crying,Luke. 17 v. 13. Iesus master haue mercy on vs: But at the thankesgiving nyne were absent.v. 17. Were there not ten cleansed, said CHRIST; but where are the other nyne? Note. The Buttler in the prison was comforted by Joseph, but while hee was restored, was hee thankfull? Nt: While hee enjoyed his pro|speritie according to Joseph his pro|phecie, it is said, Yet did not the chiefe Butler remember Ioseph,Gen. 40 v. 23. but forgate

him Note. Fooles in my text were hea|led: In their afflictions they prayed earnestly; they all cryed for salue to their ore: But what was their song? J heare it not: but the Psal|mist regrating their vnthankfulnesse cryeth out, Oh that men would praise the Lord, c.
The vse.The vse, seeing vnthankfulnesse is a disease wherevnto nyne or ten are subject;Note. let vs so much the more take heede vnto it. Note. Let vs inure our selues to be thankfull to God for the least of his blessings: Let vs pray be|fore we get them;  let vs praise God after we haue gotten them, before wee take meate let vs pray, after meate let vs praise: before we preach let vs pray, after preaching let vs praise while we put on our clothes in the morning let vs pray, while we put them off at night let vs praise: while wee enter into a water to passe thorow let vs pray, while wee are come to the yonder side let vs praise:

while wee begin a journey let vs pray: while wee are come home againe let vs praise: while mer|chands goe to a market let them pray: while they are returned let them praise: while children are borne into the world, let parents pray: if GOD take them to him selfe, let them praise. Note. Let vs all striue to bee as chearefull to praise GOD for a benefite recei|ved, as wee were earnest in pray|er to receiue the same. Note. Let vs not follow the ill example of the sicke of my text: they all cryed vnto the Lord in their trouble, but J heare not a word of their thanks: only the Psalmist saith: Oh that men would praise the Lord, c. this is the burden of the song four se|verall tymes in the Psalme.
Note.I lyke not men that pay their dueties with an OH. Note. This is a sure token of ill payment, when the godly man heere is forced to

cry: Oh that men would praise the Lord Note. Away with rents that are payed with an Oh Note. Man his praises are the LORD his rents, God will not be praised with those that praise him with an Oh. God loveth a cheerfull giver. As Hee giveth cheerfully, so will hee bee praised cheerfully: God must not be praised with regrate. Jt is good that the godly lament, that men will not praise the LORD for his goodnesse, but God will not bee praised of those that praise him vnwillingly. Note. Such a praise will proue like that doeing of Anani|as and Saphirah a part of the price will bee kept back,Act. 5. v. 2. such men can not faile but they shall lie to the holy Ghost.
Th 2 vse.The second vse wee haue to make heere is, that wee learne hu|militie in the consideration of our ill nature. What a miserie is this that man by the mercie of GOD

should be healed of a deadly dis|ease, and yet not doe so much as to giue thankes to him from whom hee hath receiued the benefite.
Note.Jn the wicked we may see the corruption of our nature, lyke swine they gather greedily the acorns of God his benefits, but beeing ani|malia prona; creatures that haue the face headlong downe, they snatch vp the gifts, but can not looke vp to the giver with a thank|full heart.
The wicked while they are in di|stresse will haue some forme of pray|ing, but while they haue gottenNote. their desire they haue not so much as a shewe in praising. Note. Praise is a sorte of godlinesse, whereof the wicked haue not so much as a shew.
Note.Pharaoh could cry for helpe in tyme of plagues; but after nyne severall deliverances I never read that he said once God bee thanked.
Note.Many while they are sicke will

giue GOD many faire wordes,Psal. 78. v. 36.which scripture calleth to flatter with their lips, but all that forme of devotion is nothing but a wyle for to winne out of GOD his hands. Note. This is cleare, for so soone as once they are free of their trou|ble, at once they grieue the spirit of grace: yea, often they become worse, lyke that man that was but for a space delivered from that divell, which was but gone out for to bring in other seven worse then him selfe,Math. 12 v. 45. for to make his partie the stronger.
Note.Let those that after so many mercies giue libertie to their lusts consider well how the deceit of spirit over-reacheth them: let such weigh well in the ballance of the sanctuary, whether or not they haue praised the LORD for his goodnesse, and for his wonderfull workes toward them.
Heere some men will say, what

is this that is required in praising the Lord? Is it not enough for to say with our mouth, the Lord bee thanked? What would the LORD haue more?
J answere to that, GOD must haue more:Prov. 23 v. 26. My sonne. (saith he,) giue mee thy heart. Note. God indeed must bee praised with the tongue, for which cause it is called our glory:Psal. 57 v. 8. Awake my glory, said the Psalmist vnto his tongue. Note. God also must be praised with the heart, without which all the praise of the mouth is but a pranke, the sacri+fice of fooles:Isa. 29. v. 13. This people draw neere mee with their mouth, but their hearts are farre from mee, said the Lord.
Note.A neere mouth, with a heart a farre off is an abomination to the LORD. Note. Those who in singing Psalmes are ledde away more by sound, than by sense, respect the musicke more than matter: Such sing to man, but not to GOD: GOD

his praises must be sung both with heart and tongue. Note. Heere is a reproach for those, who in the con|gregation joyne not their voyces with others for to praise the Lord for his goodnesse, but sit as if they were dumb. Note. The booke is too deare for singing of GOD his praise.Note. O what secreet atheisme urketh into the hearts of men!
Jf men thought that the LORD should bee praised for his good|nesse, and that God were present in the congregation of his Saints, they durst not come in before him without the booke of the Psalmes.
Note.Wee often forget our booke, because wee forget that God is in his Church; but who forgetteth to put his hat on his head while hee cometh to the Church? Who forgetteth his clothes? No man; because before hee goeth forth, hee remembereth that man will see him by the way.Nte. The wine 

aile will command many to speak who are dumb at the service of their God. Note. Many never want words but when they should praise the Lord for his goodnesse.
Note. Filthy ballads and loue songs are vaine mens delight, but OH that men would praise the LORD for his goodnesse, c.
It is not enough that men praise the LORD with their heart and tongue,Note. but also they must praise him with their lyfe, the true tryall of the other two. Note. After that the Psalmist had said that he would praise God that had chastned him sore, but had kept him from death, hee cryed, Open to mee the gates of righteousnesse,Psal. 118. v. 19. I will goe into them and praise the Lord.Note. To goe in+to the gates of righteousnesse, is to lead a good lyfe; such only are fit for to praise the Lord.
Note. As for those that praise not God in lyfe, while they are holy

in words, they are but monstrous persons, all mouthes, and tongues, and voices without hearts to thinke well, without hands to doe well.
Note. When the fororne foole come to his wits againe, hee said not only,Luk. 15. v. 18 I will returne to my father, but hee did as hee said. Note. The sluggard is ever in feare of lyons: The imagination of a beast in the way hindeth him from doeing.
Note.The Pharisees could say well but because their workes belyed their words,Mat 2. v. 27. Christ called them painted tombes or whited sepulchres.
NoteMany would content the Lord with a part of his service: Some lyke the Pharisee will paint the outward profession, but hold backe their heart from GOD: Note. Others lyke Naman will bowe into the house of immon,2 King. 5 v. 8. but keepe their heart as they imagine vnto God: But O fooles,Note. 1 King.  v.  God will not lyke the pretended mother haue his ser|vice

divided: God that made all must haue all. Note. Seeing hee hath made the heart as well as the hand, he must haue both our thoughts, and our actions for to praise him.
Note. The whole man that is a con|tinuall receiver is litle enough for to set forth the glory of the giver: Doe not the favors of GOD fol|low the whole lyfe of man? Why then should not his whole lyfe bee framed for to expresse his thankfulnesse. Note. Well is the man whose tongue, heart, and hand can sing to GOD with Jeremie,Ier. 17. v. 14. thou art my praise.
Againe in those words,The do|ctrine. Oh that men would praise the Lord, I obserue the fervent zeale of the godly,Note. for not only praise they God, but they are grieved when men whom God hath blessed with wealth, or health are slow to praise the Lord for his goodnesse. This word OH heere vox dolentis a word of mour|ning

is an evident demonstra|tion of sorrow. Note. In my judge|ment true zeale is not better known then in sorrowe for the offence of God.
The vse. Note.The vse: let every man try him+selfe, whether hee bee a godly man or not: If true godlinesse be in thy heart thou shalt bee grie|ved to see GOD offended, thou shalt striue to keepe thy brother from sinne. Note. This was the cur|sed man his language, am I my brothers keeper?Gen. 4. v. 9. When ever wee see God dishonoured or deprived of his praise, wee must mourne for that sinne.Note. Well is that soule that can cry, Oh for GOD his dishonour: Woe to him that rejoyceth while God is offended.
Note. Many thinke the vices of others commendations of their vertues. If they stand while others fall either into whoredome, or drun|kennesse, they haue a cetaine joy

of such filthy fals, which they take to be praisers of their sobrietie, and chastitie: Note. But Oh is not the Lord offended by such sinnes?
Note. Js not the profession ill spoken of: Note. Js not every sinne a scan|dale. Note. Is not every scandale a woe?Mat. 18. v. 7. woe to the world for scandals.
Note. Woe to him that is not sory for sinne, whether it bee in him selfe or in others, seeing that God thereby is dishonoured. Note. J will tell thee O man, if thou cry not Oh for GOD his dishonour, God shall cause thee cry Oh in thy distresse.
Againe in those words:The do|ctrine. Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodnesse. I obserue how sensible the godly are, when the least point of GOD his service is neglected.
Note. If a godly man cryeth, Oh that men would praise the Lord, because hee seeth them flow vnto it, how grieved will his heart bee, when

hee shall see men not only not praising God, but dishonouring GOD for his goodnesse. Note. Many haue gotten health from God, God in great mercy hath brought them from the gates of death,1. Pet. 2 v. 22. and hath restored vnto them their former strength,Note. but what thankes? They haue lyke the dogge returned to their nite againe: The drunkard resto|ed, runneth backe to the taverne, and the harlot to his old acquain|tance,Luck. 11: v 24. lyke that divell returning from dry places vnto his house whence hee came out. Note. The last of such persons is worse then their first. Note. Good had it beene for many that they had never beene brought backe from the doores of death, because that after a newe tke of their lyfe they dishonour God more then ever they did be|fore. Note. As Iacob said of Simeon, and Levi, so say I of such: O my soule come not thou into their secret:Gen 4 v. .

vnto their assembly mine honour bee thou not vnited.
The vse,The vse. let vs striue to be sen|sible of sinne, so that wee make conscience of the least sinne. Many thinke vnthankfulnesse to GOD no sinne. Note. The leavn of the Pharisees hath sowred the whole lumpe of many mens hearts: Jf they bee not Adulterers; but can fast and giue almes, at once they will thanke GOD that they are not lyke other men. Note. GOD desyreth no such thankes, when man praiseth GOD for his owne goodnesse: But OH that m would praise the LORD for his goodnesse, and for his wonderfull workes to the children of men. Note. Let man praise GOD for his goodnesse, but in his owne goodnesse there is no matter of praise. Note. What can bee said to the praise of a m|stuus cloath?Isa. 64. v. 6. Such is all our righ|teousnesse.
The do|ctrine.Let vs also obserue heere ano|ther lesson: The deliverance from death is said to bee from the good|nesse of God, and it is also called a wonderfull worke: for while it is said, Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodnesse, it is cleare that the deliverance from death in sicknesse is from the goodnesse of our GOD.
The 1 vse. The vse: let all those who are sicke haue recourse vnto the good|nesse of God,Note. by which only wee haue health.Note. When wee seeke health from God, let vs say, for thy goodnesse sake O Lord.
The 2 vse.The second vse I make of those words is for them that are re|couered of their sickenesse.Note. Let such learne to bee good seing their health is from the goodnesse of God.
Note. A lyfe given in goodnesse should not bee spent in wickednesse: The goodnesse of God inviteth all men to repentance.Rom. 2. v. 4.
Againe obserue heere that great must bee that goodnesse of God, whereby hee bringeth man backe from the doores of death: The pre|servation of mans lyfe in his sick|nesse, is also called a wonderfull worke. Js it not a great good|nesse of God, and a wonder, that hee should spare the lyfe of a re|bellious foole? What a wonder is this in God his goodnesse, that the lyfe of man should be so pre|cious in his sight? Note. Is not man naturally the enemie of God? It must bee a great goodnesse that will make a man spare his ene|mie his lyfe: And who, (said Saul to David,)1 Sam 24. v 19.) finding his enemie will let him goe well away? Note. O but in God then must be a wonderfull good|nesse, in that not onely he spareth his enemie, but which is more euen preserueth the life of his ene|mie. Did not God dye for his ene|mies? did he not suffer for them by

whom hee suffered? Note. By this meanes (such was his goodnesse) hee heaped vpon their heads coales of fire,Rom. 12. v. 20. that is, as S^t. Augustine saith, vrentes poenitentiae gemitus, the burning sighs of repentance.
Note. Who can not bee but burnt with sighs, while hee considereth the goodnesse of GOD that hath rendered him so mekle good for so mekle ill? What a great mer|cie is this, that GOD should pro|long the lyfe of a sinner but an houre.
The vse.The vse: seeing the deliverance from death and destruction is cal|led a wonderfull work, and seeing it is so indeede, let vs wonder at it: when J arose out of that dead|ly fever; Anno 1626 in the mo|neth of September, and J fand my winding sheete wrapped together into my studie amongst my bookes, J began to wonder at GOD his great worke, I thought it wonder|full.

Note.But alace we wonder at God his works of mercie, as at other com|mon worldly thinges but for a litle space. Note. From thence is the pro|verb, A wonder lasteth but nyne nights into a city: Fy vpon vs that can not wonder still at the wonderfull works of our GOD.
The Hebrew word Pala in Niphal sig|nifieth both admirabile  occuitum, that is both secret  wonderfull, a fit word for to declare the worke to be won|derfull: indeede David speaking of his making in the belly, vseth this word: I will praise thee,Psal. 139 v. 14 (said hee,) for I am fearfully and wonderfully mad: Likewise in another Psalme, speaking how Christ the stone, which the builders refused, was become the head stone of the corner,Psal. 118 v. 23. he said, This is the Lords doing it is marveilous or wonderfull in our eyes: So heere the bringing from the doores of death is called a won|derfull worke of GOD tovvard the children of men.
Obserue the lesson:The do+ctrine. only the workes of God are wonderfull. Note. Men may wonder at some workes of men, but no works of men are wonderfull: No created wisdome can fill a worke with wonder. There is nothing that man can doe, but man may come after and doe better: plus vident oculi quam oculus: many eyes see better than one: This is true amongst men. Note. But all the eyes of men can not perceiue that God in any worke hath either beene defectuous or superfluous: Note. Looke vp to the Heavens, and consider the sunne in his goings: Behold how in the spring he commeth slowly by de|grees till our day be at the longest: Behold and wonder at such slownesse in such a swiftnesse: If hee were not slow in such swiftnesse, what fearfull changes should ensue? If from the elleventh of December in the space of a day the sunne should be into that part of Heaven,
whereinto he is seene into the elleventh of Iune, what discor|der

should be in the creatures below? All men know how dangerous are sudden changes from heate to cold, and from cold to heate. Note. Behold then and wonder how the Creator hath so ruled that Bridgroome of light,Psal. 19. v. 5. that no man can imagine how his course could be changed for a better.
What shall I speake of the sea tide,Note. which made that most subtile search|er of secrets, as some thinke to haue drowned him selfe in the creature, whose motion hee could not vnder|stand? Note. As for the earth it is a worke so wonderfull that no man tell where|vpon it hath beene founded. Tell me O thou most learned Philosopher, what can vphold such a heavy masse? Thou wilt say that is founded vpon its Centre. But what is that centre but a point? What beareth vp that point that beareth vp all the rest? But how can a point bee a fundation of so hudge a masse?Note. But imagine a man standing in the centre, tell me what

should be his situation? According to the rules of Philosophie, both his head should be vpward, and his feete should be vpward? Now what braine is able to conceiue this? Some may think all this to be very easy: but God did propound it vnto Job, as a great argument:Iob. 38. v. 6. Wherevpon, (said Hee,) are the fundations of the earth fastened?
Note.We must therefore confesse, that this worke of GOD, which is but earthly, is so wonderfull, that it over|floweth all humane capacitie.Note. When a vessell is filled to the brimme, it must at last overflow. When our heart is filled with that which is wonder|full, the wonders which we can not containe must runne over.
What shall J say more? Behold O man all the pares of the mekle world, bend thy wits, and see where thou can correct God his wisedome. Come foward I pray thee, and teach him a lesson if thou can: If not, confesse that his workes are wonderfull, and

that thou is filled with wondering, so that GODS wonders in thy heart doe overflow.
From the mekle world, let vs come to man, the litle world. Note. Behold the fabricke of his body, his browes, his eares, his eyes, his nose, his mouth: Behold the wonderfull worke of God: Teach GOD a lesson if thou can. Note. Wilt thou say, that his mouth had beene best in his brow, and that his nose had beene best be|hind his eare, and that his eyes had beene more fitly into his chinne? No not. There is no part, which can be devised to b better then it is: the worke is vvonderfull, and therfore say that thou art filled with wondring: Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodnesse, and for his wonderfull workes to the children of men.
To come from the body to consi|der God his workings in the soule, they are so wonderfull, that no man can declare them. Who shall not

wonder to consider the workings of the soule? Note. J admire the mind and vnderstanding, the will and the affe|ctions agreeing, discording, conside|ring, judging, loving, or hating, making the body to laugh, or to weepe, according as the spirit is dis|posed Note. Consider the spirit of man furnishing the body with fiue wat|ches, as with a guard for its preser|vation: viz, hearing, seeing, smel|ling, feeling, tasting, and touching, all set about the body for its preser|vation, for as many watches, to tell who is a foe, and who is a friend.
Note.The worke is so wonderfull, that while I consider it, my spirit doth o|verflow with wondering: Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodnesse, and for his wonderfull workes to the children of men.
Note.Last of all, seeing the curing of the sicknesse of the body is called a wonderfull worke, how wonderfull must the curing of the sicke soule

be? For this cause, and for others also CHRIST the Saviour of soules, was called Wonderfull: Vnto vs a child is borne,Isa. 9. v. 6. (said the Prophet,) and his name shall bee called WONDERFVLL: This is he, who hath not only filled the earth, but the Heavens with won|dering. Note. The Heavens at the first could not well perceiue,Isa 53. v. 5. how by God his stripes man should haue health.
Note.The Cherubins, which represented the Angels had their heads ever bow|ed toward the Mercy-seat, for to see the calling and healing of the Gen|tiles: The fellowship of that myste|rie had beene hid in God from them, and that from the beginning of the world: But so soone as it was revea|led vnto them by the Church,Ephes. 3. v, 10. that is, so soone as they sawe God his pro|mise accomplished in the Church, as in a glasse, they all with one voyce praised God for his goodnesse, and for his wonderfull workes to the chil|dren of men: All the spirits of Hea|ven

did praise Him that day with that divine song:Luke . v. 14. Glory bee to GOD in the highest Heavens, peace on earth, and toward men good will.
Note.But what shall J say of men, who are so much beholden vnto God? Hath not God created vs? Hath he not redeemed vs with the blood of his sonne? Hath hee not delivered vs from many dangers at home and a field?Psal. 41. v. 3. Hath bee not made all our bed in our sickenesse? Hath he not brought vs backe from the doores of death? But where is our thankfulnesse? I say againe, OH where is our thankful|nesse? Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodnesse, and for his won|derfull workes to the children of men.
To the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost bee glory and Majestie, Domi|nion, and power; for ever and ever, AMEN.
















































