




The gol|de~ boke of christen matri|monye, moost necessary  profitable for all the~, that entend to liue quietly and godlye in the Christen state of holy wedlock newly set forthe in English by The odore Ba|sille.
Hebre. xiii.
wedlockers honorable among al parsons,  the bed vndeled But whoremongers  adue|rers God all iudge.

Prouer. 5.
Be gladde wyth the wyfe of thy yougthe, a wyth a louynge hynde and frendely roo, Let he brestes alwaye satisfye the, and holde the co~tent wythe her loue. Oh my sonne, why wylte thou haue plesure in an harlotte, and embrace the bo|some of another woman?
Prouer. 12.
An honeste louynge and diligente wyfe is a rowne, that is to saye, a great honour and glo|ry, to her husbande. But she that behauethe her selfe vnhonestly, is a corrupcion in his bones.
Prouer. 18.
He that fyndeth a good wyfe, fyndeth a great treasure, and he shall receyue pleasure at the Lor des hande.
Prouer. 19.
House and rytches is gyuen a man of his pa rentes, but a wyse and discrete wyfe is vnfay|nedly the gyfte of the Lorde.



To his singuler good frende ma|ster Anthony Gryse, Theodore Basille wysheth longe lyfe, co~tinuall health  pro|sperous felicite.
_IF God, whyche is the Iaco. . i. Cor.  alone gyuer of all good thynges hadde endewed me wyth the di|uine gyfte of suche and so great eloquence, that I myght iustely and wythout ony reprehension haue compared with that moost excelle~t Greke Pericles, whose vayne of ornate eloquence ey|ther in persuadynge or dissuadynge euen of ve|ry nature semed to be incomparable,  not able of any mortall man to be obtayned, nor yet scase ly in ony poynte so muche as a shadowe of the same to be expressed: yet I here frely co~fesse that I myght well appeare more barbarous tha~ the rude and grosse Garamantes, yf I should take vpon me to decantate and set forthe the dignite of honorable wedlocke accordynge to the deser|tes therof, and exalte it wythe suche encomies, laudes  prayses, as it hath alwayes ben thoght worthy euen of them, that haue moost floryshed wyth pregnant wyttes  excelled with all kynde of knowledge bothe diuine and humayne. Lette other prayse Chastitie so muche as they lyste,

whiche, they saye, would God it were so, fylleth A co~parison betwene cha stite  wed|locke. heauen, yet wyl I commend matrimony, which replenysheth bothe heauen and earth Let other set for the syngle lyuynge wyth so manye pray|ses, as they can accumulate and tomble one in anothers necke, for as much as it is voyd of all care, trouble  disquietnes, yet wyll I for euer|more commend the state of honorable wedlocke whiche refusethe no kynd of paye and trouble, so that it maye bryng any profyt at all to the publique weale of Christendome. Let other ap|proue solitarye lyuynge, whyche is pertaker of none of all those burdennes, that the common sorte of me~ do sustayne, yet wyll I preferre that state of lyuynge, whych? accordyng to the order Roma. xv. Gala. v. of charite, is redy at all tymes to beare the bur|dens of oher, and to seke the quietnes of other no lesse than of it selfe. Let other prayse y^e kynd of lyfe, wherby mankynd decayeth and in pro|cesse of tyme shoulde be vtterlye destroyed, yet wyll I commende that manner of lyfe, whiche begetteth and bringeth forth to vs excelent Kin ges, noble Princes, Pryncelyke Dukes, puys|saunt Lordes, valeaunt Knyghtes, connyng ar|tificers for the mayntenau~ce of the co~m weale learned wyttes. c. Let other auaunce that lyfe, wherby Monarchies, Empyres,  Kyngdo~s be made desolate, barren and vnfruytfull, yet wyl

I moost of all prayse that lyfe, whyche make the Realmes to florysh with innumerable thousan des of people, wherby the publique weale is pre|serued in safe estate. Lette other prayse suche as maye iustly seme to be monstures of nature for theyr sterrilite and barrennes, yet wyll I com|mende them, whyche accordynge to theyr fyrste Gene. ii. creacion and the natural disposicion, that God from the begynnyng engraffed in the~, are frute|ful Psal. c. xxvii as a plenteous vine. Let other allow the fan sy of those belly Goddes, whyche for a volupte|ous, careles and swynysh maner of lyuyng, and because they wyll not lyue of the labour of theyr owne handes / and thesweat of theyr owne b ow , after the commaundement of God, had ra|ther lyue lyke abhominable adulterers, stinking whoremongers, vncleane fornicatours, detesta|ble Sodomites, vnnaturall mo~stures vnto the great slaunder of the Christen religion: and so to dye as vnprofitable cloddes of the earth, th godly to marrye and leaue behynde them suche frute, as in tyme to come myght both profytte the common weale, and also sette forth the glory of God, whan not withstondyng both y^e lawe of God, of nature, and of man both suffereth and i. Cor. vii.  prouoketh them vnto the contrary, seynge they haue not the gyfte of chastite gyuen them, and it is better to marry tha~ to burne, as y^e Apostle

sayth: Yet wyll I commende and prayse suche as do not digenerate, as Icarus dydde, from theyr naturall kynd, but enbrace holy wedlocke, which Hebre. xiii. is honorable among all personens, and brynge forth frute accordynge to the commaundement of GOD, because they wyll not perpetrate nor once attempte ony thynge, that shoulde be vn|cleane in the syght of GOD, and a stomblyng stocke in theyr owne conscience. Tobe shorte lette other prayse them, whyche whan they dye, leaue no lyuysihe  quycke testimonis behynde them, yet wyll I commende them, which, whan they gyue ouer to nature, leaue quycke and ly|uysh testimonies behynde them, wherby they de clare that they haue lyued, and not ben vnfrute full nor vnprofitable to the Christen publique weale. For can christe~ matrimony be ony other wyse than a thyng of great excellency and inco~|parable dignite, seynge it was not ordeyned of Minos, of Creta, nor of Licurgus of Lacede|monye, nor yet of Solon the Athenian, but of Not ma~ but God himself instituted ho ly wedlocke, yea and that in Paradise the moost hygh and immortall God hym selfe,  by hym, yea by hi~ alone co~me~ded to mankynd in so much that menne may seme to be allured, moued and styred vnto thys state of lyuynge w^t a certen inspiracion of the holy Ghost? In Pa radyse also that garden of pleasure was it insti Gene. ii. tuted, yea and that before ony synne reygned in

this worlde, to shewe that it bryngethe to man great ioye, wealth, felicite  quietnes. And syns that tyme hath it euer ben had in great estima|cion yea and that not only amonge them that professe vnfayned faythe in the lyuynge God, but also amonge so many as only were led by y^ instincte of nature, in somuche that it was re|counted a thynge of muche ignominye, and re|proche to lyue wythoute the state of wedlocke  to be vnfruytfull. Were not the holy Patriar|ches Gen. xi. xxiiii xxix. xli. marryed men? Did not the Prophettes of God liue in the christen state of holy wedlocke? Dyd not God in the olde lawe bothe wyll hys Leuici. xxi Ezechi. xliiii prestes to marry,  also appoynt the~, what wy|ues they shoulde haue? Was not Christ borne Math. i. Luke. i. Math. viii. Marke. i. Luke. iiii. i. Cor. ix. Philip. iiii. Ioan. ii. Actu. xxi. in maryage? Were not the Aposties of Christ marryed men? Dyd not Christ garnysh mary|age withe the fyrste fruytes of his miracles, whan he wyth his mother  his Disciples were at a weddynge in the Citie of Cana Galyle? Was not Ppilippe the Euangeliste a maryed man, and had foure doughters excellently lear|ned in holy Scriptures: Were not many other Eccle. Histo. Lib in. Capi tulum xxiiii. holy men both Byshoppes and prestes maryed longe after the Apostles tyme, as we reade in the antentyke Hystories? Dothe not S. Paule i. Timot. iiii call the forbyddynge of marryage, the doctrine of dyuelles.

Of these thynges it is manifest, of how great estimacion holy wedlocke hath euer bene syns y^e fyrst begynnynge of the worlde amonge all de|grees of parsonnes. Who wyll not nowe com|mende The excellen cy of wedde|locke. honorable wedlocke, as a thynge of great excellency. Who wyll not thyncke it a state of li uyng worthy hygh prayse and comme~dacion? Who wyll not iudge that it ought to be embra|ced with metyng armes, as they say, seynge that by it so many noble treasures chaunse vnto vs, vertue is mayntayned, vice is exchewed, houses are replenished, cities are inhabited, the grounde is tylled, scienses are practised, kyngdoms flo|rysh, amite is preserued the publique weale is defended, naturall succession remaynethe, good artes are taught, honest order is kepte, Christe~ dome is enlarged, Goddes word promoted, and the glory of GOD hyghely auaunced and sette forthe?
But alas, and wo is me for it, the glorye of The disho|uour of wed locke. this christen matrimony is now greatly obscu red, yea almoost vtterlye extincte and quenched thorow the abhominable whoredome, stynking adultery, wicked fornicacion, and alkynd of vn cleannes, which is vsed nowe a dayes amonge vs, yea and that frely and wythout ony punish ment. There is no truethe, there is no mercye, Oze. iiii. there is no knowledge of God on the earthe as

the Prophet sayth, Cursyng, lyeng; man slaugh ter, theafte and whorehuntyng haue ouerflow|ed the worlde. Men now a daye~s hunte y^e Ste|wes Hiere. v. and harlottes houses, as Hieremye sayethe. They are become lyke wylde stoned horses that ronne after meares, for euery one neyeth at his neyghbours wyfe. And woulde God this were the worste.
Matrimony is despised, whoredome is had in price. True wyues  faythfull yokefellowes are neglected and set at nought, but whores and harlottes are embrased, kyssed, kulled and much set by. Honeste wyues syt at home and allmoost perish for ho~ger but harlottes are sumptuously fed wyth al kynde of deyntyes. Matrimony is called an halter, but whoredome is recounted a pleasure. Wedlocke is now taken for a kynde of lyuynge replete wyth all misery, care sorow, po uerte, wretchednes and beggerye, but to lyue in whoredome and such other detestable vnclean|nes, is recounted to lyue lyke a cleane and right by man, lyke a lusty brute, lyke a ioly ruffelare, lyke a fellowe, that wyll not gyue his head for y^ wasshynge, yea lyke such an one, as it woulde do a man good, saye they, to be in his company, he is suche a mynyon and pleasaunt fellow, full of his mery conceates and wanton toyes. To tary at home but one daye wyth theyr wyues,

is more than twyfe an hell, but to be dallyenge amonge whores, whole dayes, nyghtes and mo|nethes, and there to spende all that they haue, is a pleasure for a Pope, and recounted no payne at all. O good God howe longe wylte thou suf|fer this intollerable abhominacion? How longe shall the head rulars wyucke at this great wic|kednes? Shall Engelonde neuer be pourhed of this fylthy vnclennes and vncleane fylthynes? Shall there neuer be a remedy found in Englo~d for the extyrpacion of this dyuelysh  to muche beastlyke vice, seynge we haue had so many oc|casions gyuen vs in tymes past,  yet styll haue dayly? Shallwe euer laughe at this great abho|minacion, whiche is waxed so hyghe, that it can growe vp no furthe? Shall this co~mau~dement of god neuer haue place amonge vs Englishme~. There shall be no whore amonge the doughters Deuo xxii of Israel, nor no whoremonger amonge the son|nes of Israel? Are not we also y^e people of God? Are not we Israelites, and suche as be conuer|ted from oure olde conuersacion vnto true god|lynes? Hath not God also redemed vs from all . ii. iniquite, and purified vs a peculiare people to hymselfe, that we should be earnest followers of good workes? Oughte not so muche clennes of yfe appeare in vs, as it dyd i~ tymes past amo~g the olde Iewes? Hathe God delyuered vs from

the power of our enemies, that we shoulde lyue dissolutely, and not rather that we shulde walke before hym all the dayes of our lyfe in holynesse Luke. . Ero. xxx. Deut. v. Math. xi: i. Cor. vii. and ryghteousnes? Is not this commaundeme~t also gyuen to vs: Thou shalte co~mit no whore|dome: Is it not sayd vnto vs, For to auoyd for|nicacion, let euery ma~ haue a wyfe of his owne and euery woman an husbande of her owne? Why than do we tomble and bury oure selues in this fylthy and stynckyng puddle of vnclen|nes,  not rather embrase holy wedlocke, whiche Hebre. xiii. is honorable amonge all men? Why haue we a pleasure to forsake our owne wyues,  to ronne a whorehuntynge after harlottes? Why do we consume, waste and spende awaye so vnthrifte|ly all that euer we haue amonge noughty pac|kes, and leaue our poore wyues and chyldren at home socoureles and vnprouyded for? Why do i. Cor. vi. we make of the members of Christ the me~bers of an whore? Certes oure finall destruccion is nearer at hande than we are ware of For thys pronite and bent redines vnto this fylthy synne of the flesh is an euideut token that the great  terrible daye of iudgement is at hande. For a|mong all other Christ rehearseth this token be fore his commynge, and saythe: As it came to Math. xxi Luke. xvii. Gene. vi. vi passe in the dayes of Nohe, so shall i be lyke|wyse in the dayes of the sonne of manne. They

dyd eate, dryncke, marrye,  were marryed euen Gene. xix. vn to the very daye, that Nohe entered into the Arke, and the floude came  destroyed them all. Agayne as it chau~ced in the dayes of Loth, they dyd eate, dryncke, bye, sell, plante and bylde, but the very same daye that Loth wente out of So|dome, it rayned fyre and brymstone from heaue~ and destroyedde them all. Accordynge to those thynges shall the daye be, whan the sonne of ma~ commethe.
To marrye or to be marryed is no synne, so Howe it is yn to mary. that it be done accordyng to Goddes worde, but to marry as they dyd in the tyme of Nohe, that is to saye for pleasures sake only, and to be fyl|thy in wycked conuersacion as the Sodomites were in the tyme of Lothe, this is synne, thys is wickednes, this is hygh abhominacion, this stin keth before the face of God, and deseruethe euer|lastynge dampnacio~. What other thynge dothe the moost parte of men now dayes? As I maye speake nothyng of the fylthy Sodomites, which he wycked  of  lenge nowe  dayes. alas for pitie, are now to common in the worlde vniuersally, hoe many nwe a dayes contracte matrimony aryght and after the word of God? Who regardeth not more the pleasure of y^e flesh, than the hauynge of frute? Who hath not a res|pecte rather to the worldely rytches, than to the honest qualities  godly vertues of her, whome

he entendethe to marrye? Who regardeth not more the vanite of beautye, than the honeste of condicions, in as muche that a common pro|uerbe is rysen therof among vs: I wyl, say they vngodly pro uerb s. haue a wyfe somewhat snowtefayre, though she be somewhat whoryshe. Agayne, what payne is it to me, though other good fellowes fare wel, so that I fare neuer the worsse? Item, God saue y^ ouen, that baketh such bread, that all the whole house fareth the better for it: O extreme abhomi nacion. O shameles beastes. O vnnaturall mo~ stures. O wycked cloddes of the earth. It sha|meth me to thynke, that they are not ashamed to speake. It shameth me to speake, that they are not ashamed to do. It shameth me to do, that they are not ashamed to reioyse of. O very vili|ons  beastlyke slaues. Who is able to expresse eyther by tonge or penne theyr wyckd abhomi|nacio~. Fleshly pleasure before hauynge of frute? Ritches of the world, before ritches of y^ minde? Beauty of face, before honest qualities  godlye vertues? Ah whorysh loue. Ah adulterous wed|locke, Ah vayne vanite. A fayre woman wythe|out discrete manners sayth Salomon, is lyke a ryng of golde in a swynes snowte. Agayne fa|uoure is deceatfull and transitory, and beautye is a vayne thynge, but a woman that fearethe God, is to be comme~ded. The lyppes of an har|lot,

sayth Salomon, are a droppyng hony o~be, Prouer. v. and her throte is softer than oyle. But the con|clusion and ende of her, is as bytter as worme|wood, and as sharpe as a two edged sworde. Her feete go downe vnto death,  her steppes pearse thorowe to hell. And what other thyng, I praye you, is a rytche woman wythout godly qualiti What a ritch woma~ with oute good qualities is. es, than an asse laden withe a great multitude of treasure? Beholde vnto what poynte theyse whorysh loose bondes, housebo~des, I wolde haue sayd, are fallen. This maketh them to set so ly|tle by theyr wyue, and to haue harlottes in so great price. For whan they once haue that they desyred of theyr wyues, whan beauty begynneth once to decaye, whan the rytches are consumed, whiche were the alone occasion of hauyng theyr wyues, than cast they theyr wyues vp for haw|kes meat, as they say, tha~ are they wery of theyr olde pasture, and wyll looke for newe bayte.
To moche of one thyng, saye they, is noughte. Shyfte of meate is good. Iucundum nihil est, . nisi quod reficit uarietas. Therfore must ther sely poore wyues co~trary to the lawe of nature, God and man, be kepte for holy dayes, teyed vp at hard meate, only beare the name of a wyfe,  fylthy whores shall be mayntayned w^t all kynde of felicite, wealth and pleasure. O the preposte|rous manners of this worlde. O the sinistrall

iudgementes of these wedlocke breakers. O the great da~nacio~ y^ ha~geth ouer these whorehu~ters heades. I leaue of to speke of those abhominable Prouoke of theyr wy ues to leud|nes. vio~s, which prouoke theyr wyues wickedly to make theyr bodyes common to other for lucres sake. Neyther wyll I rehearse here, howe there be some husbondes, whiche let oute theyr wyues to other, euen as men vse to let out theyr hackney horses for mony, and be at a composicion wyth them, what they shal haue for theyr wyues quar terly, and they agayne shall for theyr monye at all tymes haue them not only at commaunde|ment but also at a becke or wyncke, yea the hus|bandes them selues wyll not disdayne to bryng them. I also let them passe, whiche when they se other frequent  vse theyr houses, yea and abuse theyr wyues euen before theyr faces, wyncke at y^ matter,  fare as though they knewe nothinge at al of it, as we reade of a certayne manne cal|led Galba, which, whan he sawe Mecenas, mi|nion Note. to Augustus the Emperoure dallyynge w^t his wyfe before his face, kyste downe his head, nodded and fared as though he had ben a sleape. O shamefull abusion. Can ony greater disho|noure chaunce vnto the holy state of honorable wedlocke? Do not theyse thynges requyre a re|dresse? Ware it not conuenient that the publi|que magistrates and common heade officers w^t 

y^ other nobles of y^ christe~ Realmes vniuersaly Say not but y^ ye be war|ned. should entreate of these thynges in theyr Par|lyamentes. Assemblyes, Synodes, Councels. c that whoredome myght once be banyshed, and christen matrimony truely obserued, faythfully kepte, and reuerently had in honour?
Furthermore as they set nought by theyr wi ues, so do they neglect the ryghte institution  Of the necli gent briyng vp of childre~ bryngyng vp of theyr chyldren, sufferyng them to do what they wyll. Go they to God or to the dyuell, as they saye, they passe not. Theyr exam ple leadeth the chyldre~ rather to perdicion tha~ vnto saluacion. For they heare nothyng of the~ but lasciuious wordes, wanton communicacio~  bawdy tales, or els chydyng, scoldyng, braw|lyng, fyghtynge, and alkynde of wicked rudenes What can children learue here? What goodnes Whense so great swar|mes of wyc|ked people a yse nowe a dayes. is to be sucked oute of the breastes of suche vn|godly pare~tes Wo worth them, yf they do no amend and correct theyr synfull manners. For here of commeth it to passe, that there are nowe a dayes so greateswarmes of wicked lyuers, as theues, whoremongers, bloudsoupers, men se|ars, abusers of the moost blissed name of God, false wytnes berers, extorcioners couetous par sonnes, dronckardes, glottonnes, fayned fre~des, traytoures, rebellions. c. Howe can they proue otherwyse, seynge they are brought vp wythout

ony feare of God, and without ony knowledge of Goddes moost blyssed lawe. It is a common sayeng, saythe Salomon, that a chylde / whan he Prouer. xx is olde, shall not go awaye from suche thynges, as he learned in his yougth.
Here maye we se as in a clere lampe of Phe|bus, howe greatly the glorious beauty of hono|rable wedlocke is defaced? Ah shall not that day once come agayne, that holy matrimony shal be restored to her olde fauour? Ah shal not we once se that daye, that that glysteryng strompet ad|ulterye shall be ashamed to shewe her face? Ah shall it not once come to passe, that these whore|hunters shall be ashamed to appeare in y^e syghte of honest maryed folke? Graunt, O Lord, grau~t I moost humbly beseche the, that it maye come to passe, yea and that shortely.
But some men peraduenture wyll maruell, The cause of the disho|nour of wed locke. howe it is come to passe, that matrimony now a dayes is so lytle estemed, and whoredome so commonly vsed, yea and that euen of the~: which haue wyues of theyr owne, or elles maye haue. Uereiy howe it chaunseth vniuersally, I know not, excepte it be, that we be more proe, redy  bent vnto vice tha~ vnto vertue, but of this am I certenly assured, that it is esy to declare some causes of thys great absurdite. Fyrste as tow|chynge Men of no|bilite. men of nobilite, we se dayely by experi|ence

that they for the moost parte marry theyr chyldren at theyr pleasure whan they are verye yonge, euen to suche as wyll gyue them moost mony for the~, as me~ vse to sell theyr horses, oxe, shepe or ony other cattell. Who that wyll gyue moost mony, shall be soonest sped. For all thyn|ges are obedient to mony. They are not certen, Eccle. x. whyther the parson wyll proue godly, vertuous, well disposed, wyse, prude~t, circu~specte, honest. c. to whome they marry theyr yonge chylde,  yet are they streyghtwayes redy to yoke them togi|ther, so that mony come. They had rather theyr chyldren should lyue euer after in perpetuall mi sery, than they woulde loose the sale of them, al|though they be scase sale worthy, they be so yo~ge. This kynd of marryeng hath euer ben detested euen of the very Ethnyckes, and of so many as haue ben illumined wyth ony sparke of prudent reason. And not without a cause. For wha~ they come once vnto the perfeccion of age,  se other whome they could fynde in theyr harte to fansy and loue better, than many of them begynne to hate one another, be wery one of another, spyte one another, and curse theyr parentes euen vnto the pytte of hell for the cowplyng of them togy|ther. Than seake they all means possible also to be diuorced one from another. But yf it be so, that they remayne styl togyther, what frownig

ouerwhartyng, scoldyng,  chydynge is there be|ene them, so that the whole house is fylled fl of those tragedies euen vnto the toppe. One ca|steth another in the tethe wyth theyr bloud and auncient stocke. Eche of them thynke theyr selfe best at ease, whan they be furdest one from ano|ther. There is nothyng more displeasaunt than one to beholde another. One wyssheth anothers death One draweth this waye, another y^ way. He fauoureth this parson, she that. He spendethe his goodes in this place, she in y^t contrary. Eche of them is gladde to bryde away from another. Thus goeth all to hauocke. Nothynge remay|neth in safe estate. What a wycked and heyke lyfe is this? The baser sorte of people seeth this vnquiet lyfe, that is vsed among y^e Gentylmen and theyr wyues, whiche ought to gyue an exa~|ple of all honeste and ge~tle softenes to other, th go they home, and if ony thynge, be it neuer so lytle, displeaseth them, streyght are they togither by the eares wyth theyr wyues, so that shortely after the whole towne is an a rore. If ony man beyng of a gentle nature and sofce harte mony sheth his neyghbour of his vnquietnes  rough entreatynge of his wyfe, he is also redy to faull out with him, and sayth, why maynot I punish my vyfe so well as suche and suche a Ge~tle ma~ dothe? Whome should we followe but our hea|des

and superiours? If it were not conuenient for vs so to do, I am sure they woulde not do it. O euell example that sowethe discorde betwene manne and wyfe. Who so euer offendeth one of Math. xviii. Luke. xvii. these litle ones, which beleue in me sayth Christ it were better for hym that a mylstone were ha~ ged aboute his necke, and that he were drowned in the deapth of the see. Wo be to the worlde be|cause of offenses. How be it, it can not be auoy ded, but y^t offenses must come. Neuerthelesse wo be to y^t man, by whome the offence co~meth. what is the orygynal cause of all theyse tragicall and bloudy dissencions, but only the couetous affec|cion of those parentes, which for lucres sake so wickedly bestowe theyr chyldren in theyr youth  yoke them with suche as they can not fauour in theyr age? Were it not better and more god|ly to leaue them vnmarryed, vntyl they were of a lawfull age, and than so to bestow them, that all parties should be contented wyth all,  euer after lyue quietly togiter in the Christen state of holy matrimony vnto the vertuous example of the baser sorte? At the least by thys means y^e parentes shoulde be wythoute blame. But it is not so lucrefull, I grau~t, not to the couetous pa|rentes, yet muche more profitable for the chyl|dren in tyme to come. And wo be to that father, which had rather satisfy his owne couetous af|feccion,

than to procure a quiet ma~ner of liuing Themisto cles. for his chylde. Themistocles although an Em|perour and a man of great nobilite, whan men marueled why he marryed his doughter rather to a good honest playne man of the contre, than to a great rytche man and one of an aunciente stocke, aunswered: I had rather haue a man w^t|out mony, than mony wythout a ma~, meaning that he which is a man, shall soone get mony y|nough for his necessary vses, but as for hym, y^e wanteth such qualities as belongeth vnto a ma~ thogh he hath neuer so many possessio~s in store  co~meth of neuer so hygh bloude, yet is he but a astard,  shal soone lose, y^t hath byn long in get tynge. Thus se we that the couetous affeccio~ of certen Gentyllmen, whiche for lucres sake ma|ry theyr chyldre~ before they come vnto any per|fecte knowledge eyther of the~ selues, or of other, is one occasion, why holye wedlocke is so lytle estemed nowe a dayes, and so large a wyndow openned vnto whoredome and adultry.
What shall we now saye vnto them, whiche at a iust and conuenient age come togither, yea and that not only by the procuremente of theyr parentes, but also by theyr owne consent,  yet lyue wickedly to the great dishonour of honora|ble wedlocke? Certes here must nedes be a great faulte, yf not on both, yet on one party. Dissen|si

on chaunceth many tymes betwene suche, be|cause Howe dissen sio~ chau~ceth many tymes betwene mar ryed folkes. one can not be contente to forbeare ano|ther, to gyue gentle aunswers, louyngly to che|rysh one another, and to be a lyke mynded in al honeste and godly thynges, but streyghtwayes faull out for euery lyght tryfle contrary to the bonde of matrimony. This engendreth muche hatred and displeasure betwene marryed folke, in so muche that yf it be not shortely remedyed by mutual reco~siacio~, it alieneth theyr myndes so farre one fro~ another, y^ scasely ther cometh e|uer after ony harty fre~dship  true loue betwene the~. This is a great dishonour to holy wedlock.
Some also haue such froward  scoldyng wy Frowarde  scoldyng wy ues. ues, that they can at no tyme be in quiet wythe them, they are so ladylyke, and hygh in the ynne steppe, chefely yf they broght ony substaunce w^t the~, than they thynke, y^t theyr husbo~des ought of very duty to gyue them place, to forbeare them, and to suffer them to haue the preeminence,  to do what they lyfte. The beastes wyll not be in subieccion to theyr husbondes, but rather take Gene. iii. i. Cor. xi. Ephe. v. Colloss.  i. Pet. i. vpon the~ to rule, as though not only theyr goo|des, but also them selues were not theyr husbon|des and at his commaundement, yea an that by the appoyntment of God. This ofte~tymes cau seth the husbonde to gyue hys mynde to strau~ge women, and to breake the bondes of wedlocke.

The woman is not behynde, but shapethe hym an hood of the same cloth, and so is holy matri|mony miserably rent and torne.
Some also there be agayne, whiche haue gen Crysh hus bondes tle wyues, louyng, faythfull, honest, obedient,  redy to do, what so euer theyr husbondes com|maundeth them, so it be reasonable, godly  ho|nest,  yet wyll they not be pleased nor conte~ted but lyke stubble curres, vngentylly entreate the~ beate them, buffet them, and put them out of the dores, handlyng them rather lyke dys clowtes, tha~ lyke honest wyues, vnto the great slaunder and ignominy of wedlocke.
All these do muche derogate, obscure  deface the dignite and excellency of christen matrimo|ny, yea and that so much the more, because they professe the same order of lyuynge, and yet lyue nothyng agreable to the same.
Another sorte of people ther are, which might Obiecto of pouerte marry, if they would,  yet do they rather chose to lyue in abhominable whoredome, than they would couple them selues wyth an honest wo|man in lawfull mariage. Many obiecte  laye for theyr excuse, pouerte,  saye, y^t if they shoulde marry, they were vtterly beggarde for all euer. To whome I aunswere, If they be no able to healpe for to mayntayne an honest wyfe, which wyll also laboure, worke and take paynes to get

her owne lyuynge, howe are they than able to Super  ostes. mayntayne theyr whores, and to awaye wy the the costes and charges that they spende in wan|ton and ryottous companye, as I maye speake nothynge of theyr waste mony, which they con|sume on theyr vayne iagged and garded appa|rell? Who euer wanted that lyued accordyng to Goddes worde? O thou wycked and shameles whorehunter, if thou thorow the sufferaunce of God haste ynoughe to fynde the and to satisfye thy beastelyke affectes  carnall pleasures, why doest thou dispayre of the blyssyng of God, yf y^u shouldest leaue thyne abhominable lyuyng, and take to the a true and lawefull wyfe? God lea|ueth no man socourles that putteth his trust in hym, and diligently laboureth for his liuyng ac|cordyng to his vocacion and callyng. Dyd not Christ turne the water into swete wyne at a cer an. ii tayne maryage to shewe that so many as lyue in holy matrimony accordyng to his word, shal neuer wante? The water of the ryuer shall so|ner be turned into wyne, and the stonnes of the Mar wel. felde into bread, than the faythfull shall be lefte socourles. Dyd not God fede the people of Isra|el wyth meate from heauen? Dyd he not gyue Exo. xvi. Psal. lxxvii. Exo. xvii. iii. Reg. xvii. them dryncke out of the hard rocke? Dyd he not make a crowe to bryng meat vnto the Prophet Helias twyse on a daye, and so wonderfully fed

hym? Eue~ sowyll he do with vs, yf we be fayth full, and seake to lyue accordynge to hys worde. The blyssyng of the Lorde maketh me rytche, Prouer. x. sayth Salomon, I haue bene younge, saythe the Psalmographe,  I am nowe olde, yet dyd I ne Psal. xxxvi. uer se a righteous man forsake~, nor his seed beg gyng theyr bread on the earthe. All the tyme of hys lyfe he sheweth mercy to the poore, and len|deth to them that haue nede,  yet hath he goo|des plenty and ynough for his chyldren that suc cede hym. Therfore thou that makest thy bodye co~mon to ony woman wythout the law of wed A good lesso~ locke, cease from thy wyckednes, leaue thyne ab|hominacion, get vnto the such a wyfe, as fereth God, louethe his worde, is gentle, quiet, honest, silent, of fewe wordes, seruiseable, obsequious, modest, louyng, faythfull, obedient, and redy to do what so euer becommeth an honest marryed woman. Couple thy selfe with her, lyue togither in y^e fear of God, in concord, loue  mutual ami te Suffer no dissension nor discorde to preuayle Follow thi counsell. Ephe. ii. betwene you. If ony displeasure aryseth, reco~cile youre selues streyghtwayes one to another. Let not y^t son go downe on your wrath. The your selues to be tha~ moost rytch, wha~ moost co~cord, amite, frendshyppe, beneuolence, and loue rayg|neth betwene you, yea beleue this for a suerty, y^t ye can not be poore, so longe as one of you loue

another vnfaynedly, and walcke in the feare of God, but if ye do not agre amonge your selues, nor loue one another hartely, than shall y^e curse of GOD faull vpon you, so that all that euer ye haue, shall go to hauocke, and be your goodes neuer so manifold, yet shall they come to nogh in shorte space.
Furthermore brynge vp chyldren in the nur|tour of the Lorde. Order your family and house The briging vp of childre~ holde vertuously and accordyng to gods worde. Let nothyng appeare in the  in thy wyfe, that maye gyue ony occasion of euell to them that be vnder the. Remember that God hath made the a Bysshop in thyne owne house, and that ther|fore Euery ma~ is a Byshop in hisowne house. Ezec. iii. and xxxiii. thou must be a diligent ouerfeare and cir|cumspecte in the gouernaunce of them. For yf ony of them that be in housholde wythe the pe|rysh thorowe thy faulte, theyr bloud shall be re|quired of thy hande at the dredfull daye of iudge ment. These thynges to fore co~sydered,  in thy dayly co~uersacio~ practised, faull y^  thy wyfe to labour, euery one of you, as god hath called you Laboure  pray to God y^t he wyl blisse, prosper, fortunate and brynge your labours vnto good effect, and doubte thou not, but that God shall so prouyde for the  thyne, that thou shalte wante no good thyng, as the scripture sayth: Taste and se that Psal. xxxiii. the Lorde is gentle, blyssed is that man, that tru

steth in hym. Feare the Lorde, O all ye that ar his Saynctes, for there is no scasenes to them that feare him. The rytche haue wanted and ho~ gred, but they that seke after the Lord, shal want no good thyng. Age~, Cast thy care on the Lord,  Psal. xliiii. he shall norysshe the. Awaye therfore wythe thy whoredome, and marry in the Lorde. Let no po|uerte plucke the backe from the holy state of ma trimony.
Another sorte of wyueles people there are, y^ myght marry yf they woulde, and are of suffici ent habilite, yet do they abstayne from mariage only for plesures sake, because they maye y^ more frely ronne at rouers, defloure maydes, corrupt wynes, defyle wydowes, and lyue in all kynd of carnall voluptuousnes. For so longe as they be single, they thyncke it no greate offence thus to abuse them selues. Therfore to be bound to one woman only, they recounte it more than twyse an hel, and by this meanes do they continew in a damnable sate of lyuynge. For the Scripture sayth, neither whoremo~gers nor adulterers shal . Cor. vi. Ephe. v. enheryte the kingdome of heauen, All those par|sonnes aforsayde cause that holy wedlocke is so lytle estemed, and that whoredome and adultry is so greatly vsed at this daye.
Hytherto haue I declared howe greatly y^ ho nour and renowne of holy wedlocke is decayed.

and by what meanes it is come to passe. What remayneth now but that some remedy be fou~d? And would God that all men woulde employe theyr endeuour in this behalfe. Woulde God y^ Ephe. vi. whoredom and adultry were so detested among vs, that it myght not once be named, as y^e Apo|stle fayth. Would God that all whorehunters  adulterers were so abhorred among christe~ me~, that no man would vouchesafe to eate with the~ i. Ioan. i. nor to kepe them company, no nor yet to bydde them God spede. Certes it is a thynge much to be wondered at, that whoredome shoulde growe vp into suche heyght, among them that professe How greuou slye adultrye was punis|shed in times paste. The Egipti|ans. the fruytes of the spirite. But what maruell is it, seynge that whoredome nowe a dayes is be|come, but a lusty courageous pastyme of youth  reputed almoost for nosynne at all. We read, that yf a man amonge the Egiptians had bene taken in adultry, he should openly in the prese~ce of all the people haue bene scourged naked wyth whyppes vnto the nomber of a thousande stry|pes. The woman that was taken wythe hym, I wolde all whores we|re so serued now adayes also. The Arabi|ans. had her nose cut of, wherby she was knowe~ euer after to be an whore, and therfore abhorred of al men. Among the Arabians, they that were take~ in adultry, had theyr heades stryken from theyr bodies. Among the Athenians adulterers were ponyshed by death wythout mercy. In lyke ma|ner

is it at this day among y^e Tartaris,  yet The Atheni|ans. The Tarta reans. The Ger|maynes. are they Infidels. If a woma~ among y^e Germai nes in tymes past, had bene conuicte of adultry, she had all the hear of her head cut of, beyng stry ped starke naked, her husband put her out of his dores before his neighbours, and in y^e syght of al the people he scourged her w^t whyppes about the cytye or towne, and euer after she was so despi|sed, that no man would wouchesafe to marry w^t The turke her Amonge the Turkes euen at this day, they that be taken in adultry bothe manne and wo|manne are stonned streyghtewayes to deathe wythoute ony mercye. Was it not so lykewyse The Israeli tes. Leuit. xx. Deu. xxii. among the Israelites by the commaundemente of God?
Thus se we how whoredome and adultry in tymes paste haue bene ponysshed, and yet is in certayne nacions, Woulde GOD it were not laughed at euen amonge them, that moost of all ought to mayntayne the purite and clennes of matrimony. But the redresse of all these moost The ciuile magistrates ought to re|dres all enor mites. greuous enormities partayne vnto y^e ciuile ma|gistrates, whose office and duty it is to prouide that all whoredome  adultry be banyshed oute of the boundes of Christendome, that holy wed locke maye once agayne be had in price,  resto|red vnto her olde beauty  pristine glory. Howe this thyng may moost conueniently be brought

to passe, the hygher powers for theyr wysdome and discrecio~, wherwyth they be endewed from aboue, shall easely consyder. I beseche God pros|per Ageral ad moicion. theyr moost godly trauayles in these  suche lyke enterprises, that vertue maye encrease and vice decaye. In the meane season it shallbe very expedient that all men seake to lead an honest, pure, cleane and godly lyfe, and not suffer them selues by no meanes to be spotted wyth the fyl|thy synne of abhominable whoredome, Let the~  folke that be marryed seake none other straung com|pany, but let the husbonde be co~tented with his owne wyfe, and the wyfe wythe her owne hus|bonde. Let them that be vnmarryed, and canne aryed. not lyue w^tout y^e co~pany of a woma~, get the~ wi|ues of theyr owne, and so lyue godly togither. For it is better to mary, than to burne. And to auoyd fornicacion, sayth the Apostle, lette euery i. Cor. vi. man haue a wyfe of his owne, and euery woma~ Si~gle liers an husbonde of her owne. As for suche as entende not to entangle them selues wyth ma|ryage, but determyn to lead a sole and contine~t lyfe, let them seake all meanes possible to mayn tayne the same, as by readynge the holy Scrip|tures, by godly meditacions, by contynual pray Cupiens ui tae Scylla~ incidit in Charybdin ers, and suche other vertuous exercyses, vnlesse whil they abstayne fo~ y^e art of matrimony. Sa tan our olde aduersary drawethe them vnto all

kynde of wickednes, and suche vicious vnclean|ns, Preache Gouernors. as maye not here wythe honeste be named. Let all preachers also in theyr Sermons exhorte y^e herers vnto purite of lyfe. Let all fathers and mothers, masters and mastresses with all othe gouernours se that none vncleannes be vsed a|mong them that are vnder them. To conclude, let vs all seake and deuyse all meanes possible, y^ holy wedlocke maye once agayne be had in such honour, that all whoredome, fornicacion, adul|try, incest and all other vnclennes maye vtterly be abhorred, detested  hated worsse than any ve nemous serpent. And to encourage all manner of persons in this behalfe, I haue sette forth this Treatyse ensewynge of Christen matrimonye, which teacheth so largely all thynges that per|tayne vnto that kynde of lyfe, that who so euer readeth it and practiseth the same. I doubte not, but as he shal be occasioned to forsake all vnclen nes, and to embrace holy matrimony, so shal he be moued to gyue God thankes for the settynge forth of this lytle worke in our maternall tong I beseche GOD, that it maye brynge forthe no lesse frute, than I haue entended by the settynge forthe of it. For well shall it be wythe Christes Chyrche, if they maye once se holy wedlocke had agayne in honoure, and whoredome banysshed oute of the boundis of Christendome.

This lytle Treatyse (moost gentle master Gryse) for the honest and ryght harty fre~dshyp, that hathe euer ben betwene you and me, syns y^e fyrst tyme of our acquayntau~ce,  for the qui|et and godly conuersacion that I haue euer per|ceaued betwene you and the vertuous Gentle woman your wyfe, and for the godly institucio~ and honest bryngyng vp of your chyldren, I de|dicate to you, as a manifest testimony of myne vnfayned loue and ryghte harty aite towarde you and all yours, desyrynge you frendely to ac cepte this my lytle gyfte, as the present of hym, whiche though he be absent in body, and far fro~ his natiue contre, yet is he present wyth you in spirite, and wysheth to you, and to so many as tender the glorye of God, and the promocion of his holy word, all good, happy, fortunate  pros|perous thynges in Iesus Christ, our Lorde and omnisufficient Sauiour for all them that repe~t beleue vnfaynedly, and walke accordyng to his worde, in whome I bydde you all well to fare. Grace be wyth all them, that loue the Lorde Iesus Christ vn|faynedly.
Ame~.



 The Author to the Christen Readers.
_AMonge other greuous synnes  shameles blasphemies which in this last euell  pere|lous tyme haue sore encreased, (halas therfore)  preuayled vn to a great no~ber. Thys is not y^e lest, I meane aduoutry with shameles whore|dome,  all manner of vnclennes in vayne wor des and vnchaste workes. All this nowe co~meth Uices haue lst theyr  mes. bycause y^t suche vyces beare no more theyr owne right names,  therfore doth no man esteme the~ as they are in them selues, and in the syghte of God. The bloudye murtherer (I nede not here to speke of a rougher name) is called a good bold man of his handes, The vserer is named a good honest man. To be droncken, is to be mery. To ommit whoredome, is called as muche as o ex ercyse the worke of man, and to do as yong fol|kes that can not lyfte them selues vp vnto hea|uen. Many there be, y^ boast them selues of adul try, yea many make but a iest, mockage  sporte therof. To caste oute vnclenly wordes, nd to synge vayne songes ofrybaudrye, is called good pastyme, yea in many places (the more pitie) it is come so farre, y^ these  such lyke vices are cou~ ted no synne, neither is there any thyng rekened

for synne in a maner, saue only to talke of God and hys trueth
For no ma~ is despised, reproued  resisted for To talke of god and hys worde icou~ ted a greate offence. quarellynge, vsury, whoredome, swearynge, ly|enge, dronckennes, glotonny, vayne songes, wor des, talkynges and gestures. But yf ony man speake of God, and reproue suche conuersacion for a vayne and vngodly lyuyng, or do synge of God, or meddle wyth suche songes as are made of  gracious worke of the holy Gospel, agaynst falshode, hypocrisy, ydolatry and vice. He maye not be suffered, he shall soone be despysed as one that slaundereth honest folkes,  medleth withe newe straunge thynges. Wherfore seyng y^ such Whoredome nowe a day|es is shame|les  comon. vices haue loste theyr owne ryghte names? and shame is become honeste, we haue thys fruyte therof, that the vnclennes of shamefull whore|dome and aduoutry, is nowe become altogither common  shameles in the worlde. For thoughe some nowe onely of an euell custome, some tho|rowe the ignoraunce of Gods worde, resorte af|ter vngrarious co~pany and folysh pastyme, yet for the moost parte do they followe whoredome and aduoutrye in ydelnes, euen of a shamefull wycked purpose.
They also that lyue in wedlocke,  committ  Wycked ly|uers in wed|locke. neyther whoredome nor aduoutrye lyue yet so miserable in other poyntes, that thorowe theyr

ersacion nyther God is praysed, nor them sel|ues set in quietnes of conscience, neyther are o|ther men edified therby. Hereof spryngeth nowe an horrible blasphemy in the whole congregaci|on of all estaes and lyues. For the chyldre~ that are brought vp in suche abhominacions,  haue sene nothynge but vyce (whan they also come to mariage and common offices, lyue as they haue learned, sene, and are accustomed, euen fleshely, shamefully, vaynely, rudely, vnfrendely, vnma|nerly, vnchristenly, and plant none other thynge saue only that whiche they haue of them selues. This commethe also, bycause that wedlocke is not kepte as it ought to be, and because it proce|deth euell, euen wythout God, and agaynste the lawe of equite.
Many knowe not who dyd institute and or Errours a|boute Ma|trimony. dayne holy wedlocke, nor what wedlocke is, ne|ther for what intente it oughte to be embraced. Many haue respecte onely vnto goodes, y^ they maye be rytche, or come into great frendeshyp  make an hand. Many take wedlocke vpon them as another common custome, because that after the course of the worlde, they wyll do as other foes.
Truethe it is, that in many places there is earnest preachyng agaynst suche abhominacion and vyce, but the worde of preachyng prospereth

not on euery syde For al dominions, cities, cou~|trees Why thys boke was compyled. and people wyll not gyue place to the hole some doctrine of the Gospell. For asmuche also as that which is wrytten, endureth longer and goethe further than it that is spoken, therfore haue I gatheredde this booke concernyng holye wedloke, and sent it oute in wrytyng: specially to the confusio~, diminyshyng and wastynge of al the forsayd vnclennes: to the honoure, prayse, commendacion and plantyng of true clennesse, for the good instruccion of symple marryed peo ple: to the intente also that wedlocke maye well proceade and be kepte,  that nothynge be done amysse, thorowe ignoraunce or euel custome, or for faulte of doctrine. To the intente also that all vertue and honeste maye preuayle, and that men maye walke soberly accordynge to the com maundement of the Lorde. For this is y^ wyll  commaundement of the Lorde (as Paule sayth) euen that we shoulde be holy, that we should re|frayne i. Thes ii ii. from whoredome and vnclennes, y^t eue|ry one of vs, know, how to kepe his vessel in ho lynes and honour, not in the luste of concupis|cence, as do the heithe~, whiche knowe not God. For this intent is all our enterpryse, y^ true cha|stite  clenlynesse maye be described vnto euery man,  that fylthy condicions may be auoyded God graunt his grace therto.
Amen.





The christen state

 The begynnynge  fyrste originall of holy wedlocke, whan, wher, how, and by whome it was ordined and instituted.  The fyrst Chapter.


_WHa~ our Lord Iesus Christ in the rr. of Mathewe, was spoken to in ertayne poyntes concernynge wedlocke, he hadde a respecte behynde hym in to the olde Testament,  gaue answere

oute of Moses, that he sayd, howe that wedlocke at the beginynge was ordyned of God himselfe. For as muche therfore as I nowe also am myn ded to speake of the begynnynge and fyrst origi|nall of holy wedlocke, I owe no better, tha~ in lyke manner to stablysh the same out of y^e ryght excelle~t Prophet of God Moses, who writeth  testifieth in the seco~d Chapter of his fyrst boke, y^t God made the ma~ Ada~ altogyther perfect, set h in the Paradise or garden of pleasure, and after ward sayd immediately: It is not good that ma~ should be alone. I wyll make hym a fellowe hel|per to stand nexte by hym. For whan the Lorde The pate Gen. ii. Playnelye ed had shapen man oute of the earth, he brought vn to hym all maner of beastes, that he myght giue euery one his right name, howe it should be cal|led,  that he might looke vpon the~. But among the~ al found he none apte to be ioyned vnto him selfe, none that he could set his harte vpon, none lyke hym selfe, none that he myghte dwell by as by an helper and conforter. And vpon this sayd God: It is not good, that man should be alone. And therfore determined he withe hym selfe, to make an helpe and conforte vnto man. In the whiche processe we perceaue alreadye, where ho|ly Wed locke was institu|ted of God  aradyse. wedlocke was instituted, namely in the Pa|radise and garden of pleasure: yea and whan it was ordined, euen in the begynnyng of y^e world

before the fall of ma~ in all prosperite. Of whom also it was instituted euen of no Aungel or ma~ but of God hymselfe, doubtles to mannes great conforte and healpe. For in as much as god him selfe sayth: It is not good for man to be alone: It followeth, that it is good for man to haue his owne lawfull mate. As for that cul which some tyme is sene and sound among maried parsons, it commeth not chefely of holy wedlocke, but of the misusyng therof, and because men do not as God commaundeth and as they shulde do.
Nowe wyll we farther consyther, howe God dyd institute holy wedlocke,  he hymselfe made a companion for man, and brought him a wife. It followe the thus in Moses: Then the Lorde God cast a slomber on Ada~, and he slepte. And The creaci of the wom he toke out one of his rybbes, and in stede therof hefylle vp the place wyth flesh: And thus oydde God make the woman, out of the rybbe that he had taken from Adam. Of this maner dyd god make for man a companion, lyke vnto hymselfe, and mete for hym. Here nowe ought we to consi der the occasion, why GOD made the woman out of the slepynge man, and not whyle he was awake. Of the rybbe,  not as well of the earthe, as he had made the man to fore. For all this ser ueth to the declaracion of our purpose.
Fyrst in the slepe of Adam, dyd he set forthe y^

death of Christ, out of the which (vnto the same Lorde Christ) there is prepared a pure and holy spouse in the Fountayne of water thorowe the worde, as Paule sayth to the Ephesians y^ fyfte Chapter Of suche health and grace of GOD should marryed folkes also haue vndersta~dynge and knowledge. Moreouer his mynde is to sig|nifye vnto vs that in takyng holy wedlocke in hand, all te~tacions should slepe. The ordinau~ce regard, and feare of God, ought to ioyne them togither, that are disposed to marry. The wo|man was taken from and out of the syde of ma~ and not from the earthe, least ony man shoulde thyncke that he had gotten his wyfe oute of the myer: but to considre, that the wife is y^e husbon|des flesh and bone, and therfore to loue her. yet was she not made of the head. For the husbond is the head and master of the wyfe. Nether was she made of the feete (as thoughe thou mighteste spurne her away fro~ the,  nothyng regard her) but euen out of thy syde, as one that is set next vnto man, to be his helpe  companion. And as the bone of the flesh is strong, so ought the hus|band to be the strengthe, healpe  conforte of the wyfe. Therfore was she also taken and created oute of the ryb or bone, and not out of the fleshe.
But in the circumstau~ce that followeth, shal euery thing be more playne afterward. For now

it followeth howe God gaue the woman vnto man, and how that he receaued and toke her.
God brought the woman vnto Adam, and as it is euident in the fyrst Chapter) he blyssed them and sayde vnto them, growe and multiplye, and Ada~  Eu were maried togither. fyll the earth. Out of the which wordes we may perceaue clerely, that God was the fyrst causer of wedlocke, and fyrst dyd knyt them togyther,  blyssed them. Nowe as soone as the woma~ was brought vnto Adam,  gyuen vnto him, he sayd immediately: this is once bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh. Afore dyd Adam beholde  con|sidre all beastes and lyuynge creatures here vpo~ earth, and gaue euery one his peculiare name ac cordyng to his kynde, but among all thynges ly|uynge he found none, to whome he myght beare an harte and mynde, namely to dwell by it, to loue it, and of it to procreate one lyke vnto him selfe. And therfore is it reason, that wythe fyre they be punyshed vnto death, which agaynst all kynde and nature of man, haue to do with bea|stes, and not only with women.
As soone now as the woman was set before Ada~, he knowledged immmediatly, that she was Occasion of loue and con sent into ma riage. for his purpose, that he lyked her well,  that he could fynde in his harte to loue her, as one that was of his owne kynde, of his owne bloud, flesh of his fleshe, and bone of his bone. For thoughe

he slepte, and the woman was created out of his rybbe, yet sawe he well that she was lyke hym  suche one as he hytherto had not found amonge all other lyuynge creatures. God also had pla~ted the~ the kynde, the loue, the harte, the inclinacion  naturall affeccion that it besemeth the one to haue towarde the other. Lyke as Ada~ nowe had yuen all other beastes theyr names according to the fyrst originall  operacion of theyr kynd, so gyueth he nowe a name also vnto the wyfe,  calleth her Ischa, that is to say, of man, because she was taken out of the man.
The~ foloweth it farther in Moses. For this cause shall a ma~ leaue his father and mother,  cleaue vnto his wyfe,  they two shalbe into one flesh. These wordes doth Adam (or ts Moses) The knotte  coueuaunt of mariage. speake yet out of the mouth of God,  therby de clarethe the dewty knot and couenau~t of maried folkes, namely that the hyghest loue, bonde and vnite among them, should be this, that no man separate them asunder, but only deathe. This de clareth he with two speciall poyntes. Fyrst, the is no ma~ (nexte vnto God) derer vnto vs by all reason, the~ is our father and mother. But wha~ they wyll make discorde betwene maried folkes, God commau~deth a man in that behalfe to for|sake father  mother,  to kepe hym to his wyfe. The loue therfore in mariage ought to be nexte

vnto God) aboue all loues. The seconde: They two, saythe he, shall be into one fleshe, that is to saye, one body. Nowe lyke as the greatest loue, the moost excellent and vnpayneful seruyce, di|ligence and earnest labour, is in the partes of a ma~s body, one doyng for another, one louynge, defendyng, helpyng  forbearynge another, suffe rynge, also lyke ioye  lyke payne one with ano|ther. Euen so ought it to be betwene man  wo man in wedlocke. And lyke as the partes of a mans body seperate not the~ selues one fro~ ano|ther afore death, eue~ so must wedlocke be a knot vnlooseable. And lyke as the partes of a mans body, whan they are sundred one from another conceaue an exceadynge great anguysh, dolour and payne, euen so ought it to he an exceadynge grefe for marryed folkes to be seperated.
And thus Moses, ouer  besydes that he de|clareth y^e fyrst originall of holy wedlocke, layeth also the foundacion of lawes matrimonyal, out of the which all other statutes are taken. After the fall of Ada~  Eue, there was nothyng added further vnto wedlocke, neyther altered in those thynges that were ordyned, sauyng that, by rea|son of the faull and synne, there was sorow and payne layd vpon the~ both, and vpon vs all. For vnto man it was sayd: In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread. c. And vnto the woma~

sayde God: I wyll surelye encreace thy sorowe whan thou art with chylde,  wythe payne shal thou be delyuered, and to y^e husbande shalt thou haue respecte, and vpon his pleasure depende. Neuertheles thorowe thy vnfayned fayth in Ie|sus Chryst, all these  other grefes are minished in them that beleue, and therby vnperfectenesse is helped, in so muche that they come to a verye prosperous olde age many tymes.
Thus much thought I to shew out of Moses that excelle~t seruau~te of God, wha~, where, how, of whom,  partly for what intent, holy wedlock was instituted namely, how that God himselfe in Paradyse, at y^ begynnyng of the world (eue~ in the tyme of ma~s innoce~cy  prosperite) ordey|ned thus for the welth of ma~, that one ma~  one woma~ ioyned togither shulde be one bodye, one to loue the other aboue al thinges next vnto god the one to be coupled to the other without sepa|racion, one to helpe  socour y^ other, and in the fare of God to bring vp theyr childre~, And this is in a maner the whole summe of the one parte of this boke.


The seconde Chapter.

What wedlocke is.

FOr vpon the sayde foundacyon will I laye  set forth all my worke folowynge. And fyrst wyll I shewe what wedlocke is. Tha~ whan I haue descrybed the same, I shall open 

declare the articles therof particularly.
That we call wedlock, is in the Germaynes Wedlock tonge called Ee, which as it is a very old word, so is it somtyme taken for a law or statute, som tyme for a bonde or couenau~te. Thus is the old testamente called the law or the olde couenaunt, the new Testament, the newe law or y^e newe co uenaunt: because that ther in consisteth not one lye the lawe that god gaue to the olde and newe people, but also the couenaunte whiche he made with them bothe. The latinistes cal it Coniugi urn, a ioyninge or yokinge together, like as wha~ two oren are coupled vnder one yoke, they beare or drawe together like burthen and wayghte.
Therfore is wedlocke a couenaunte, a cou|plinge Ayo kyng together. or yokynge together. Nowe yf wedlocke be not the couplynge or yokynge together of one thing, the~ must it be excepted, from other knyt|tinges, and we must geue vnto it the owne na|ture  propertie pertayninge to it selfe. Namclye that it is a ryghte knotte vnto god acceptable ayokinge together of one manne and one woma~ withe the good co~sente of them bothe. Here vnto also must we adde, why  wherfore they shoulde and must be yoked together. Euen to the intent that they maye lyue honestlye and frendlye the one with the other, that they maye auoyde vn|clennesse, that they maye brynge vp children in

the feare of god, that the one maye helpe and co~|forte the tother.
Out of thys maye we comprehende a shorte What wed lacke is. descryption of wedlocke, and saye. Wedlocke is a lawefull knotte and vnto God an acceptable yokynge together of one man and one woman with the good consent of them both, to the inte~te that they two maye dwell together in frende|shyppe  honestye, one helping and confortynge the tother, eschuynge vnclennesse,  bryngynge vp chyldren in the feare of god Or els set it after this maner folowyng: Wedlocke is the yokynge together of one man  one woman, whome god hath coupled accordynge to his worde, with the consente of the~ both, from thence forthe to dwell together, and to spend theyre lyfe in the equall pertakynge of all suche thinges as god sendeth, to the intent that they maye bring forth childre~ in the feare of hym, that they maye auoyde whor dome, and that (accordynge to Gods good plea|sure (the one maye helpe and conforte the other,


 The thyrd Chapter.

 The declaracion of wedloke thus described.

NOwe wyll we playnely open euery par|cel of the sayd descripcion from article to article,  (w^t testimony of the scriptures) proue and establysh the same, where nede is.

Fyrst that wedlocke is the couplyng togithe Onema~ an one woman. of one man and one woman, not of one man  m women, or of one woman and mo men, the Lorde himselfe affyrmeth it Math. xix. and so is it wtytten also in the seconde of Genesis. Nowe where as some of the holy fathers had more wy|ues than one, those were but the Actes of certen priuate men, and not such general examples, as are thorowly to be followed.
Agayne, the priuate dede of some, or of many men, make no common lawe. The Lorde in the fore rehearsed place of Mathewe, dyd alleadge  renew y^ olde law of mariage agayne. Therfore he that nowe wyll bryng in the multitude of wi ues, shall follow more the rule of Mahumet, th of Christ.
Moreouer by yokynge, ioynyng, or couplyng do I vnderstande not only an outwarde dwel|lynge togyther, but also an vniforme agremen of mynd,  a comon participacion of bodye and goodes, for asmuch as the Lord sayth playnely: And they two, shall be into one flesh, that is, one body. But of this we shall speake further after|ward, wha~ we come to treat of the consentyng.
Furthermore, wedlocke must not onely be a couplyng togyther, but it must also be such a cou plynge togither as commeth of God, and is not contrary to hys worde and wyll. For where as

certayne men do alleadge out of the holy gospell (what God hath cowpled togyther, let not man separate)  conclude theron, that whan two par|sonnes come once togyther,  the one hath taken the other, it must nedes be fast,  no man maye breake y^e band. Such me~ haue not so good respect to the wordes of the Lorde, as they shoulde. For the Lord sayd not what so euer is coupled togy|ther, ought not or maye not be separated. But thus he sayd: What God hath coupled togither Let not man separate y^ God hathe coupled togi ther. let not man separate. Therfore must it be con|sidered not only whether two parsons come to|gyther, but muche rather whether it be done w^t God or no. That thyng is wyth God, which is not done agaynst his commaundeme~t  worde.
There be many whome God coupled not to gyther, but carnal lust, mony, good, flattery, dro~ kennes, a fleshely arme and frendeshyppe, where God is not thought vpon,  therfore synne they the more agaynst hym. It is wrytten in y^ syxte Chapter of Genesis: The sonnes of God sawe the doughters of men, that they were fayre, and toke vnto them wyues such as lyked the~. Wher|by euery man maye perceaue, that ther was loue  lust, a consent  couplyng togyther, but ther|fore plesed it not God. The same maner of oo ynge dothe the Lorde recyte also in the. xxiiii. of Mathew, and sayth: As they were in the dayes

afore the floude, they dyd eate, they dyd dryncke, they marryed  were maryed, eue~ vntyl the day that Nohe entered into the Arke,  they regarded it not, tyll the floud came and toke them all a|waye. Thus also shall the co~myng of the sonne of man be.
There is no man nowe so dull, as to thyncke that it is synne to marry. Therfore was not that reprehended as thoughe it were a synfull  vnright thyng to marry, but because they came  togyther after the worde of the Lorde, yea rather they followed theyr owne te~tacions as I sayde afore. Wherfore Esdras dyd separate di|uers mariages, yea eue~ of those that bore a good affeccio~ y^ one to the other,  were coupled togy|ther. Diuor For it was not God, but theyr owne tenta cions that ioyned the~. Esdras y^e. x. chap. The yo kyng tha~ of maryed folkes togyther must be fra med ryght accordyng to the word  wyll of god.


 The fourth Chapter.

The ryght couplyng togyther of Christen folkes in mariage.

CErtayne poyntes now shall I set forth, to the whiche those faythefull Christen men must haue respecte, y^t entende to take holy wedlocke vpo~ the~, accordyng to y^e wyll  plesure of god. Fyrst though mariage also concerne the soule and inwarde man, yet pertayneth it lyke|wyse

to the outwarde thynges, that are subdued Statutes  lawes matri montall ma|de by rulers. to the hygher powers. For where as faythful ru lers haue ordeyned, good apte, and conuenient statutes and ciuile lawes, suche ought no reaso|nable Christen man to resist, but muche rather is he bounde to obey them, lyke as the holy Apo|stle Peter hath wrytten and taught. i. Petre. ii. Be ye subiecte (ayth he) to all ciuile ordinaun|ces of men for the Lordes sake. The hygher pow ers haue authorite to make Ciuile lawes in out warde thynges. And who so withstondeth such, bothe wythstonde the ordinaunce of God, and therfore shall God ponysh hym, as Paule testi|fyeth. Roma. xiii.
Secondely, the Lorde saythe. Deutero. vii. Religio~ and faythe must be considred youre doughters shall ye not gyue to theyr son|nes (meanyng the vnfaythfull  Infidelles) and theyr doughters shall ye not take for youre son|nes. Therfore in goynge about mariage, a chri|sten man must fyrst looke that in handfastynge hymselfe to a woman he make no diuorce of the true fayth, or brynge it into parell. For it follo|weth in the lawe. For they shall make your son|nes to fall away from me, and to serue strating Goddes. And then shall the indignacion of the Lorde waxe whotte ouer you, and destroye you shortely. Neuerthelesse yf there be no daunger of faulyng awaye from Goddes trueth, or of hur

tyng the same, then (concernyng mariage) it ma keth no matter though the partie dwell amonge Infidelles, or come of vnfaythefull fathers and mothers, For Booz, whiche was grandefather to Iesse Dauids father, married a Cananite of Ierico euen uth, whom the Euangelist recy|teth in the Genelogy of Christ Iesu mat. i. For she was right faythfull,  abhorred al ydolatry.
Elles yf there be parell presente, that the one shalbe caryed away vnto errour, then hath not onely the lawe in the olde Testamente spoken there agaynst, but Paule also commaundeth in the second to the Corinthians the sixte chapter, sayeng: Beare not a strau~g yoke with infidels. For what felowshyp hathe righteousnes wythe vnryghteousnes? What company hathe lyghte with darkenesse? What concorde hathe Christe wyth Belial? Or what parte hathe the beleuer with an Infidell? How agreeth the Temple of God wyth Idolles: Ye are the Temple of y^e ly|uyng God. c.
Mariage is a co~mon participacion of mynde body,  goodes. Now sayth Paule: What vnyte can a faythfull beleuer haue wyth and infydeler. The vnbeleuer cleueth to vnrighteousnesse, to darkenesse, to ypocrysye, to erroure, euen vnto the deuell and to ydolatry. Agayne: the faith|full beleuer despyseth, abhorreth  condemnethe

all such thinges, loueth righteousnes, the trueth of the Gospel, the lyght, euen the Lord, and hath God lyuyng in hym. How wyll these two now drawe one yoke, whiche are of suche a contrary mynde? To drawe one yoke, is a maner of spe|kyng and is as muche to say, as to haue fellow shyp, and to yoke the~ selues togither in wedlock To beare a strasig yoke, is it to take an vnfaith What it is to beare a  yoke ful mate, or one to gyue ouer himselfe vnto such thynges, as maye alienate hys mynde fro~ God  his trueth. And verely what woma~ so euer ta|keth an vnbeleuyng ma~, must drawe after hym in vnbeleue, yea  do, se,  heare that whiche is cleane contrary vnto fayth, and hurteful to her soule. The chyldren also shalbe brought vp in in fidelite. And thoughe it come not to passe whyle the parentes be alyue, yet happeneth it after the death of the faythfull? Whyle such yoked folkes also are alyue, there is no tranquilite:  finally the beleuer must be in continuall discorde wyth the vnbeleuer, or els must he graunt vnto her  so do agaynst God, agaynst his own soule, and agaynst his conscience. Therfore must we take good aduisement afore hand, leest we yoke oure selues, our fre~des or our chyldren with vnfayth ful people, to the great hurt of our selues  ours
Thou wylt say: For asmuch now as I haue An obiection an infidell to my mate. I perceaue that ther can

be no mariage betwene hym and me, therfore wyll I departe from hym. To this doth Paul The solucio~ aunswere the. i. Cor. vii. yf a brother (that is to saye a Christe~ man) haue an vnbeleuyng wyfe  she be content to dwell wyth hym, let hym not departe from her. And yf an woma~ haue an vn beleuyng husbonde,  he consent to dwell wythe her, let her not departe from hym. For the vnbe leuyng husbonde is sanctifyed by the wyfe, and the vnbeleuynge wyfe is sanctifyed by the hus|band. Els were your chyldren vnclene, but now are they holy. But and yf the beleuyng departe, lette hym departe. A brother or a sister is not in subieccion to suche. But in peace hath God cal led vs. c. We must therfore put a difference be|twene it that is done already, and it that is yet to do. A wedlocke is it (no doubte) that after the common custome and law is openly and iuste|ly celebrated, of euery man estemed for wedlock. But yf in the same there be any erroure or ble|mysh, that errour should not be defended or bro ught into other mariages. Neyther oughte men therfore immediately to conclude  saye: Myne vnsemely mariage is therfore no mariage at al.
Wherfore, whyle the matter is not yet past, euery man ought to beware, that he nether hys be snared in daunger. We can note well the ble|myshes of the body, much more ought we to con

sidre the blemyshes of the soule. We should take ensample by Salomon, seyng it is manifest, vn to what poynte the vnbeleuing women brought hym, although he was the wysest amonge men vpon earth. But whan the matter is done alre|dy, let euery ma~s mynd be to kepe that thyng y^ God hath called hym vnto, and do that mooste conuenient is, makynge faythfull prayer vnto God, and followynge the counsayle of the holye Apostle Peter, whiche (i. Pet. iii.) he gaue to the women that haue vnbeleuyng husbo~des, saye~g: Let the wyues be in subieccion to theyr husbon|des, that euen they which beleue not the worde, maye without the worde be wonne by the good conuersacion of the wyues, whan they se youre chaste lyuyng in the feare of God.
It plesed not Paul, that in wedlocke al hope should be sodenly cast of for vnbeleues sake, and vyolence ministred to seperacion. For in y^e fore recyted place to the Corinthians he sayth after this manner. For what knowest thou woman, whyther thou shalte saue the man or no? Or y^u manne, whether thou shalte wynne the woman or no?
Wherfore he that is snared in such a case, let him call vpo~ God, and lyue in his fear, in fayth fulnes, in pacience, in long sufferynge, in discre|cion soberly and in vnfayned loue. Yet let euery

Christen ma~ take hede, that for his wyues sake e consent to none ydolatry, neyther defyle him selfe withe the workes of vnbelefe. Lette euery man remember the wordes of the Lorde: Who so loueth father or mother, wyfe or childre~, sister or brother, londe or substaunce, more then me, is not worthy of me. But let hym alway cry vpo~ God for succoure, counsayle, conforte and helpe. So shall he faythefully not onely shewe hys lo|uynge kyndenes, but also fynde remedy, and de|clare hys healpe.


 The fyfth Chapter.

To a ryght mariage, must chyldre~ also haue the consent of theyr parentes.

MOreouer lyke as God  faythe shoulde not be denyed or forsake~ wythe y^e mari|age, eue~ so they whiche are nexte to god (as father  mother ought not to be neglected  Marke wel. despysed. For though God sayd: A ma~ shall for|sake father  mother,  kepe him to his wyfe, yet those his wordes in y^e same place, are co~cerninge mariage y^t is made alredy (what duty they y^e are maried owe y^e one to y^e other)  are not touching the contractyng of wedlocke, that chyldren may mary, without the respecte, knowledge or co~sent of theyr pare~tes, vnder whose authorite  iuris|diccion they be. And I wonder what the papisti call bokes  learned men dyd meane, whan they

taught that the consent only of both the parties doth faste~ the matter,  coupleth the~ togither in mariage: The co~sent of y^e pare~tes also, say they is good with all, but whan they two haue co~sen ted, and one hath taken the other, y^e knot can not be vnknyt, neyther maye the parentes seperate the~ from a sunder Wher as lawes both natural (diuine specially) and ciuile, require the pare~tes consent to the chyldrens mariage: In so much y^t they iudge the promyse to be of no value, which is made without the knowledge of the parentes yea  that also in those chyldre~, which as yet are not come to theyr yeares,  are yet vnder the tui cion of theyr elders. Forin as much as the chyl|dre~ are not yet come to perfecte discrecio~ they ca~ not co~tracte mariage which requireth vndersta~ dyng, yea they can nether cou~sayle nor helpe the~ selues. So y^ in this behalfe y^ co~sent of theyr pa|rentes is not only necessary but also good  pro fitable for the~, As for preuy co~tractes which are not made according to the lawes, they haue euer bene reiected, neyther were they acceptable to a|ny Preuy con|tractes. man, saue vnto suche as were ignoraunt and wycked. For why: for the moost parte they are made of some fond affeccio~, yea knauery, falshod  disceate is commo~ly the doer, to persuade,  by wordes to take yong folkes in the snare. Many priuy co~tractes are brought to passe w^t flattery,

wyth dronckennes, wyth rewardes  promises, wherby young ignoraunt people are vtterly be|gyled  destroyed. To gyue liberte  lice~ce vnto suche, is euen as muche as to gyue a mad ma~ a swerd,  a knyfe to a yong chyld, yea a very slau~ Note. dering is it  a dishonouryng of mariage. Diso bedie~ce of chyldre~ also toward theyr parentes  tutours, hath euer bene reprehended among all nacio~s. God co~masideth and sayth: Thou shalte honour thy father  thy mother. Nowe doth the Ed. xx. Chyldrenne must honour theyr paren|tes. Isaac. obedie~ce or disobedie~ce of y^e chyldre~ at no time de clare it selfe more than in contractynge of wed|locke. Greater honour canst thou not shew vn|to thy parentes, than whan thou followest the~ herein: neyther greater dishonoure than whan thou herein resistest them. Esau displeased hys pare~tes very sore, in takyng his wyfe w^tout their co~sent. Iacob followed theyr mynd  was co~me~|ded. This commaundement also of honouryng our pare~tes, dyd our Lord Christright faythful ly, co~mit vnto vs. Math. xv. In the. vii. of Deu. doth God gyue this charge vnto his people say enge: You shal not marry your sonnes  dough ters to the vnbeleuers. By the whyche wordes we maye well vnderstande, that the authorite of marryeng yonge folkes, lyeth in the parentes  not in them selues, Wherfore Abraham before the lawe charged his seruaunt Elieser, that con|cernynge

the contractynge of mariage betwene Isaac  Rebecca he shulde do his message wythe Bathuell and not specially wythe Rebecca her selfe. The seruaunt also dyd hys eacande to the parentes and not to the daughter, althoughe he founde her alone wythoute by the well syde (and had tyme, place and occasion sufficient so to do. This lawe dyd Sampson obserue. Iudicu~. xiiii. For though he had found  spyed a damsell that Sampson. pleased hym, yet he toke her not, but fyrst shewed hys parentes, brought them wyth hym vnto her  toke her wyth the knoweledge and consent of hys father and mother.
In the seconde boke of Moses, the. xxii. Chap Note thys precepte. ter doth God commaund thus. If a man begyle a mayd that is not detrouthed, and lye with her he shall endote her, and take her to hys wyfe. If her father refuse to gyue her vnto hym, he shall paye mony accordynge to the dowry of virgins. Here dothe GOD gyue the father authorite to take hys doughter from the man, to whome she is promysed els by the lawe. Therfore maye the parentes drawe the chyldren agayne to theyr iu risdiccion. For this is a singuler great thynge, that the father hathe authorite, to take his for|ced doughter from the man, and to wythdrawe her from hym, to whome she was promysed by the lawe. In the fourth boke of Moses the thyr|ty

Chapter it is wrytten thus: If a damsel vow Chyldre~ may make no vo we nor pro|myse  the parentes consent. a vowe vnto the Lorde,  bynde her selfe beynge in her fathers house and vnmaryed: yf her fa|ther heare her vowe and bond whiche she hathe made vpon her soule, and hold his peace therto, then all her vow and bond which she hath made vpon her soule, shall stand in effecte. But and yf her father forbyd her the same day that he hea reth it, tha~ none of her vowes nor bo~des whiche she hath made vpon her soule shalbe of alue. c. Although nowe in these sayde wordes of God, there is no marryage but vowes expressed and named, yet is it an euident testimonye, that no chyld which is not yt come to hys yeares, and is yet vnder the tuicion of his parentes, hathe aucthorite to vowe, bynde, or alter it selfe wyth|out theyr consent, yea yf any suche vowe or alte racion do chaunce, that then the parentes haue athorite by the lawe of GOD, to lette and hynder the same. For in as muche as. God per|mytteth to vnbynde it, and wyll not that it shal be of any effecte, whiche wythout consent of the parentes is promised to hym selfe, no doubte, he wyll not that it shall stande immutable whiche in disobedience is wylfully done without the pa tentes consent.
The holy Apostle Paule in the fyrste Chap, of y^e fyrst Epist. to Timo. amonge many other

greuous synnes, rekenethe also the stealynge a|way Me~stealers of men, whiche is a shamefull vyce, whan mens children, seruauntes or suche other folkes as belong vnto them, are caried awaye or enty|sed fro~ them, Whan a wicked, sotel  shamelesse woman, entyceth an ygnoraunte yonge ma~ fro~ his father, which with great expenses trauayle  laboure hath brought him vp, whan she blyn|deth him with loue, and at the laste gettethe him awaye vnder the title of mariage: Or whan a wanton and fayre tongued fellowe entycethe a damesell from hyr mother, and than (vnder the tytle of mariage) conueyeth her awaye, what is it els but menne stealyng:
Thus I trust it is manifest out of gods word and the lawe, that to the laweful mariage of the children, the consente of the parentes also is ne|cessary, and that the chyldren oughte not to cast theyr parentes a syde:  yf they do, that then the pare~tes maye refuse and dysanull the chyldrens promyse.
The eyuyle and Imperyall lawe requyrethe also the consent of the parentes, as it is many|feste The eiuile lawe. libro Pandeet. xxiii. Iustinian the Empe|rour Instit libro. i. tit. xi. wryteth after this ma|ner, lawfullye  ordinatelye do they co~tract ma|riage one with another, whiche come together after the co~maundementes:  lawes yonge men

whan they are olde ynough to take wyues, and yonge wemen whan they are of conuentent age to take husbo~des: but so that they haue the co~se~t of theyr pare~tes, vnder whose auctorite they be. That this shalbe so, wyllethe and chargethe the lawe eyuyle  naturale in so much that the fa|thers co~maundement must go before: These be Iustinians wordes, which are so manifeste and euyde~t, that they nede no further declaracyon.
Upon this do some men thinke, that theyr ma riage is no mariage,  that the one of the~ shulde nowe be separated fro~ the other seyng it is so lo~g sens they were co~tract agaynst the wyll of theyr parentes. But such personnes ought to considre that theyr parentes dyd not put the fro~ a sunder  therfore is theyr wedlocke now a lawfull wed locke, inasmuch also as in processe of tyme theyr parentes were reconcyled. And thoughe it were not so, yet openly accordynge to the custome of the comen lawes were they permitted to mary,  were solemply receaued in to wedlock, lyuynge honestely together, haue had chyldren, exercysed all dewties of mariage. Therfore ought they by reason to co~tinew styll in theyr matrymony   al poyntes to applye the~ selues to y^e feare of god
Some turne the~ selues another waye  sayes Thorowe such lawes are the poore snared, that they can neuer come to anye riche mariage, for

the rytch wyll not geue theyr chylore~ to the poore Wherby it may easely be perceaued, where the shoo wringethe them, that resiste thys aunciente good and reasonable lawe. Theyr harpynge is Note. vpon theyr halfepeny, theyr mynd is to be riche with mariage: neyther are the satisfyed to haue take~ awaye the chylde agaynste the fathers and mothers will, but agaynst theyr myndes wolde they haue the good also. These take not the child because of mariage, but for the goodes sake.
Thus doth iniquite discloose it selfe, that a man maye well perceaue, what it is that some menne seake in mariage. A reasonable manne whe|ther he be rytche or poore wyll allwaye haue re|specte vnto the feare of god, to honestye, to faith fulnesse, to laboure and vertue, and not to the Themisto|cles bagge of moneye. Themistocles desyred rather to haue a wyfe, discrete and a prudent personne then one that was rytche. But who so hathe more respecte to worldly substaunce, the~ to ho|nestye and knowlege, is a shamefull personne: lyke as he also that hyghly estemeth suche a ma~s Virtus post nuos. frendshyppe, and desyreth it for moneyes sake.
Nowe be as be maye: Who soeuer is greued with this lawe towchynge the consent of the pa re~tes, let him laye awaye hys gredye desyre, hys bragging and his fond affeccyon, and lette hym haue respect vnto god and vnto equytye. Lette hym co~sidre well the worde of the Lorde. What

thou wylte not haue done vnto thy selfe, that do not thou to other. So shall the law be more light vnto hym, and the more easy to beare.


 The syxte Chapter.

The pare~tes ought not to constrayne theyr chyldren to matrimony, nether to marry the~ afore thyr tyme.

IN this poynte also ought not the pare~tes to take to much vpo~ the~ selues because of theyr authoritie, neyther to abuse it, or to compell theyr chylde, eyther because of fylthy aduaun|tage or lothesomnes in takyng payne) to let him go,  haue no respecte vnto hym. For an vngod|ly and vnhappy thyng is it in the cause of mary age to co~pell a yonge ma~ agenst his wyl, to take suche one as he hath no harte vnto. For in mari age ought to be the full consent of both parties, w^t the consent of theyr parentes. Lykewyse also A good ad|monicion. wha~ a son or doughter are come to theyr yeares  ful discresion, but are of theyr pare~tes in y^e me ane season not looked vnto,  so afterward with a good aduise  deliberacio~ do honestly mary to gyther. Then ought the father well to considre, that thorow hys owne wrongful  vnrighteous demeanour, he hath lost his authorite as towe|chyng hyndryng  breakyng of that mariage.
For seyng that the parentes do not looke to the chyldren, nor make such prouision for the~ as pa|rentes

 tutours ought to do ( therfore are be|come nothyng lesse the~ the pare~tes) why would they the~ require of chyldre~ such obedie~ce, by the whiche the chyldren myght fall and peryshe in y^ daunger  snare of the dyuel: In suche causes ve rely is not a Christen man subiecte nor bonde, in as muche as all the lawes of God do extende  serue for the honeste, welfare, and preseruacio~ of man, and not for his destruccion. It hath oft tymes bene founde in dede, that suche mariages ontracted euen agaynst the wylles of suche vn faythfull and couetous parentes, haue ben pro|sperous, holy, and acceptable vnto God. Not w^t|standyng my purpose is, nother to co~mende the foolyshe affeccions, nether the wicked  wanton behauoure of certayne yonge wylfull personnes that feare not God. In summa, the measures ought here to be a lyke longe: euen thus, lyke as the chyldren must haue respecte to theyr pare~tes  not wylfully despyse them or cast them of: So shulde not the parentes wythout ony petie com pell theyr chyldren to mariage afore theyr tyme neyther wyckedly neglecte them, nor leaue them vnprouided for in dewe season. Good lawes, iust rulers, the feare of God and discrecio~, shall moderate this matter well ynough. Hereof also shall we treate more largely, in the Chapter of the consentynge.

Furthermore the age or yeares of the chyldre~ Mariage be fore the time must well be considered of the parentes. For an vnnaturall and vnhonest thynge is it, to mary younge folkes, whiche yet haue not attayned to theyr lawful and iust yeares. Many great sicke nesses do spring therof. Yo~ge mothers also haue no iust strength, nether to norysh nor to bryng forth frute. And sometyme hathe it chau~sed that they haue dyed of theyr impotent chylde. Lyke|wyse the chyldren whiche were borne of chyldre~ became sycke and feble: It shall also not be come ly for Christen menne, to haue lesse discresion herein, then the Hethen, whyche haue had great respecte to the age and yeares. For Plato, Ari|stotle and Heseodus appoynte the age of seuen|tene yeares to yonge women. Some there were that to yonge menne haue appoynted the age of nynetene or twentye yeares: for in those yeares be the powers somewha~t strengthened, and de|creace not then thorowe maryage, as they do in weake folkes. But herein maye euery manne be|haue hymselfe after the best  moost honest ma|ner, accordyng as the kynde, complexion  cause requireth.


 The seuenth Chapter.

 Of the iust co~sent of both parties into ma riage, and howe that maryage oughte to be free and vncompelled.


TO the sayd poyntes also must euery Chri sten man (whan he contracteth mariage) haue good respecte, namely y^ his wedlock be accordyng to the common lawes that it hyn|dre not y^e true beleue that it be done w^t the know ledge of his parentes, or of them vnder whose iu risdiccio~ he is, and that he marry not in the for|bydden degrees of consangu inite or affinite. Be sydes all this, and specially is required the free harty co~sent of bothe the parties, as it is recited in the discripcion. Wedlocke must be coupled to gither with the good consent of both the parson|nes. Concernyng the same good consent, wyll I nowe gyue this shorte instruccion.
This consent, is that ouergyuyng  graunt The consent of thy harte, whan vnto thy chosen spouse thou promisest and gyuest thy selfe ouer in wedlocke and in the hyghest loue  felawshyp that maye be vnder God. In the loue and consentynge of harlots there is also an earnest fauoure of y^ one loue towarde the other, but that is carnall and wycked, therfore doth the dyuell knyt that who|rishe and vnthrifty knot. The consentyng into mariage spryngeth out of gods ordinaunce and leaneth vnto honeste. For an ordinate and pure loue is it that she beareth towarde her chosen, by hym her desyre to remayne withe mynde bodye and good (accordynge to the worde of the Lorde)

to serue hym, to shewe her trouth plyghte vnto hym, to suffer well and woo wyth hy yke as it followeth also in the descripcion. That vnto theyr ende they dwell styll togyther, and spende theyr lyfe in the equall partakynge of all suche thynges as God sendethe. Therfore is it God hymselfe that knytteth the knotte of mariage. And whorysshe, carnall, and affetionate wyll, spryngeth of vicious lust and vanite,  hath not respecte to the glory and ordinau~ce of God, but vnto bewty or to other lyke transitory thynges. And as soone as the same faylethe, or yf he once myslyke her or se a fayrer, than fayleth the wyll and mariage also. But the wyll of lawfull ma|riage (as I sayd afore) consydreth the ordinaunce of God, regardeth honestye, and continuethe in loue, euen in aduersite as well as in prosperite. Herein also diffreth the consentyng in mariage from naturall inclinacion. A naturall thyng is it that two parsons which are of lyke kynd and complexion, of lyke nature and dispocisio~, of lyke maner and occupyenge, shoulde beare more wyll the one toward the other, than they do that haue no mutuall fellowshyp herein. Yet is not thys wyl comparable to consentyng into mariage.
Notwythstondyng suche proporcion in kynd helpeth muche (no doubte) to a more stedfast vnt te  co~sentyng togytherin holy wedlocke,  then

fore it is very good for the same. And to be short a matrimoniall consent is the same herte, dispo|sicion  loue, that Adam bore toward his Eua. He behelde all other creatures, and no~e lyked hi. But as soneas Eua was set before him, he sayd This same is once bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh, that is, she hath my hart, my mynd and my bloud. c. as it is sayd in the fyrst chap|ter. For her sake thought he that a man shoulde forsake father and mother and kepe hym onelye vnto her He knowledged that she was one body wyth hys, then must it follow also, that she had lyke mynd hart  wyll. For neuer one body hath The wil of mariage com meth of god. two co~trary wylles, but one body hath one wyl. And of God hymselfe is the same wyll planted and mygtely conceaued in man, for it exerciseth it selfe strongly,  preaseth after his lyke. Ther|fore was it ryght spoken of the~ of the olde tyme howe that maryage is prepared of God for all men. Herof co~meth it that many straunge mari Maryages are appoyn|ted and pre|pared of god ages are brought to passe not inordinately tho|row the workyng of god. But are take~ in hand and do not prospere, for God hathe not so ordi|ned it. In the. vii. Chapter of Toby doth the au~|gell saye, y^ Sara the doughter of Raguel should haue Tobias, bycause she was appoynted hym of GOD, and therfore dyed the seuen men to Sata. whome she was promised one after another.

In the. xxiiii. of Genesis, Whan the father and mother of Rebecca perceauedde the wonderfull Rebecca. worke of God thorowe the message of Eliezer, they sayde: This co~meth of the Lorde, therfore we can saye nothyng agaynst the, neyther euell nor, good: there is Rebecca before the, take her,  go thy waye wyth her. c.
Whereoute it is easye to vnderstonde, that mariage ought to come of a free herte, and ney|ther to be constrayned and compelled of the pa|rentes, nor of other menne. For in as much as wedlocke requireth both the parties good co~sent which no man can gyue, but only God, the pa|rentes Note well. maye not compell the chylde, but haue re specte to gods ordinance,  to the ryght ordinate consente of the parties, and considre whether it be or no. Bathuel and Labin had respecte to the ordinaunce of God, and whan they saw y^e same power before theyr eyes, yet sent they for theyr doughter Rebecca, to knowe her wyll also. And whan she of her owne free mynde hadde sayde yea, than was she fyrst sente awaye vnto Isaac her spouse. Thus haue we before our eyes ma|ny ensamples, wherby we may learne what mi sery  wretchednes foloweth oute of an vnwyl|lynge and compelled mariage. And therfore it were a great deale better for rulers, to loke fyrst that no manne shoulde compell his chylde, then

that they them selues afterward (when the mat ter is almoost past remedy,  hurte foloweth vp on hurt, shuld haue ynough to do wyth lytle pro fyt, and yet wyth much disquietnes.
Here muste the chyldren looke also, that they The inordi|nate affeccio~ of yong fol|lies. fall not immediately to discord for this matter, and violentlye despisynge theyr parentes (make has to theyr owne great hurte,  persuade them selues to be endewed wyth a wyll from GOD, which of God is not planted in them, but com|meth of theyr owne inordinate affeccion. For it happeneth oft tymes, that a chylde taketh suche a fashyon in hande as ought not to be, and dis|pleaseth GOD, and namely he goeth about to haue suche a parson as is not for hys honestye. As whan a yonge woman wyll neades haue a ryottous, wylfull whorehunter and wayster, or suche one as is forsworne and hath begyled ma|ny other. Or as whan a yonge man wyll nedes haue a vayne, wanton, fylthy, c. (Herein to pre uent the harme that myght come therof) the pa|rentes oughte to make obieccion,  to dispoynte them of theyr purpose. Yet should they not ther fore compell theyr chyldren into other mariages to the whiche they beare no harte nor wyll, but discretely enforme them, gyuynge them good in struccion, to gette that frowardnes from them but godlye to deale wythe them for theyr owne

wealth and honeste.
It chauncethe sometyme that the pare~es the~ The inordi|nate affeccio~ of parentes. selues deale not well, neyther seake honesty and equite, but only theyr owne inordinate affeccio~ and wyckednesse, where as sometyme the chyl|dren are more reasonable, and make obieccio~ to theyr parentes, comely and with good manner. It fortuneth also many tymes that the pare~tes stycke styll to theyr owne frowardenes, to theyr flthy desyre of lucre and wyckednesse, and go about to delyuer theyr chyldren forth in the bar gayue. The chyldren therfore sometyme (for as Unreasona|ble pare~tes ought not to haue they wylles. much as they are come past theyr years) beyng constrayned by suche violence, do aduisedly and in honeste prouide for the~ selues. In suche a case verely ought not the hyer powers to suffer that such vnreasonable parentes as feare not God, should haue theyr wylles.
For lyke as the inordinate affeccion of the chyldren is not to be permitted, whan they wyll nedes haue suche parsonnes as be to theyr owne destruccion: So can no equite alowe you, O pa|rentes, Marke wel. that for your couetous lucre sake, do set youre owne fleshe and bloud to morgage. youre opinion is (happely) to make sure prouision for them, but seyng youre enterprise commethe not of God, neyther leaneth vnto honeste, therfore do ye but sell them away. Let euery ma~ therfore

haue respecte to God, to honeste and to the right consent so shall God suffer no man to miscary.


 The eyght Chapter.

The occasio~s of wedlocke, why  wherfore it shulde be contracted.

ANd to y^e inte~t that the sayd consent maye yet the better be consydred, I wyll yet fur thermore (by the worde of God) declare, the occasions of maryage, why and wherfore it was ordined,  to what purpose it shulde be con tracted, that euery manne maye vnderstonde to what thynge he consenteth, whan he graunteth vnto mariage.
The causes of mariage are orderly sette and To brynge forth childre~ expressed one aft other in the descripcion therof, in the secon Chapter: Fyrst of all, they that are faythefull, do marry, to the intent that they maye brynge forth and haue chyldren togy ther. This cause is expressed and grounded in the wordes of God followynge: And god made Gene. ii. man vnto hys owne ymage, in the ymage of god made he hym, man and woman created he them And God blyssed the~,  sayd vnto them: Growe and multiply, and fyll the earth. They therfore that are beleuers, do marry to the intent y^ they maye haue chyldren. They knowe well also that to be frutefull or barren / cometh of God. Ther fore do they knoweledge that they haue not the

chyldren of them selues, but of God. And this What a tre|sure it is to aue frute. cause is no small nor lyght thynge. For to haue chyldren is the greatest treasure. For in the chyl dren do the parentes lyue (in a maner) eue~ after theyr deathe. And yf they be well and luckely brought vp, god is honoured by them, the publi|que weale is auaunced, yea all men (theyr paren tes also fare the better for them. They are theyr parentes conforte nexte vnto God, theyr ioye staffe, and vpholdyng of theyr age.
The vnbeleuer regardeth not this cause, but The vngod|ly hate to be frutefull. feareth he shall haue to many chyldren, putteth not his trust in God, wyll not giue hymselfe to laboure, and therfore lacketh he the honour and good, y^e groweth out of thite vnto the fayth full, whose harte  lust, is set with hys mariage to please God, and to plante  brynge forth pro|fitable frute vnto men, yet happenethe it many tymes, that euen they whiche feare God, are dis apoynted of thys frute, and that verely because that they (not without the ordinaunce of God) shulde haue no chyldren togyther whiche thynge the faythfull also doth paciently take at y^e hande of God gyuynge hym thankes for that in trou|blouse tyme of famyn, battayle, persecucio~  pe|stilence theyr crosse is so muche more thesyer to cary, aswell as he (to who~ God gyueth chyldre~) doth ernestly tha~ke hym for makyng hym frute

full. Of all this haue we a notable ensample in the thre holy Patriarches, Abraham, Isaac  Ia cob, whiche is more manifest vnto euery man, than that we nede to speke further therof. Ther fore thoughe thys cause fayle, so that God wyll gyue the no chyldren, yet is thy mariage righte in the syghte of God. For there be other causes also, for the whiche wedlocke was ordeyned, and for the whiche it is contracted.
And namely it is contracted lykewyse of the faythfull, to the entente that they maye auoyde To auoyde whoredome whoredome and all maner of vnclennes. Thys cause also doth Paule laye before the Corinthi|ans in the fyrst Epistle the. vii Chapter  sayth It is a quiet and commodious state for a man, not to towche a woman. But to auoyd whore|dome, let euery man haue a wyfe of hys owne,  euery woman her owne husband. He sayth it is a quiet state of lyuyng for a man not to touche or lye w^t a woman: yea if God haue graunted hym  gyuen him the gyfte, that he may wel and without burnyng, lyue chaste  vnmaryed. But if a man or woman maye not so do. God hathe gyuen the~ the medicine of maryage,  wyll not esteme the worcke therof, as synne, whoredome, vnchastite or vnclennesse. For he sayth playnely let euery ma~ haue his owne wife,  euery woma~ her owne husbond. To be theyr propre owne or Note.

peculiar maketh y^e mariage. As for harlottes  vnthriftes, they are not perculiar propre or own one to another, but borowed  lent for a tyme.
It foloweth yet more playnely in Paul, how The worke of martimo ny is no syn. that he not onely vouch saueth the worke of wed locke to them that be maried, but commaundeth also (yee and taketh away the priuate power of either of them both therin)  sayeth clearly, that nether of them maye denye vnto the other the dewe worke of matrymonye. Let the husbande, (sayth he) geue vnto the wife dewe beneuolence. Likewise the wife vnto the husband. And this with comelye wordes expresseth he the actuall Marke wel. worke of mariage which certayne of the Corin|thians, of a speciall chosen holynesse  falfe fay|ned clenlynesse, had vtterlye denyed vnto theyr maried spouses, thinkyng therby to be very holy clene and spirituall. But Paul co~maundeth the~ to mary the one to geue dewe beniuolence vnto the other no doubt for the auoydyng of whordo~e  eschui~g of vncle~nesse. For it foloweth in Paul immediatly after: The wyfe hath not power of hir awne bodye, but the husbande: Lykewyse the husband hath not power of hys awne body, but the wife. Wherby he forbyddethe, that nether of the~ shall denye his body vnto the tother. For Math. ix. they two, sayth the Lorde also, are one bodye.
Hereof doubtlesse dyd the holy  godly lerned

bysshoppe take the same whyche he spake in the great cou~saile at Nicea, where as he sayde, that . it is dennesse also, a man to lye wyth his owne maried wife. For Paule in the same chapter speakyng of wydowes  wydowers saiethe that it is good yf they so remayne, but immediatelye addeth he therto, sayenge: Neuerthelesse, yf they can not absteine, let them mary. For better it is to marye the~ to burne. And within a litle after he sayth moreouer: But and yf thou take a wife thou synnest not. Beholde, what could be more clerely spoke~: To mary (sayth the Apostle) is no synne, then must it folow also that the worckes of mariage are not synne, not of the~ selues but because of the mariage selfe  gods ordinaunce.
And that more is then all that we haue yet Uirginite is  holy  ex cellent thing. spoken of, it foloweth farther in Paul: And yf a virgyn mary he or she synneth not. For euery man knoweth well, howe holye and excellente a thing virginite is,  yet sayth Pauel, that a vir gyn sineth not yf he or she lose theyr virginite in mariage. The~ must it folow, that god rekeneth not the worke of mariage for synne  vnclennes But synne and wicked vnclennesse is it to com mytte whoredome. Fylthye  abhominable is it Deflouryng of virgins. to force or begyle a virgin. For Paul sayth fur|thermore in the. xiii. to the Heb. Mariage is to be had in reuerence  honour amonge all me~) 

the bed of them that are maried, is vndefyled. As for harlottes  aduoutrers, God will iudge the~. How much more wil he iudge them that ra|uyssh virgyns? Iob saieth in the. xxxi. Chapter I made a couenaunte with myne eyes, that I wolde not loke vpon a virgyn. For howe heuye is the punishement of god fro~ aboue? And what inheritaunce and rewarde geueth the almygh|tye from an hy? Destroyeth he not such vnchris tes? and casteth he not out the~ that medle withe such wickednsse. c.
The wise man Salomon sayeth Prouer. v. Beglad with thy maryed wife, whom thou hast taken in thy youth,  loue her as a deare chosen hynde. Let hyr brestes satisfye the at all tymes, and reioyse styll in her loue. For why shuldeste thou come nye an harlot (my sonne) and haunt the bosome of a straunge woman? In the which wordes, Salomo~ like as Paule also co~mendeth and prayseth the loue and worke of mariage as clenlynesse, but draweth men from whoredom as from it that is nothing but fylthy. Therfore (doutelesse) mariage was instituted to auoyde whoredome and vnclennesse and the worcke of mariage is rekened of God for no synne. All which thinges I haue the more largelye spoken of,  proued and confirmed the same with holye scripture: And though I dyd not gladlye take in

hand to wryte of this matter yet haue I done all this to helpe many suared co~sciences, whiche without occasio~thorow the ignoraunce of gods leaue and lawe do piteouslye trouble and vexe themselues here in. I hope therfore noman wyll mysconster me, seynge I haue spoken nothynge but that which Paul dyd wryte afore.
And in all this matter is it well to be considred Masure  shamefast|nesse. that like as shamefastneste, comlynesse and te~pe rau~e is good in euery thynge, so is it good here also and exceadyng necessary. Wedlock is hono rable and holy, therfore must not we as shame lesse parsonnes cast awaye good maners,  be|come lyke vnresonable beastes God hath geuen and ordened mariage to be a remedy and medicy ne vnto our feble and weake flesh, to swage y^e dis quietnesse therof,  to the intent that we should be cleane and vndefiled in spirite  in body. But yf we rage therwith,  be shameles in our wor|des and dedes, then our miste~ peraunce  excesse maye make it euell whiche is good, and defyle it that is cleane. Paule also is content, that as co~|cernyng the bed, maried folkes vpon a due occa|sion, may ly the one from the other. But so, y^t it i. Co.  be w^t the good consent of them bothe, And y^t not alwaye or longe, but only for a tyme, leest the di uell be busy,  tempte them with whoredome or vnclennes, or deceaue them wyth aduoutry.

The thyrd cause is this: Eue~ to the entent y^ To auoyd solitarinesse, to helpe  co~ fort one ano ther. the one maye be an helpe  conforte to the other accordyng to the wyll of God, auoydyng solita|rinesse. Whiche the Lorde expressed wythe these wordes. It is not good for manne to be alone, I wyll make hym an helper to be nexte vnto him. And wythin a whyle after, he saythe moreouer. They bothe shall be one fleshe, or one body. So that lyke as in the partes of a mans body there is a mutuall healpe or participacion of the one toward the other. Euen so ought it to be also a|monge marryed folkes. The one ought to be an eye, eare, mouth, hand and foote to the other In trouble, the one must be the co~forte of the other. In aduersite must the one be the othrs refres|shyng, yea  in all theyr lyfe must the one be the helpe  socour of the other. And these are the cau ses why wedlocke was ordeyned, and wherfore they that are faythefull beleuers do mrry, and y^e occasions whervpo~ y^e ro~sent bothe leaue  rest.


The nynth Chapter.

The ende fruyte and commendacion of holy wedlocke. Howe blyssed, honourable  good a thyng it is.

BY this now is it easy to vnderstond what is y^e ende, vertue  frute of wedlocke,  how holy, profitable  good a thyng it is. This is y^e ende of mariage whervpon it leaneth. Not

to be aloue, but to haue a co~panion in this lyfe, that wyll helpe to beare wealth  woo, euen such one as thou canst fynde in thyne harte to loue, and of whome thou arte loued agayne, that by the same thou mayst fynde a medicine and swa|gynge of the weakenes of thy vnquiet flesh, and so voyde whoredome and all fylthy lyuynge, to brynge vp chyldren vnto the prayse of God, and to the publique wealthe, profyt and conforte of thy selfe, and other thy neyghbours. c.
Wherfore the vertue, operacion, effecte, and The opera|cion of wed|locke. frute now of mariage, is to confort, mayntayne helpe, counsayle, to clense, to further vnto good mannrs, honeste and shamefastnes, to expel vn lennes, to auaunce the honoure of God  the publique weale, and to sette vp many suche ver|tues moo.
Hereof commeth it that wedlocke is a great Wedlocke is holy and ho|nourable worke and holy ordinaunce of God, whiche defy leth or vnhaloweth no ma~, saue hym that taketh it vpon hym w^t an vncleane harte. Whome (to saye trueth (not the mariage, but his owne wic|kednes defyleth. For it is alwaye holy  right in it selfe,  all such as receaue it wyth true hertes, doth it allowe  bryng to honour. It hath euer also bene of an excellent estimacion  had a glo|rious name of all prudent people, in so muche that Paul durst boldely saye: Wedlocke is hono

rable among all men, or in all the worthe.
For wedlocke dyd God institute by himselfe  not by his Angels or holy me~, as he dyd othr good statutes  ordinaunces, yea euen at the be gynnynge toke he it in hande in Paradise that Marke w garden of pleasure, no doubte, for the commodite  not for the grefe of man. Wythoute Paradise were all other ordinaunces made, but euen in Paradise was wedlocke ordeyned. And yf all ordinaunces haue theyr propre comme~dacion  honour of theyr fyrste begynner of the antiqui|te, of the place where they were mae, or of y^ pro fytte that they bryng. Then verely is wedlocke moost worthy of prayse  honour, as a thyng in stituted of God hym selfe, euen in Paradyse, at the begynnyng of the worlde, for the wrath and commodite of man.
Therfore in mariage lyued the holyest, the moost vertuous, y^e wysest  moost noble me~ vpo~ erth: yee the holy ghost is not ashamed, euen in the fyrst boke of the byble, very playnely to take  wryte nothyng els for the moost parte, then of mariages, chylbren, or byrthes, and suche other Genes The  poyntes of housholdyng in wedlocke. Ada~ was a marryed man, so was Enoche, Nohe, Abraha~, Lothe, Isaac, Iacob, Iosaphat, Iob, Moses, Aa|ron: And so were other Regentes, Iudges, Pre|stes and Kynges, Iosue, Gedeon, Phinees, Sa|muel,

Dauid, Ezechias, Iostas, Osas, Isaias, and other Prophetes o. Dauid commendeth the state of mariage as a singulare blyssynge of God, whiche he sendeth to them that loue him,  who~ he loueth,  sayth. Psal. cxxvii. Blessed are they all that feare the Lorde,  that walke in his wayes: for thou shalte lyue wyth the thyng that thou hast gotte~ thorowthe labour of thyn owne handes. O how blyssed  happy arte thou? Thy wyfe is as a frutefull vine that standeth by thy house syde: Thy chyldren round about thy table are eue~ lyke Olyue trees newly planted. Lo thus shall he be blissed y^ feareth the Lorde. c. and this is the cause that the wiues of the olde testame~t, toke it for a great dishonour  plage, whan one of the~ was at any tyme barren or vnfrutefull.
In the new Testame~t it was y^ good plesure of our Lorde Iesus, to be borne in mariage, For Math. i.  the virgyn Mary was marryed vnto Ioseph of the house of Dauid, yet co~ceaued she of the holye Luke. i. ghost,  brought forth her chylde beyng a virgyn her selfe,  remaynyng a virgin. The fyrst mi|racle that oure Lorde Christ dydde. The same wrought he at a weddynge,  namely suche a mi racle as is able to gyue co~solacion in maryage, Ioan. ii that euen in thynges pertaynyng to this tempo rall lyfe) God wyll not leaue them vnprouided for, that mary in the feare of hym  in the fayth

of his euerlasting worde: yee that he both can  A great  ma|ryed  will turne the vnsauery water of all trouble, in to theswete wyne of gracious comforte. The holy apostles  preachers of Iesus Christ had wifes, as Paul the Apostle. Phil. iiii, reporteth of him selfe as Peter and the other Apostles. . Corin. ix. and as Luke. reporteth of holy. Phi|lippe, Act. xxi. And Eusebius. Eccles. Histo Lib. iii. cap. xx. Paul calleth theyr doctrine that in|hthite  forbyd mariage, the doctryne of the de|uell, and saieth. i. Tim iiii. Thesprete speaketh euidently, that in the later tymes some shall de|parte from the faith, and shall geue hede o di|sceatfull spretes  to deuelish doctrines: thorow them that are lyers in ypocrisie, and haue theyr conscyences marcked with an whot yerne, for|bidding to mary. c. Therfore foloweth it that the doctryne which doth set forth and knowlege wedloke to be holy, honorable, profitable, ne|cessary and good, is gods doctrine, euen true and good, holy, and vndefyled.


The. x. Capter.

 How shamefull, vycious and abhomina|ble, the synne of whordome i.

ANd to the entent that the praise honour goodnesse  co~me~dacion of holy wedlock may the more clearly appeare, I will now set whordome ryght ouer agaynste it on the other

fyde, and declare how shamefull, vycious,  ab|hominable it is before god  all honestye: That youth may loue the honoure of god, and auoyde dishonesty:  y^ euery one may eschewe vycious whordome, and betake hym to holy wedlocke.
Paul the chosen man of god writeth thus to the Corinthia~s: Flye from whorome. All the Whoredome defylethe the members of Christ which is thy owne body. synnes that a man doth, are without his bodye but who so committeth whordome, synnethe a|gaynst his owne body. And immediately afore the sayd wordes, he expressethe the vndersto~ding of this se~tence,  sayeth. Know ye not that your bodies are the membres of Christ? Shall I than take Christes membres,  make them the mem|bres of an harlot? God forbyd. Paul then wha~ he spake those wordes (All the synnes that a ma~ dothe, et c.) had repsecte vnto wedlocke. For lyke as wedlok maketh of two personnes or bodies, one personne and one bodye. Euen so lykewyse  the spirituall mariage, namely the receauynge of gods grace, in that we are baptysed i~to christ and become Christen maketh one body betwene Christ and vs beleuers, so that we be called and are in dede Christes membres. Nowe lyke as he y^ is maried (yf he take another besyde his wife dothe synne agaynste his owne body: Euen so lykewise doth that Christen ma~ synne agaynste his owne body, yf he commytte whordome. For

he dishonoureth the grace of Christ,  defylethe the holy couenaunt made betwene: Christ and him. For it foloweth in Paule: Knowe ye not, that he which ioyneth himself to an harlot, is be come oue body For they two sayth the lord shall be one flesh, or one bodye. But who so cleuethe vnto the lorde, is one spyrite. Neuertheles tho|row whordome is the sprete banished and exclu|ded. For thy sprete, herte and mynd that ought to leue vnto y^ lord, is ioyned to y^e harlot, withe whom thou art one and incorporated Therfore they that co~mytte whordome, do synne agaynst the couenaunt and spirituall mariage, where with we must be ioyned vnto Christ.
Furthermore it foloweth in Paul: Or know Whroedome robbeth god of his owne. ye not, that your bodyes shuld be the te~ple of the holy goost, which is in you who~ ye haue of god,  y^ ye are not in your awne power? For ye are dearly bought. Wherof it foloweth constantly that they which commytte whordome, do disho|noure and waist away theyr owne bodyes. For they geue ouer theyr me~bres, yee theyr hert and mynd vnto whordome: And yet Christ for his i. Pet. i: honoure  our clenlynesse dyd bye the sane, and that not with mony, but with his owne bloud. It foloweth also, that they which are geuen vn|to whordome, be vnder the great plage of god. For Paul saith here, that Christe~ mens bodies

are the te~ple of god the holy goost. Thus saleth Whoredome he he  of god he. i. Cori. iii. yf any ma~ defyle the te~ple of god, him shall god destroye. Is it not an horryble de|fylynge of gods te~ple, to set that vycious harlo Wenus, eue~ in the place where god shuld reigne with his sprete,  to be ioyned  do seruice vnto her with body  soule? Let them come forth now  for| s a ous sin. that wyll alwaye excuse syngle fornicacion, as though it were not synne (or at the leest not so greate syn) one syngle person to abuse another. Paul the Apostle of Christ saieth, that whor|dome deuydeth vs from God, breaketh the coue|nunt which we haue wyth God, spoyleth and robbeth god of that which is his, mysordreth the ms of god, maket of christes me~bres y^e mem b of an haclotte, defyleth and vnhaloweth the te~ple of god, the~ therfore that wyll folow whor|dom, shal god destroye. Yf all this be to be este|med but a small thinge, then do I confesse, that whoredome and fornicacion is euen as lytle a synne, as vyious vayne people do make it.
It is more then ones also, that Paul him selfe Whoredome shut me~ oute of heauen. shutteth whormongers out of heauen, who so beleueth not my wordes, let him reade. Rom. i. i. Co. v. and. vi, Gala. v. Ephe. v. i. Tess. iiii. To the Hebrues he saieth planely, that as for whoremongers  aduoutrers, God wyll iudge them. What can be more sayde? Yf thou not

wythstondyng all this, wylt yet say, that whor|dome or fornicacion is no synne, then cryeth the holy Prophet Esaye that horrible woo vpo~ the and sayth, Esaye. capit. Woo vnto you that call euel, good. Or do ye not knowe, that euen nowe in this tyme, God doth sore punysh whordome as a great vice: Paule sayth. i. Corin. x. Lette vs not co~mitte whoredome, as some of them of olde dyd,  were destroyed in one daye a great no~bre. It is euident what slaunder  dishonour, Sam|son brought vnto hym selfe, specially to the glory  name of God among Gods enemies  hys,  among all the children of Israel w^t his bolde and vicious whoredome,  howe shamefull an ende he made by the means of the same harlot.
In the fyfth of the Prouerbes of Salomon saye after this maner: The lyppes of an harlot Whoredome spoylethe a ma~ of his ho neste body  good. are as aswete droppynge hony combe, and her throte is softer then oyle: but her end is bitterer then death,  as sharpe as a two edged swearde. Her feete lead vnto deathe,  her pathe drawethe vnto hell. Therfore se that thou go not in vnto her, nether draw nygh to the dores of her house, lest straungers haue thy substaunce, and left the cruell gette thyne encreace. Wythe fewe wordes both Salomon describe the shorte and swete dis|ceatfulnesse of whoredome, which yet leaueth be hynd it a perpetuall vytternes, and brefely he she

weth, howe that whoredome destroyeth in soule, in honoure, in body and in good. As for ensam|ples, we nede not to sette forthe any there are to many before oure eyes, the more pitie. The sto|ries The French pockes, how it yrst came do testify, that the Frenche pockes came of an harlot into the worlde thorowe whoredome. Howe many a man hath consumed all his sub|staunce  goodes wyth harlottes, and at the last hath ben hanged, drowned or headed? c.
Yet go the shamelesse harlots forth styll into Whoremn|gers haue no rest. theyr owne perdicion, vice  abhominacio~, yea  vnder take to blaspheme wedlocke,  somwhat to excuse theyr owne mischefe. Therfore talke they of muche trouble that is in wedlocke. And as for theyr whorysh lyfe, it is nothyng elles but open vyce  abhominacion before God and all honest people. Fylthy is fylthynes styll, althoughe the fylthy swyne delyte therin, They speke much of euyll wyues, which whan some men had taken, they coulde not be ryd of them wythe any fayre means. And yet can they not leaue theyr vayne crafty  vnfaythfull harlottes, of who~ they the~ selues are mocked, and scorned to the vttermost yea  are fayne to suffer more of suche vicious  fylthy bodyes, than any man doth of his honest wyfe. They speake much lykewyse of bryngyng vp of chyldre~ which are borne in wedlocke. And yet they them selues in whoredome are fayne to

brynge vp the bastardes that they haue gotten, lyke as afore tyme they were wont to bylde ma~|met houses  felde Chapelles, wythe collections and gatherynges of euery man.
They speake of muche trauayle and careful|nes, Whores are insaable  haue neuer inough. howe the housholde must be brought vp and prouided for in wedlocke. And yet the dotynge fooles them selues are fayne to nomysshe those shamefull harlottes wythe muche greater care, and yet be afrayed, that whan they haue done theyr best, the gredy sacke wyll not be fylled, and that the fylthy strompette wyll yet brynge forth a greater rekenynge vpon thy trencher, and all to get the bagge of money into her owne ha~des. Moreouer among whores is waystyng and ex|penses The ende of whoredome is beggery. moost regarded, nether art thou welcome but thy money. No more money, no more loue. I must haue the money  purse, sayth the harlot take thou thy cloke and thy baggage. Lette ano|ther come that hathe more money, for he hathe bene in the bath, and is dispatched. Thus maye he byte hys lyppes and cratch his pate, and take that for his farewel that he getteth of hisharlot.
They complayne moreouer of the cryeng of the chyldren in the nyghtes, and how that mari ed folkes can not stepe, but must watche by the means therof. And yet the dotynge fooles them selues go all the nyght long vp and downe tho|row

the stretes,  kepe the dyuels watche, wythe paynefulnes, frost and vnrest. Let no reasona|ble manne therfore be snared styll in whordome by such harlottes, to the slaunder  dishonoure of holy wedlocke. Whoredome (no doubte) hahe muche more disquietnes, anguyshe and trouble, then hath the holy state of maryage. The payne also that is in marryage, is godly and honest. God gyuethe suche pacience, strength and good wyll vnto the faythfull, that they canne easely a|waye wythe all manner of congale cares. As for harlottes, they are the dyuelles martyrs, and haue alwaye dishonour and shame.
Where as certayne men saye: if whoredome Stewes. be so great a synne before God,  bryng so much vice and mischiefe wyth it, why do some hyghe rulers and prelates of the world the~ mayntayne open stewes: To that I answere: Many thyn|ges are suffered, that ought not so to be, and yet for suffryng therof are the suffrers neuer the bet ter. But let those prelates  rege~tes of the world make aunswere vnto God for theyr owne acte. God hathe commaunded the and vs all: Thou shalte not commit whoredome. Let euery Chri|sten man followe him, what so euer other folkes suffer or do. The holy Apostie Paul sayth: Let neyther whoredome nor any vnclennesse be once named among you, as it becommeth Sayntes.

Ephe. v. Chap. Now yf amonge Christen folke as an holy people that is clensed thorowe the bloud of Christ there may no whordome be na med, much lesse no doubte ought vycious ste|wes to be set vp and openly mainteyned, for a playne shame is it and a manifest confusion. Let them therfore that maynteyne such shame|full houses, looke well to themselues, how and what answere they will geue vnto God for this their acte.
They that saye they are suffred for auoyding of greater inco~uenience, let them considre whe|ther, they meane to put awaye a worse thinge with an euell, be a meane that is comely and pleasing vnto god? or whether God hath at any tyme commaunded or geuen lycence, to suffre and maynteyne open and shameles whordome, that virgins maye be the lesse forced  defloured or that yet worse thinges be not commytted of wilfull persones? Paulsaieth. Thou ought st|not to do euil, that therof might come good ex|cept thou wilt be dampned iustely. Roma iii We fynde daylye by experience, that the same way helpeth not,  that there are whore houses and in the meane season the worse thinge, not eschued, And therfore euell with euell, and vyce with vyce do runne together, so that abomina|cion and myschefe preuayleth. Wherfore let

euery reasonable Christen man ceasse now from vyce, braule who so list: yf thou wilt do that god co~maundeth the,  the thing wherof thou mayst haur worshippe  welfare in the sight of God  honest people, then medle not with harlottes, ether come at the stewes. Mayntayne the~ not and vse them not. But to auoyde whoredome, let euery man haue hys owne wyfe and euery woman hir owne husband.
Yee but it is not mete for euery man to mary Many poore mariages make many beggers. Obiection. Ther is no man compelled to mary, nether yet afore the tyme, nor whan thou hast not a conue nient cause therto. Onely yf it be not mete for the to be vertuous, it shall be no vyceous thinge to mary. Now yf thou thinkest it wyll not fra|me with the to mary, then leaue thine whordo|me Marke wel. also. And then we are agreed. For goddes sake man, kepe thy selfe honeste, sober, pure and cleane, vntyll the tyme that it be mete and expe|dient for the to mary. Thou wilt say: Halas we are but flesh and bloud. Iau~swere: were not our fore fathers flesh  bloud also? dyd they therfore continue stil in child hode? Or hau~ted they har|lotrye in the meane time? Beholde the example of Isaac, Iacob, Ioseph and other excellent men, which maried not tyll they were of a good  per fecte age, and yet neuertheles spent theyr youth

vertuously in clenlynesse of lyfe. Therfore shulde oure youth feare God lyke wise as they dyd, haue Gods commaundement before theyr eyes, call vpon God for grace, auoyde ydlenesse  all that maye prouoke to an vnclenly lyuyng: but contrary wise, geue them selues o labour, and resyst manfully in te~tacion. But nowe we fynd it other wise, for oure youth hath lytle re|specte vnto god  his co~mauudementes, calleth not vpon God, goeth vp and downe ydle, haun|teth euell company  dronkennesse, Hereof com|meth it now that they can not refrayne,  they thinke that they must nedes folowe harlottes still, or els haue wiues,  yet can they nether la|boure er get theyr lyuing. And thus came they to naught: therfore is it theyr owne vnthristy|nesse and not holy wedlok that destroyeth the
Doth not the hauntyng of harlots make beg|gers also? Whence come then suche swarmes of Mariage (saye they) maeth m|ny beggers. beggers  wretched pockye people: Eue~ of whor dome get they that mischefe for the most parte. And this doth no ma~ esteme ner considre. But wha~ a good vertuous yong man which is come to his age, doth honestly mary, then is the walet brought before him, to feare him, or els to with holde other me~ fro~ holy wedloke, and to make the~ co~tynue still in whordome. This a~ the sotil de|uell  do. The rych, faithful  almighty God dyd

neuer fayle any ma~, that seketh him in trewe ve Whoredome leffe, that laboureth faith fully, and that is ver|tuous and honest, Let noma~ therfore besnared styl in synne. To be shorte, whordome with dra weth  separateth the mynd fro~ god, maketh vs to breake our couenau~te, dishonoureth the gra|ce of God  me~bres of Christ, robbeth God of that which is his, vnhaloweth the te~ple of god,  plucketh vs vtterly with sprete  flesh into the myre  into all fylthynesse, maketh vs of men, beastes defyleth body and soule, taketh fro~ vs all oure substaunce, honestie and good, shameth de stroyeth and caryeth to bell wyth wrechidnesse, misery  sorow. Contrary wise: wedlok delyue|reth Wanion cou~ sayle. vs ones from all suche inconuenience. And therfore is it a myserable thynge, that all thys wyll not be consydred, and that yet also there be olde men, whiche esteme whordome to be no synne, and talke so lightly and wantonlye ther of before yong people, that youth beynge prouo|ked for warde in their wicked purpose, are now the more hard harted and obstinate therin
Deare children, harken ye rather vnto Paul the electe seruaunt of god wiche speaketh out of Ephe. vi the holy goost these wordes: Be ye sure, that no whormonger or vncleane personne hath in heri taunce in the kyngdome of Christ and of god. Be not disceaued wyth vayne wordes. For be|cause

of such thynges commeth the wrath of god vpon the chyldren of vnbelefe. Marke this well, and reme~ber it. God wyll not regarde the wan|ton and vile communicacion of such, so lyght as they make it. Wherfore yf ye wyl escape y^e wrath of God, then kepe your selues from whordome, and marry at your iust age.


 The. xi. Chapter.

How shamefull  wycked a thyng aduoutry is, and howe it hath of olde tyme bene puny|shed hytherto.

ANd lyke as whordome hath euer ben take~ for an abhominacion, among all honest people in y^e whole worlde, eue~ so haue they estemed aduoutry to be a thing much more sha|mefull  vtterly to be abhorred: in so much that all vertuous rulers, yea  that euen among the Hethe~ haue punyshed it wyth y^e payne of death. Ho we God plaged ad|ontry befo|re y^ law c wrytten.
Wha~ Abraham came wyth Sarai hys wyfe into Egypte, and the Egyptians thoughte that she had bene Abrahams sister, they toke her and brought her to the Courte vnto kyng Pharao. But the Lord punyshed Pharao  all his house wythe great plages, bycause of Sarai, and yet committed he no hurt with her, and that he dyd was done of ignoraunce. For whan he vnder|stode that she was Abrahams wyfe, he sent for hym, and sayd? Why hast thou dealt thus with

me. Wherfore toldest thou not me, that she A goodly ex|ample. was thy wife? Why saydest thou vnto me, that she was thy syster? There hast thou thy wyfe, take her,  go thy waye. And seyng it is thus it maye well be considred, y^e God is much more dis pleased w^t the~ that wyllyngly co~mit aduoutry.
In the twentyest Chapter it is written that Marke this well:  once be ashamed ye wyllfull whoremon|gers. at Gerar, Abimelech y^e kyng of the Philistines toke Abraha~s wyfe, as Pharao had done before, and it appeared vnto the kyng in a dreame, and was sayde vnto hym: Beholde, thou arte but a dead man, because of the woman, whome thou haste taken, for she is another mans wyfe. And yet hadde Abimelech committed no actuall ded wythe her, no more the~ Pharao had done afore. Therfore sayde God also afterwarde: yf thou doest not delyuer her agayne vuto Abraham, be sure, that thou shalte dye the death, and so shall all that thyne is. Dyd not God wyth these wor|des declare manifestly, what sentence and iudge ment he hath gyue~ vpo~ aduouterers? Wherfore Iosephe, whan he was prouoked of hys Lordes wyffe to acco~plysh her wyll, sayd: My Lord hath co~mitted all thynges vnto me, sauyng the only, for thou arte hys maryed wyfe. Howe shoulde I then do so great hurte, and synne agenst God? Genesis. xxxix.
Iob saythe in the. xxxi. Chapter: yf my harte

hathe lusted after my neyghbours wyfe, or yf I haue layed wayte at his dores, than let my wife be another mans harlotte, and let other men lye wyth her. Herewyth doth Iob knowledge it to be reason, that he be measured wyth suche measure as he hath gyuen vnto other men. If he had bro|ken his wedlocke, whyche thyng yet he dyd not, syth the punyshme~t of aduoutry is a meate that euery man can not chewe, let euery man consy|dre by hym selfe, howe lothe another ma wolde be therof:  let hi~ not touch another ma~s wyfe, so shall his also not be medled wyth all. It follo|weth in Iob: For this is a wyckednesse  synne that belongeth to the Iudge, yea a fyre it is that consumethe all togyther, and plucketh vppe all a ma~s substaunce by the rootes. With the whiche wordes Iob dothe knowledge, that aduoutrye is suche a vice and wickednesse, as partaynethe to the Iudge, that is to saye, oughte by ryght to be greuously punyshed of thm whiche be in autho rite (if they were not aduouterers the~ selues) for it is a fyre that co~sinneth altogyther, both body honeste, and good: mynde, harte  welfare. And all this was exercysed  practised, afore the lawe was gyuen to the people of Israel by Moses.
And in the law doth God appoynt a certe~ pu The punysh mente of d|uoutry in the law of God. nyshme~t for aduoutry amo~g other tra~sgressio~s nd sayth. Leui. xx. Who so co~mitteth aduoutry

with any mans wyfe, shall dye the death both y^ manne and the woman, because he hathe broken wedlocke with his neyghbours wyfe. And Deut xxii. is the same lawe recited agen,  confirmed.
Nether was aduoutry so sore punished amo~g How aduou try was pu|nished amo~g the hethen. Lex Lepre ianorum. the people of Israel onely, but also the Heithen vsed mortall executious therof. Thys wyll I nowe declare oute of the histories  credible wri ters. Wha~ any of the Leprea~s were taken in ad uoutry, they were bounden,  caryed thre dayes thorowe the cite,  afterwarde (as longe as they lyued) were they despised,  with shame  co~fusi|on, reputed as parsonnes desolate of all honeste. Among the Lore~siaus dyd Zale~cius forbyd ad Lex Zalen ci. A good ensa~ ple for noble men. uoutry vnder a great punyshment. The trans|gressours caused he to haue both ther eies thrust oute. And whan his owne sonne was taken in aduoutrye, he badde them put oute hys one eye as Iudges  the tother dyd he hymselfe put oute as a father. In the dayes of our forefathers, the noble Germaynes (afore they came to Christen Germani, faythe the punyshmente of a woman that brake wedlocke, stode in the power and aucthorite of her husband. And at the lest he myght strype her oute of her clothes, thrust hr out of his house,  beat her openly with roddes in the Citie or tow ne, euen before her frendes. c. as Cornelius Tacitus makethe mencion, who also wrytethe

these wordes: Among the~ ther was none y^ laugh ed at y^e mysdede:  to defyle or be defyled, was na med among the~ to be asmuch, as not to do accor ding to y^ course, maner  custome of the world.
Marke now well in how much better case they stode, then we, whiche laughe at all synne  vyce: yee all abhominacion, as fightinge, war|rynge, whorehuntynge, wedlok breakinge, mas|king mo~myng, to much drynking, excesse inea|tinge,  all vnclennesse do we excuse with these wordes. It is y^ maner  comen course so to do now in the world. Opilius Marinius the em|perour Lex opil of Rome, vsed to punishe aduouterers with fyre For the~ who~ he found in aduoutrye, caused he to be bownd and to be burnte together quycke. This doth Iulius Copitolinus wryte of him. And amonge the Romaynes was ther a Lex Iulia, comen law (called lex Iulia), whiche wolde, that execucio~ shuld be done vpo~ aduoutrers, with the swerd the same law stod in stre~gth in s. Hieroms tyme, who wryteth, that a certayne yongeman and a maried wyfe, were iudged and put to exe|cucion with the swearde because of aduoutry. And the same law (called lex Iulia, de stup  adult, dyd the Christen Emperours receaue,  of Iustinyan it is appoynted, lib, iiii. Tit. xoi. de publicis iudiciis.
This allegacion concernyng the punishment

of aduoutry I am sure wyll many menne mar|uayle Why aduou trye was so sore punished at, and esteme it sore  vntollerable. But yf they wolde considre the matter ryght, settyng affeccion and euell custome asyde, and wold po~|der well what aduoutry were, and what follo|wethe it, they shoulde not wonder so sore at he punyshment. Aduoutry is a destruccio~ and hye what aduou try is. dishonour of the ordinaunce of God, a wycked|nesse growen out of the dyuell and ydlenesse of the fleshe, a shamefull vnfaythfulnes, a wylfull truce breaking and periury. And that this is so, maye euery man considre by the Chapters go|ynge afore. Wedlocke is the ordinaunce of god, Wedlocke. in the which both y^e parties ought so to be knyt the one vnto the other, that they be not deuided, Paule sayth also, that aduoutry is a worcke of the flesh. Notwythstandyng, manifest it is that maried parsonnes at theyr entrau~ce do make a perpetuall couenaunt, and there callynge vpon God,  takyng hym to recorde before y^e whole co~ gregacion, they promyse trouth and sayth wyth Marke and take hede. mouth  hand the one to the other: c. Nowe yf it be but a smale trespasse to dissemble, to breake to destroye  to tread vnder foote all this to for sweare trouth geue~ before god  the church  no thynge to regarde honoste and fayth, the~ must I nedes co~fesse, that the punyshment of aduoutry was to rygorous in the olde tyme. But yf it be

a ust thing, ernestly to punishe vnfaythfull per ury, the despysing and contemnyng of god and all honestie, then is also the punishment of ad|noutrye right equall and not to sore.
Item, Yf the losse of a good thinge shoulde be valued after the estimacion of the owner, then (as touching this life, ther is no greater da~ma|ge, then a man to lose his owne body. Now is it certaine, that both the parties maried, are but one body, and that (as Paul saieth) the husband hath no power of his owne body, but the wife, nether hath the wife power of hir awne body, but the husband. Wherfore who so committeth aduoutry, the same taketh awaye, stealeth and robbethe the other of hys awne body, euen hys pryncypall and best good. Or what honest per|sonne had not rather fynd a thefe stealynge his treasure  rather to suffre the losse of y^e goodes the~ to fynd an aduouterer by his maried spou|se, and to reape dishonoure in her.
Both these vyces therfore theft and aduou|trye, Aduoutry  theft compa red y^ one to|ward y^ other by Salomo~. doth Salomon in the site of the Prouer|bes laye vpon the balaunce the one agaynste the other, and sheweth how that aduoutrye is the sorer and more tedyous, sayenge: A thefe is not vtterly despysed, that whan he is hongrye, stea|leth to fede himselfe, for whan he is taken, he must restore seuen tymes asmuche, or els all his

substau~ce. But he that is so farre out of reason as to breake wedloke with another mans wife, both eyther destroye him selfe, or els getteth him selfe strypes and shame, which shame maye ne|uer be wyped out. For the wrath of gelousye and of the husband (yf he haue tyme to reuenge) wyll not be intreated: he wyll not be persuaded with prayer, yee though thou geuest him rewardes he wyll not receaue them. This comparison doth euery man vnderstond. For though a ma~s good be stolen, yet yf it be restored him agayne with|out hurt, he wilbe intreated, for as much as it was done (happelye (thorow pouerte. But yf a ma~ take his wife in aduoutry, he will not be pa cified. For it is a very beestly and wicked thing.
More ouer, yf a man take a thefe with the de mayner yet hath he no power to auenge him sel fe  to slaye y^e thefe: But yf a man fynde an ad uoutrer at the dede doyng, he maye be auenged. And though he do wound, slea or kyll the ad|uoutrer  the aduoutresse: yet shal he not be pu|nished for the death of them. Out of all whiche wordes euery ma~ may planely vndersto~d what vyce is most greuous before god  before all in|different iudges. Before these wordes also, saieth Salomon: Maye a man take fyre in his bosome, and his clothes not be brent? Or ca~ one go vpon whotecoles, and his fete not be hurte

euen so, who so euer goeth into hys neyghbours wyfe, and toucheth her, can not remayne vndefi led. Wherby he declareth furthermore the daun|ger and greatnesse of this vice, threatenyng the~ that thyncke (lyke fooles) to kepe theyr aduoutry Whoredome shall come to lyght. secrete, and that they shal neuer be taken and pu nysshed.
It seruethe to our purpose, that thorowe ad|uoutry, Alteracions and alienai ons of here|tages. great enheritaunces are altered, and the ryght heyres disherted For oft tymes it fortu|neth, that an aduoutresse hath children by an ad uoutrer,  then must the sayd chyldren enherite all the substaunce of theyr pretenced father, as lawfull chyldren, which yet are vnlawfull, wher by the father leseth his honour, hys kynred, hys body  goodes. His wyfe, which is hys owne bo|dy, hath the aduouterer defyled,  the vnlawfull childre~ take y^e goodes awaye. If this be not great wrong and wyckednes, then wote not I what a ma~ maye affirme to be vicious inough: therfore Aduoutry in womenne is moost to be abhorred. though aduoutry be horrible both in men  wo|men, yet in wome~ it is moost hurtfull  detesta|ble. For besydes that the aduoutresse alterth the inheritau~ce (as I sayd before) and with false pro mises  shamefull disceate, withdraweth  stea|leth it from the ryght heyres, she ladeth fyrst her honest poore husbande wyth great shame, great trauayle, laboure, sorowe and payne, in that he

is fayne to bryng vp those aduouterous chyldre~ which are not his awne.
Moreouer, she dishonoureth her father, her mother  kynred: Her chyldren (euen those that are lawefull must be ashamed of her,  be doub|ted of in the worlde, whether they be lawefully begotten or no. Thrfore whan they speake of theyr mother, or heare her named, they are abas|shed and ashamed. Aduoutresses also make theyr husbandes to be despised and of no reputacion, although they be vertuous  honest men. They are the occasion, that folkes come ofte togyther, whyche are nye of kynred. These  suche lyke in What a sea of euylles en sue outof ad uoutry., numerable co~fusions, shame, hurte, dishonoure  fylthynesse, folowe out of abhominable aduou|try. I passe ouer nowe the murthers, poysonyn|ges, , ma~slaughters, battayls,  warres, that haue ensewed after aduoutrye,  destroyed both countreyes  people. This dyd the auncie~t  noble men of olde, pondre and considre,  ther|fore ryghteously  of iust occasions appoynted they the punyshment of deathe for aduouterers.
Yet wyll we heare howe aduouterers excuse The defence which adul|terers vse. theyr owne vice,  pondre howe reasonably they go to worke. They saye: Though God haue for bydden aduoutry vnder the payne of deathe, yet is the same punyshment not executed, perfour|med or practised. For in no place appearethe it,

that aduoutrers were put to death. For Dauid was an aduoutrer,  yet receaued he no punysh|ment therfore, yea the Lord Christ hymselfe dyd abrogate  dissolue y^ punyshment of aduoutry, for asmuche as he commaunded not the woman (taken in aduoutry) to be put to deathe, but bd her go her waye. For whan no man had conde~|ned her, he also let her go. Ioan. viii.
To that I aunswere: God in hys lawe hath once expressed, howe he estemeth aduoutry, and how he wyl haue it punyshed. Nowe yf me~ haue not done Gods co~maundement  accordinge to the same, then is it neuer the better: yet endureth the lawe of God vnmoueable and sure. Neuer|thelesse Death was the punyshe|ment of ad|uoutry. they of the olde tyme dyd punysh aduou|try wyth the payne of death, as it is sufficiently proued afore oute of the stories. The obiection therfore that aduouterers make, is but vayne. Nowe thoughe all sente~ces  iudgeme~tes y^e haue bene executed and practised because of aduoutry stonde not in holye scripture, it is no maruayle. For the Byble is not a register of vnthriftes  of suche, as for theyr wyckdnes haue bene putte to execuion. Or is it not euident ynough vnto you, howe it was lyke to haue gone wythe Su|sanna? The aduou|try of dauid Dauid committed aduoutrye once in his lyfe, which drewe hym also and brought him into great murther, so that he caused not onely

his faythfull seruaunt Uria, but other noble me~ lykewyse to be slayne. Beholde what occasion aduoutry gyueth? What cometh of it? Trueth it is, he was not stonned to deathe. But what chaunsed vnto hym? Euen as he had dishonou|red another mannes chylde, so sawe he shame v|pon hys owne chyldren whyle he lyued  that with great wretchednesse. For Amnon deflou|red Thamar hys owne naturall syster. And they both were Dauids chyldren. Yea Absolom dyd miserably slaye Amnon his brother, for co~|mittyng that wyckednesse wyth his syster Tha mar. Not longe after, dyd the same Absalo~ driue his owne naturall father Dauid out of his Re+alme,  shamefully laye with his fathers wifes. Wherevpon there followethe an horrible great slaughter, in the whyche Absalom was slayne, wyth many thousandes moo of the comon peo|ple Nowe lette euery man ponder wll by hym|selfe, whether it be not a lesse thyng, once to med+dle, and so to haue execucio~  dye: then to abyde the death of so many, and that so longe, wythe suche misery and sorowe. Therfore was Da|uid sorer punyshed, than if he had bene but once stoned vn to deathe. And lette euery man learne hereby, that no ma~ can escape the hand of God, althoughe the worlde laye no hande vpon hym, God punysheth neuerthelesse, yea  that muche

sorer, whan he doth not here, but differreth it in|to another worlde.
Wher as they make Christ y^e Lorde a mayn|tyned of aduouterers, it is playne and euident The aduou|tresse broght before christ shame. Christ neuer gauelibertye vnto synne. For he sayth: I am not come to breake the lawe but to fulfyl it. Paule also sayth: To the righte ous is ther no law giuen, but vnto the vnrighte ous and disobedient, to whoremongers, to per|iure personnes, to lyers and blasphemers. And to the Galathians he saythe: Walke ye in the spirite, so are ye not vnder the lawe. Therfore for asmuche as aduouterers do walke in y^e flesh and not in the spirite, they are vnder the law, ne ther hath the Lorde taken the lawe and punyshe ment from them.
Moreouer, as touching the story. Ioh. viii. we must considre that the Lord sayd vnto the wife: woman, hath no man co~demned the: And whan she had sayd, no man, he answered: Nether do I condemne the. For wyth this answere layed he before her the sentence of the Iudges. And for as muche as he was not come now to gyue sen|tence as a Iudge, but to saue, he wolde not con|demne her, and so medled nether wyth the lawe nor the acte. The Lord was come nowe to haue mercy vpon synners, and to call them to repen|taunce. Therfore sayd he also vnto this woma~:





Go thy waye, and synne no more. And wythe Repentau~ce. these wordes doth the Lorde warne all suche as are tangled wyth aduoutry, to cease from hens|forth and to amende. God happely maye haue mercy vpon them,  take from them the shame, dishonour, payne and punyshment, whiche they haue greatly deserued. For God hath no delyte in the destruccion of a poore synner, but wyl ra|ther that they co~uerte  lyue. But yfye wyl not turne, yf ye wyll nedes be styffenecked and styll set forth youre shamelles foreheades, then verely doth God watche ouer youer wyckednes,  saith Hieremy. v. In the desyre of vnclenly lust, they are becomel yke olde stalla~des: euery one neyeth at his neyghboures wyfe: Shulde not I punysh this? Wherfore ye aduouterers, looke for none other, but God wyll plage you for shamelesse actes of wickednes  whoredome. For abhomi|nacion, vice, periury, and shameful matters are they, that ye go about wythall.


 The. xii. Chapter.

ow one that ente~deth to mary, shulde chose a mete, honest, and vertuous mate.

ANd hytherto haue I declared whence wed locke co~methe, who dyd institute it, what it is, how it ought orderly to be contrac|ted, what be the occasions end and vertue ther|of. Item howe holy, profitable and good it is.

Agayne, howe horrible, noysome and shamefull whoredome and aduoutry is. But forasmuche as in the occasions of wedlocke it is mencioned how y^ wedlocke was ordined of God, to the in|tent that maryed folkes shulde spend theyr lyfe in y^ mutuall participacio~ of al such thinges as God sendeth, y^ they may bryng forth chyldre~, or they maye auoyd whordome, or for the eschew|ynge of perellous, solenes, that the one maye be a conforte and helpe to the other accordyng to y^ wyll of GOD: And for asmuche also as in the meane season there lyethe great importaunce,  wayght vpon it, what manner of companion  mate thou chosest, how thou mayest lyue wythe hym, and (yf God gyue the chyldren) howe thou mayest bryng them vp. Therfore in thys parte of y boke followyng, I wyl treate how a mete honest and vertuous spouse ought to be chosen. Afterwarde, howe they ought on both the sydes to lyue well and ryght togyther, to hepe and in|creace the mutuall loue and trouth of mariage, and fynally howe they muste well  vertuously bryng vp theyr chyldren.
For who so coupleth hymselfe wyth braulg Ther lyeth muche way|ght in y^ elec|cion of thy ate. folkes,  co~meth to disquietnes, maye not com|playne therof. Why lefce he not such co~tencious persons wythout his house? Who so nowe wyll haue a peaceable mariage, must not chose him a

restlesse mate. He that wyll plante any thynge, A godly and not a leensa~ ple: doth fyrst considre the nature of the ground, in the whiche he entendeth to plante. Muche more shuldest thou haue respecte to the condicions of thy spouse, oute of whome thou desyrest to plant chyldren, the frute of honeste and welfare. And lyke as plantynge and carefulnesse hathe great power in al growyng thinges: so hath it greater vertue and strength, yea and better frute in the diligent bryngynge vp of chyldren. Where as mariages and chyldre~ do sometyme prosper euel the greatest cause therof, is the faulte in chosyng the partie, and in the chyldrens bryngynge vp. Nowe where as we fayle in this behalf, it com|meth either of our owne fonde affeccion whiche we folow, and are seduced therby, or els co~meth it of ignorau~ce, as whan folkes wotte not wher vnto they ought to haue respecte, or howe to do in the cause. And seyng that in these poyntes sto~ deth the makyng and marrynge of wedlocke, I wyll fyrst note in fewe wordes the moost neces|sary thyng that maye be spoke~ hereof: And fyrst wyll I speake of the chosyng of a spouse.
The chosynge, is a receauyng or acceptynge What the e|lecion is. of suche thynges as we thynke are mete for our ende and purpose. Therfore euery election hath a finall respecte, that it is directed vnto. For as much now as our talkynge here, is of the eleccio~

of a spouse, we must reduce to our remembra~ce, the ende of wedlocke, that is to saye, the causes, why and wherfore it is contracted. Nowe haue Why mary age is co~trac ted. we heard afore, that the causes why it was orde ned and wherfore it is to be receaued of y^e two parsonnes, are these, euen to the intent that they shall co~tinually dwell togyther, and spende theyr lyfe in the mutuall participacio~ of all such thyn ges as God sendeth, that they maye bryng forth chyldren, or that they maye auoyde whoredome, (for the eschewyng of perllous solitarines) that the one maye be a conforte ad healpe to y^e other accordyng to the wyll of God.
Therfore thou that wylte chose, muste haue respecte vnto these aforesayde poyntes, as to the finall ende  marke, set before the,  must proue whethr the parsonne, whome thou thynkest to oyne vnto thy selfe, haue these poyntes, whyche thou hast heard now recyted. And the same shalt thou well proue, if thou note diligently the ryt|ches that are in man, of the whych I wyll nowe speake.
Thre manner of rytch re therin man, the Thre man of rytche  man. rytches of the mynde, of the body, and of tempo|rall substaunce. The best  moost precious are the ritches of the mynde, as they without which the other two are more hurteful then profitable. The rytches of the mynde are, the feare of God,

faythe, gods glory, gods seruyce, vnderstandyng Rytches of the . or knowlege, prude~ce, trueth, sobernes, righteous nes, liberalite, chastite, humblenesse, honesty and nourtoure, synglenesse and diligence: and suche lyke vertues. These lye not styll, neyther hyde them selues, wher so euer they be, but breake out diuerse wayes, so that they maye well be spyed, but specially in talkynge. For our Lorde Christ dyd say: Out of the abundance of the harte spea keth the mouth. They of the olde tyme sayd, that a mannes talkyng is the myrrour  messanger Language. of the mynd, in the whiche it maye be sene with|out, in what case the man is wythin. Therfore who so wyll knowe and haue experience howe a The feare of God. mans mynde standethe, let hym diligently note his communicacion, whether it be ioyned w^t the feare of God, manerly, true, earnest honest, sted fast, and reasonable, or whether it be churlyshe  vngodly, nyce, vayneglorious, fayned, ful of wor des vnstedfast, vnhonest, vnreasonable and ioy|ned wyth lyghtenesse. And of these fruytes than shalt thou know the tree and roote of the harte. And thoughe ypocrisy vse much disceate in tal|kyng, yet canne no ypocrite go alwaye so crafte|ly, but he shall sometyme stomble and bewray hym selfe.
But for the more suertye, it is good for the ot only to marke his communicacion, but also

other gestures  maners, howe the ma~ nowe be|hauethe hymselfe, howe he hathe done hytherto, Reputacion. what name and fame he hath had, and yet hath, what opinion otherwyse, and honest men haue of hym, howe he behaueth hymselfe in stondyng and goyng,  in all the partes of his body, what rayment he vseth, whether it be vayne, whorysh, Garmentes. wanton, lyghte, or mannerly and accordynge to his estate, reputacion and power, that is to saye, honest rayment. For rayment doth ofte giue cer tayne and sure testimony of pryde, lyghtenesse, wantonnesse, inconstancy, vnshamefastnesse, boastyng and of fylthynesse or vnclennesse, and other vices or vertues that are in ma~. So maye Company. much be spyedalso, by the company and pastyme that he vseth. For a man is for the moost parte condicioned euen lyke vnto them that he kepeth company wythe all. We se that among beastes wylde and tame, lyke wyll to lyke. The educa|tion The bryn|gyng by. also gyuethe great testimonye, namely by whome,  how euery one is brought vp, whether it were among vertuous parsons or euell, whe|ther the partie hathe continued in the nurtoure of the vertuous,  shewed hymselfe obedient, or whether he hath broke out of his disciplyne, and followed hys owne wylfulnesse. For it is but a smale matter for the to haue dwelte among ver|tuous men, but rather herein lyeth the wayght,

howe farre  howe much thou hast folowed the~,  bene obedient vnto them. Iudas was amonge the Apostles, brought vp of the Lord Christ, but for all that was he neuer the better. For he lefte not his wicked pranes, nether was he obedie~t.
Thorowe the occasion of all these thynges,  other lyke appartaynyng to the same, oughte euery one to discerne the parsonne, whome he Note: hathe chosen to take to marriage, and to se that she be endewed with the sayd rytches of y^ mynd and that to his purpose she be ryghte, peaceable, honest, mete and conuenient for hym to lyue w^t all in wedlocke, as it besemethe, and as GOD hath iustituted. For lyke as in the mynde there are suche vertues as we haue spoken of, so are Frowarde wycked qua lities of the mynde: there in it also noysome wycked vices and des|traccions, as vngodlynes, despysyng of Goddes worde, mysbelefe, ydolatry, Maetrye, igno|raunce, churlyshnes, lyeng, falsehood, ypocrisy, vnryghteousnesse, backebytyng, mistemperau~ce, dronkennesse, couetousnesse, vnchastite, vnsha|mefastnesse, mysnurtoure, rashnesse, furyouse wantonnesse, pryde, presumpcion, vayneglorye, hydyng, brawlyng, and vnhandsomnesse. Who so nowe chosethe hym a mate that is tangled w^t suche noysome vices, seakethe not a spouse for a ryght peaceable and good honest lyfe, but a hell a paynfulnes, a destruccio~ of all expedient ver|tuous

lyuyng. Specially there is lytle good to be looked for, where as is vngodlynesse and des|pysyng of Goddes worde.
For lyke as the feare of God draweth y^e who The desy|sing of gods worde.  le garland of ertues wyth it, so bryngethe vn|godlynesse all vice and abhominacion, ea and shutteth vp the waye to amendement. For who so wyll not heare Gods worde, refuseth all good enfourmacion, and therfore is there no amend|ment to be hoped for in hym. And where as is no shamefastnes, there dare the shamelesse per|sonne vnshamefast ness. Lyeng. do euery thyng that lykethe hym. Where lyeng, bastyng and lyghtnesse is, there can no certaynete be had, there stondethe all in doubte, Pryde. what so euer is spoken and done. Where pryde is, there is also rashnes, wylfulnes, presumpcio~, contempt, disdayne, murmuryng, and obstinate rebellio~: And where as suche be, there is nothing but brawlynge, chydynge, and neuer one god houre. Wherfore he that wyll not lacke y^e ryght poyntes of marryage, and of a co~modious lyfe, let hym haue respete o the ryches of the mynd, and chose hym suche a parsonne, as is endewed of God wyth such rytches, and not with a noy|some or frowarde mynde. The ryche of the body.
After the rytches of the mynde, do the ritches of the bodye followe nete, as is a bewtyfull or well fauoured body, health, a conuenient age c.

A bewtiful body is such one, as is of right four|me and shape, mete and of strength to beare chil dren, and to kepe an house, euen such a personne as thou canste fynde in thyne herte to loue, and to be content wythe all, c. Of the bewty of the body (where there is els no good qualite besyde) Beautye. sayth Salomon, Prouer. xxxi. As for fauoure it is deceatfull and transitory, and bewtye is a vayne thynge, but a woman that feareth god, is to be commended. And Prouerb. xi. A fayre wo|man without discrete maners, is lyke a ryng of golde in a swynes snowte. Therfore are they all starke fooles, that in chosyng them wyues, looke only to theyr bewty, and regard not the rytches of the mynde. Afterwarde doth the same bewty turne them to disquietnes, to payne and trou|ble.
Health also must be considred in the eleccion, lest thou with all that thou hast, perysh, and lest Healthe. thy whole house be poysoned and hurte. Neuer|theles I speake here of sore contagious syckenes|ses, not of such dayly infirmitees and small di|seases, that all menne are subdued vnto. But I spake of madnesse, frenesy, the fallyng syckenes, lamenes, leprosy, Frenche pockes, or suche lyke, whiche euery manne should greatly abhorre.
Notwythstondyng where maryed folkes, which Marke well now are togyther, be visited wyth suche diseases

then must suffre the one wyth the other as they that are in one body. As for the due and conueni ent age we spake of it in the syxt Chapter.
To haue the goodes of temporall substaunce Rytches of te~porall sub staue. is to be borne of noble parentes, or to come of a worshypful stocke, to haue rytches, great offices gaynes, or occupienges, and such lyke. The hiest nobilite and moost worthy comme~dacion, is to be noble in vertues, in good workes, manners and condicions. Who so dothe come also of no|ble parentes, is the more to be reputed. But to Nobilite. be a gentle borne, and to vse hymselfe vgently is euen as muche as to shame hymselfe and his. There haue ben found many, whiche came of a lowe byrth, but they garnysshed theyr kynredde so wyth vertues and noble actes, that they and theyr stocke attayned to great prosperite. Ther are many this daye that come of famous hou|ses  noble parentes, but they leane to muche to theyr byrthe, yea they are wylfull mynded, and thynke, that (because of theyr nobilite) they may do what they lyst, and that theyr doinges becom methe them well, and yet are they so noble (that, is, they so excell) in all vyce and abhominacion that they brynge them selues to dishonour, and to co~tempt and hatred of all men.
Let euery man therfore looke ernestly to this matter, lest any manne intendynge to haue the

golde, and catchyng the whotte cooles, do burne hyselfe wythout recure. For temporall goodes sake, the matter miscarieth and is in daunger. Temporall goodes. There is sometyme great rytches, but wyth ly|tle honeste is it gathered togyther. And wythe the same rytches, wyll not be al waye prosperite, peace and rest. Many trust to theyr goodes, and nothyng wyll they learne, therfore also can they do nothyng but lyue deyntely, and wyth pryde, excesse and dishonesty, to wayst it awaye, that hathe bene long gathered togyther. Nowe whan Beware or ll be spent. there is all waye taken from the heape, and no thyng layd therto, it waysteth away in processe of tyme, howe great so euer it hathe bene. Then foloweth pouerte, yea an intollerable and vnpa+ient pouerte. For they that nowe lasshe oute all togyther, haue had no necessite hytherto, but were in all wealth, therfore after suche a Sonne shyne, there commeth euer an intollerable heate, and thense forth begyn they to warme them sel|ues at the bare leaues.
Who so nowe in his eleccion lookethe to the multitude of goodes, and not howe they were wonne,  whence they come, he hath accustoma|bly suche a smoky hat set vpon his head, that all  the water of Ryne can not wash away the soo therof. Good wythout God  honeste, is a dead+ly poyson,  the bodely dyuell hymselfe. Goodes

and rytches is in y^ hand of an vndiscrete  igno raunt man, is as a sharpe knyfe in the hande of a chylde, that doth no good therwyth, but woun deth and destroyethe it selfe. Wherfore let euery ma~ in the eleccio~, haue more respecte to discrecio~  knowledge, tha~ to rytches. Moreouer an hand that is occupyed,  wynneth  getteth his lyuing godly and honestly, doth farre excell any rytches Handy craf tes. that are wonne. A rytche man which hath great goodes in hys hand,  yet hath learned nothyng wythall (and nothyng can learne) whan he once loseth hys substaunce and goodes, he can wynne no more, but commeth immediately to the staffe  wallet, As for suche one as hathe applyed hym Wynnyng  occupyenge. selfe to learnyng, he is fytte to some office, he can and is able to occupy and laboure: and thoughe he once or twyse loseth that he hath, yet canne he wynne more agayne.
And though no ma~ wyth hys eleccion shulde Honest pro|uisio nought to be regar|ded. haue speciall respecte vnto temporall substaunce yet ought no man to behaue hymselfe vncircum spectly, nether lyghtly to regarde honest prouisio~ For lyke as out of great rytches there followeth pryde, euen so of pouertie there folowethe muche euell. Therfore is it not vnryghte, that thou  thyne eleccion considre how thou mayst honest|ly wynne thy breade, and wherof thou mayest lyue wyth thy spouse, and what thy spouses sub|staunce

and occupyeng is,  howe the same may be an healpe to thy conuenient lyuynge. If thou nowe wylte not regarde the more excellent and better thynges, but haue onely respecte vnto the goodes, than marryest thou not the parson, but the goodes? Wherof if there be not so muche as thou wouldest fayne haue, or if it waste awaye, then farewell all the loue. For that loue whiche Whotte loue is one colde. commethe thorowe rytches, beauty, or other lyke smale occasions, is euen as a fyre that is made of stra or tow: it groweth soone and is great, but streyghtewaye it vanysshethe. Euen so is that loue shortely extincte, which spryngeth not of durable occasions. If a fyre be made of whole stronge wood, it gyuethe a good naturall heate, lykewyse if thou in the eleccion of a spouse, haste respecte vnto y^e true, godly  honest poyntes, the~ is the loue of so muche the longer continuaunce.
And to be shorte, let euery one wyth his elecci|on, he effect of the eleccion. haue fyrst respecte vnto those poyntes, for y^e whiche wedlocke was ordeyned of God. Then whether the partie (whom thou arte mynded to chose) be reasonably endewed wythe all, or no. And to the intent that the same may well be per Good lesso~ for chosynge  wyfe. ceaued, let euery ma~ haue faythfull respecte here to the rytches of the mynde, whether the parson be godly, wyse, discrete, true, faythfull, honest, so ber, and louyng. Item whether she be whole and

sounde, and not laden wyth sore diseases, defor|med, sluttysh. fylthy, euell fauoured,  what her estate is, what power and possibilite she is of, how, where,  with whom she hath ben brought vp, whervpon she lyueth,  what she occupyethe. how frutefull, handsome, houswyfely, laborious and quycke she is. If besyde these, thou fyndest other great rytches (bewty and suche gyftes) and comest godly  honestly by them, thou haste the more to thancke God for.
But specially and afore all other thynges, we must faythfully wyth feruentnesse and stedfast belefe (without ceasynge) make intercession and prayer vnto God, to whome all hartes are open and knowne, that he wyll not suffer vs to go a|mysse, but as a father, healpe and guyde vs to a ryght mariage, in the whiche we maye lyue ho|nestly and prosperously, eue~ as we ought to his honoure. For it is God onely that prouidethe the mariage, that hath the hartes in hys hande, and that gyuethe the wyll, as it is sayde in the Chapters afore. But lyke as in other poyntes  matters the ordinau~ce of God doth not destroye lawfull instrume~tes: Euen so here in this cause the institucion of God denyeth not the ordinate election, but in them that feare GOD they go both togyther.
Of this ordinau~ce of God and ordinate elec|cion,

we haue a very fayre example, Gene. xxiiii. A notale en  of y^ electio~ and  ad in y^ cause  ma|tr. where Abraham sent his seruaunt in hys messa ge, to get his sonne Isaac a wife in Mesopota|mia. The same seruaunt begynneth his matter with prayer,  sayeth: O lord god of my master Abraha~, send me good spede this day, and shewe mercy vnto my master Abraham. Lo, I stonde here by y^ well of water (for he tyed there with his seruauntes and camels without the cyty by a welles syde, and the daughters of the menne of thys cytie wil come out and drawe water. Now the damsell to whome I saye, stoupe downe thy pitcher and lette me drincke, yf she saye, dryncke, and I wyl geue thy camels dryncke, therby wyll I know, that she is the same, whome thou haste ordeyned for thy seruaunt Isaac.
Beholde, in thys prayer doth Abrahams ser|uaunt knowlege the ordinaunce of god, and that god onely prouydeth the mariage, and yet neuer theles he falleth to prayer, and vseth that meane. For it foloweth in the story, And it came to as that yer he hadde left speakynge, Rebecca came forth,  caryed a pitcher vpon her shulder,  she Rebecca. was a verye fayre damesell  vnblemisshed vir|gyn,  came downe to the well to drawe water. Then ranne the seruaunt vnto her, and asked hir drynke,  she sayde: Drincke syr. And wyth that toke she downe her pitcher, and gaue hym

drincke. And whan he had droncken, she sayde: I wyll drawe water for thy camelles also, that they maye dryne. And so she made haste, and poured water out of her pitcher into the trough and gaue the camels drynke: But the ma~ mar|uayled at her, and marked her well, and hyld his tonge et cete. No doute, he hadde respecte to the The proper tyes of a mayde that shulde e cho sen wyte. ryches of the mynde and of the body, and percea ued that she was gentle, seruiseable, lowly, geue~ to laboure, quycke in her busynesse, louynge to|warde strau~gers, that she was not my taughte or nycely brought vp, ner a hye mynded or deyn tye veast, but honeste and handsome. How she was condycyoned, coulde he not knowe better, then by such token. She was yet an vntouched virgin, and therfore also wel nourtoured and no nyce thynge.
Whan she commeth to the well she makethe no stoppe: ner bringeth a sorte of yong fellowes with her, nether standeth she gasyng and won|dryng vpon the straunge man, but quyckely and straight goeth she her way, and tendeth her own busynesse. But assone as the olde honeste man (Abrahams seruaunt) speke vnto her, she shewe|eth herselfe very curtuous and gentle. Full re|uerently calleth she hym, syr master or lord and serueth him quickely, asketh no questions at him and makethe no moo wordes. These are righte

vertues, highely to be commended in a virgin. Morouer this damsell is praysed for her bew|tye and fayrenesse of hir body, whiche was euen asmuch the more excellent, as she exceaded in ver tuous condicions.
Thou wilt saye, yee but where are the other gyftes of god and ryches of the mynd, as the fea re of GOD, true beleife, et cete? I answere.
The sayde vertues were not in her wythoute the fear of God and fayth. Abraham also had ta ken an ooth afore, of the same his seruaunte, af|ter this maner. Thou shalt sweare by the lord of heauen  earth, that vnto my sonne thou shalt take no wyfe of the doughters of the Cananites among whom I dwel, but shalte go to my coun tre and kynrid, and thence bring him a wyfe.
The Cananites were corrupte and loste in The goodes of the mynd are more to be regarded tha~ the go des of y^ bo|dy or of the worlde. theyr faythe and manners gyuen to Idolatrye and abhomynacyon, yet were they mighty and rytche. But they in Mesopotamia (whe~ce Abra ham was) feared God and were vertuous, not withstandyng they were not of lyke power and ritches. Neuertheles Abraham folowed after the feare of God,  therin leauethe he vs an en|sample, that we all shulde be the gladder to haue God, then Mammo~. And thus haste thou also, that in this mariage, there was great experien ceof fayth.

Whan the seruasit now had with syle~ce con|sydred the excellent giftes in the damesell he as|keth her furthermore: whose doughter art thou? She aunswereth. I am the doughter of Bathuel and Nahor is graundfather. Then Abrahams seruaunt toke out a ryng of gold  other Iewels Gyftes in y^ waye of ma riage are oth laufull and co~men|dable. A prouer and gaue her them. For no vncomlye thynge is it to geue honeste presentes to honeste dame|sels in the waye of honeste, and so to moue theyr myndes vnto the honour and loue of mariage. Els (or in other wise,  of suspecious personnes, ought honest damsels to take none. For it is no vntrueprouerbe: She that taketh the pedlers ware, must be fayne to haue the pedler himselfe also at the last. c.
Moreouer, the seruaunt thought he wolde pro ue, how frendly, mercifull, harbarous,  faithful the damesell was, and sayd: Haue ye rowme in thy fathers house to lodge in? And she sayd vnto hym: We haue plenty of lytter and prouender,  rowme ynoughe to lodge in, yet because she wold not take much vpon her, she ranne in, and tolde her brother Laban the matter.
Who immediatelye made readye the stable, goeth forth to the well  bringeth the seruaunte into the house, and setteth meat before him But the seruaunt sayde: I will not eate, tyll I haue first done my earand. And so beganne, and tolde

how that hys master Abraham had one onelye A fourme of the rande in mariage. sonne: how riche he was, and how he had sente him to Mesopotamia to get hys sonne a wyfe.
Then tolde he howe he made hys prayer vnto god,  came to the well, and how theyr doughter Rebecca came to the well also, how she behaued her selfe and what she dyd, by the vohych he vn|derstode, that god had prouydd theyr doughter for his masters sonne: So that now his request was, that they wold geue hym a fynall aunswe|re, whether they could be contt to mary theyr daughter to his masters sonne, or no. Where vpon the damsells father and brother aunswe|red. Thys commeth euen of the Lorde, therfore wyll we not saye agaynst it c.
And thus out of the story we learne, that wha~ we haue made oure faythfull prayer vnto God, appoynted oure election ordynatelye, and vsed the other meanes, we must do oure errand vnto the parentes or tutours of the partye, and how and after what maner we ought to do it. The damesel also is enquyred what her wyll is, she consenteth, and ther wyth is the mariage conclu ded. Thus much I haue spoke~ co~cerning the chosynge of conuenient and mete spouse, and of the earand appertaynyng to the same.
Yet in thys thynge also must I warne euerye Trueth in co~tracynge of mariage. reasonable and honeste persone, to beware, that

in contractyng of maryage, they dyssemble not, ner set forth any lye, but rather vse trueth,  tell how euery thyng standeth. For they that lye and dyssemble, do afterward cause much displea|sure amonge them that are disceaued. Let euery one remembre, how loth he wolde be to be discea|ued hymselfe, and that it is comenly sayde: In mariage ought no man to be begyled.
Euery man lykewyse must esteme the parson to whom he is handfasted, none otherwyse, then Marke this well. for his owne spouse, though as yet it be not done in the church ner in the streate. For thus is it wrytten. Deut. xxii. yf a mayde be handfasted to an husband, and then a man fynde her, and lye wyth her, they shall both he caried out of the cytye, and stoned vnto death.


The. xiii. Chapter.

Of the weddyng.

ANd to the inte~t that all inco~uenie~ces for to come which myght afterward growe, eyther touchyng the goodes or the promy ses) maye cyrcumspectlye be preuented, therfore after y^ handfastynge  makyng of the contracte y^ church goyng  weddyng shuld not be differred to long, lest the wickedde sowe hys vngracyous sede in the meane season. Likewyse the weddinge

( cohabitacion of y^e parties) ought to be bego~ne with God,  wyth the earnest prayer of y^t whole church or co~gregacio~. But into this dysh hath y^e dyuell put his foote,  myngled it wythe many wycked vses and custumes. For in some places ther is suche a maner, wel worthy to be rebuked that at the handefastyng, there is made a great feast  suprfluous ba~cket,  eue~ the same nyght are the two ha~dfasted personnes brought  layed togyther, yea certen wekes afore they go to the chyrch. Which is nothyng els but a wycked lust, and a playne euide~ce, y^t thou lytle regardest the blyssyng, euen as dyd Esau,  that in wedlocke thou sekest nothyng but caruall desyre.
Christ commaundethe vs, that fyrst before Maried fol|es go to the chyrch afore they lye togy ther. all thynges and in all thynges, we shal seake the kyngdome of God. And for asmuche as he hym selfe dyd openly couple the fyrste mariage togy|ther, and blyssed both the parties, therfore the co~ gregacion thorowe the ensample and spirite of God, hath ordeyned, that the parties shall open|ly and before all thynges, come to the Chyrche, and there declare and confirme theyr marriage in the face of the chyrche, and of Gods minister receaue the blessyng, and committe them selues to the comon prayers of the congregacion, and enioye the same. This godly ordinaunce ought euery reasonable Christen man to prefer aboue

his owne fonde affeccion, and not fyrst to seake the bancket  the bed in his mariage, but Gods kyngdome, and then fyrst to be wedded  dwel to gyther in the name of God.
For in the sayde ordinaunce we must not on|ly The occasi|ons  co~mo|dities that commethe of this ordina~s. consither, and note the acte and example of God, but also those profitable and christen poyn tes followyng.
Fyrst, with this ordinaunce is it openly decla i. red in the syght of all the worlde, that it is God which knytteth the knot of mariage. For that the minister of the churche doth, that doeh he in the name  accordyng to the ensample of God.
Secondly with this ordinaunce is testimony gyuen, that wedlocke is honorable and pleasau~te ii. vnto God, an holy worcke of the lyghte, and no foule worcke of darckenes. For the parties dare syghtly come into the open Churche (euen in the lyght) where Gods worckes onely are practised. As for the worckes of whoredome and dishone|stye, that hyde them selfes in the darkenesse. It is sene also by the goyng to the churche, who ke|pith house wyth God and honeste in wedlock, and who wyth the dyuell and shame in whore|dome: Not only this, but also what they be, that among Christen people are to be suffered togy|ther as honest personnes: and who, as harlttes and vnthriftes, are to be expelled  dryuen from

asunder.
Thyrdly, in this ordinau~ce is euery one war iii. ned, faythfully to kepe his promyse, made and gi uen to his spouse, before God  the whole chyrch For if a man haue cause to be ashamed, whan he promiseth ought in y^e presence of honest peo|ple,  kepeth it not: Much more ought aduoute|rers to be ashamed, that breke theyr promyse, made before God and the congregacion.
Fourthly, God wyll gyue his blyssyng to the~ that co~tracte wedlocke in the feare of hym, and iiii. that confirme it accordynge to his ordinaunce. Whych thyng the faythfull may assuredly loke for at hys hande Gene. i.
Fyftely, There is Goddes word declared and . taught, how holy a thyng wedlocke is, how mar ryed folkes ought to behaue the~ selues. c. There euery man that is marryed already, is putte in mynde of his promyse, and they that sometyme lyue well in maryage, are called to repentaunce: lyke as they also that lead an honest lyfe, are co~|fermed in all goodnes.
Syxtely. There is made a generall prayer of the whole congregacion in the name of Christ, vi. for those newe maryed folkes, and for the whole state of matrimony. Now hath the Lorde promi sed, that where two or thre are gathered togy|ther in hys name, he wyl be in the myddes amo~g

the~: therfore is it wel to be hoped, that he wyll be much rather in such a whole congregacio~s, and heare theyr prayer: All these occasion co~sidred, let not the faythfull despyse Gods ordinaunce, but behaue them selues so, that dilige~ly  afore all thynges, they seke the kyngdom of god,  take that in hand, which is honest profitable  good.
But the dyuell hath crept in her also,  togh  weddynges. he can not make the ordinaunce of goyng to the church to be vtterly omitted  despysed, yet is he thus mighty,  ca~ bring it to passe, that y^ ori|nau~ce is nothyng regarded, but blemyshed with all manner of lyghtnes: In so muche that early in the mornyng the weddyng people begynne to xcead in superfluous eatyng  drinkyng, wher of they spytte vntyll the halfe sermon be done. And when they come to the preachynge, they are halfe droncke, some all togyther: therfore regard they neyther the pchyng nor prayer, but stond there onely because of the custome. Such folkes also do come to y^e church w^t all manner of po~pe  pride,  gorgiousnes of rayme~t  Iewels. They come w^t a great noyse of Harpes, Lutes, kyttes, basens and drommes, wherwyth they trouble y^ whole church,  hyndre them in matters pertay|nynge to GOD. They come into the Lordes house as it were i~to an house of marhau~dyse to laye forth theyr wares  offer to sell them selues

vnto vyce and wickednesse. And euen as they come to the churche, so go they from the churche agayne, lyght, nyce, in shameful pompe and vai|ne wantonesse. What thinkeste thou, faythefull man, that suche church goyng opteynethe before god? Uerely more indignacion and displeasure, then fauoure and grace.
Wherfore let all vertuous and honest people How they ught to go to the chyrch for to be ma yed. take here monicyon, to leaue such abuse, yee such synfull and vycyous church goynge, there as it is yet practysed: And let them take theyr ho nest kynsfolkes  neyghboures w^t the~,  in good season soberly discretely lowlye, as in the syghte of god, without pompe, manerly, and in comely honest rayment, without pryde, wythout drom|myng  pypynge, let them go in to the house of the lorde, and there heare the lordes worde, make theyr faithful prayer vnto God with feruente|nesse and stedfast beleyfe, receaue the blessynge, and then manerly and wyth sylence to go home agayne.
After the goyng to the church, is there no lesse inconuenience vsed amonge manye multitudes Synne  ex|cesse co~myt|ted at wed|dynges. then in the church goynge. For whan they come home from the church, then begynneth esse of eatyng and dryncking. As for the poore, they are out of remembraunce. And as much is waisted in one daye, as were sufficient for the two newe

maried folkes halfe a yeare to lyue vpon. The dayes of Noe, mencyoned in the Gospell, and the parable of the ritch man and Lazarus, haue there rowme ynoughe. Let euery man loke, that with such excesse: he praye not also with the rych man in the pitte of hel. O abhomi|nacion.
After the bancket and feast, there begynnethe a vayne, madde, and vnmanerlye fashio~. For the bryde must be brought into an open dauncynge place. Then is there suche a rennynge, leapynge and flyngyng amonge them, then is there suche a liftynge vp and discouerynge of the damselles clothes and of other womennes apparell, that a man might thynke, all these dauncers had caste all shame behynd them, and were become starke madde and oute of theyre wyttes, and that they were sworne to the~ deuels daunce. Then muste the poore bryde kepe foote with al dauncers, and refuse none, how scabbed, foule, droncke~, rudeand shameles so euer he be. The~ must she oft tymes heare and se much wyckednesse,  many an vn|comely word. And that noyse and ro~blyng endu reth euen tyll supper. At an af|ter supper.
As for supper, loke how much shameles  dro~ ken the euenynge is more then the mornynge (so much the more vyce, excesse, and mysnourtoure is vsed at the supper. After supper must they be|gynne to pype and daunce agayne of the new.

And though the yonge personnes, beynge wery of the babiynge noyse and inconuenience, come once towarde theyr rest, yet canne they haue no quietnes. For a man shall fynde vnmannerly  A wicked cu stome. restles people, that wyll fyrst go to theyr cha~bre dore, and there syng vicious and noughty Bal|lades, that the dyuell maye haue his whole try|umphe nowe to the vttermoost.
But here let euery Christe~ man co~sidre, what an vnmanerly  frowarde custome this is, and how vnmete a thyng it is that suche vnclennes shoulde be practysed amonge Christen peopel, whiche ought to be holy. Maryage shuld be an inhibion  manifest condemnacion of all inor dinate luft, of all excesse, of all wa~to~  vnshame fast lyuynge. And yet is the same chaist estate begonne wyth suche vayne wantonnes  lyght|nesse, wyth superfluite and royote, to the great hurte of the bodyes, soules, and goodes of the yonge folkes. Or is there ony manneso greatly destitute of vnderstondyng, that he perceauethe not this? Why doth no man then refourme it? Or wyl we wyth vyolence prouoke and defy al myghty GOD? Nowe go to, though the myre fall vpon your heades, we can not do with all. Thou wylte saye: What? hathe God then for|bydden honest folkes to make mery togyther or Conuenient and honeste myrth. to daunce honestly in all good manner: I aun|swere.

Wht so euer God doth not inhibite and A goodly to enlusion. condemne to be synne, maye not be called synne by ony man. As for myrth wyth honeste, it is a grace and gyfte of God, and hereof commeth it, that they of olde dyd saye: Honest myrthe shulde none forbydde. Wherfore thought a Christen ma~ vse conuenient myrth wyth nourtour, tem|peraunce and thankefulnes, he synneth not. For God hath not inhibited ma~ to be mery wyth ho neste, and in due season. This is manifest. Hie|remy. xxxi. And Salomon saythe, Ecclesiastes. lii. There is a tyme to wepe,  a tyme to laugh, a tyme to mourne, and a tyme to dau~ce: a tyme to embrace, and a tyme to refrayne from embr cynge. In conuenient tyme therfore and place, maye faythfull Christen men haue ordinately all maner of myrth in instrumentes wyth hone stye, at mariages or other ioyfull tymes, whan God gyueth peace, prosperite and fayre wether. The abuse, the royot and excesse (agaynste the whiche onely we her speake) marrethe all, and bryngethe inconuenience in theyse and all other thynges. And so after great vntemperate, and vnmeasurable myrth, ther foloweth commonly exceadyng great and perpetuall sorowe. Wher|fore lette all faythfull Christen men take here a monicion at theyr weddynges to put awaye all vnte~peraunce, and wyth nurtour and honoure

to begyn that honourable state, so shall God in|creace his grace in them, and grau~t the~ to lyue in long  honest myrthe: Or els if they fall into trouble, he shall not leaue them w^tout conforte.


 The. xiiii. Chapter.

Of the fyrst cohabitacion or dwellyng togy|ther, and loue of marryed folkes.

AFter that we nowe hyther to haue brefely spoken of the eleccio~ of a comely spouse,  of y^ earand in the cause of maryed folkes. church goyng also, and of the declaryng and con firmacio~ of the parties in wedlocke: I must de|clare, howe they bothe maye lyue well and ryght togyther, and faythefully kepe and increace the loue and dewty of mariage.
And here y^e fyrst dwellyng togyther is moost aunger in the fyrste o a habitacion. daungerous of all For where folkes neuer came togyther afore,  the one is not yet accustomed wythe the other, and where sometyme also they are of contrary condicions and natures among the~ selues. There or euer they can dwell vnder one rofe, and afore theo ne learneth to know the other: much contencion happeneth many tymes and if the same be not preuented at the begyn|nyng, there spryngeth worsse thynges therof.
For the dyuethe enemy of all vnite crepeth in here also, and laboureth fast, that he maye lyke|wyse haue hys porcion, and that he maye make

the marryed folkes not to agre well the one with the tother. Agaynst whome, they that are nowe marryed, must diligently watch and fyght, and gyue the Dyuell no place, but remember well, what maye followe vnto them by suche to early discorde. And the same maye they learne by thys ensample followyng: if two boordes at the fyrst be not well cowpled and ioyned the one to the Marke thys exa~ple well. other, they neuer are fastened right afterwarde. But if the fyrst couplyng  ioyning togyther be good, than can there afterward no viole~ce driue the boordes asunder, yea the whole boorde dothe sooner breake, the~ the glewyng of the~ togyther.
They therfore that are marryed, must apply theyr speciall dilige~ce, that theyr fyrst cohabitaci Howe mar|ryed folkes ought to be|haue the~ sel|ues whanne they fyrste dwell togy|ther. on  dwellyng togyther be louyng  frendely,  not separated thorow ony spytefull contencion, for so shal the whole estate of your mariage pro|sper the better, and haue the more tranilite  rest, as longe as ye lyue. And though there hap|pen to aryse any clowde of discorde, yet let them beware, that at the least there be not to muche displeasure, disdayne and inconuenience. For yf at the begynnynge of mariage there chaunse suche rudenes and vncomely discorde, then wyll it alwaye be breakyng oute, euen as it is wythe great woundes and broken legges, whyche sel|dome are so thorowely healedde, but sometyme

hey haue payne at the chaunge of the wether. Eue~ so yf married folkes behaue the~ selues thus vnhonestly the one toward the other at the fyrst  if discorde be once begonne betwene them, the olde cancker wyll breake agayne, thoughe it be scaled afterwarde. Then come suche vnsemelye wordes as these be. Thus dyddest thou serue me also afore. It were my parte to learne to gyue ly|tle credence vnto the. c. And after this manner doth that to early discorde make the whole lyfe.  the whole state of mariage, bytter and sower.
Let euery one consither this aforehande, and Howe they must behaue the~selues at theyr fyrst be yng togither refrayne, forbeare and suffer: And if all be not after his mynd, let him remember the wordes of S. Paule. One beare anothers burthen, and so shall ye fulfyll the lawe of Christ Let one suffer wyth another. In the meane season let eche one learne to be acquaynted with the nature  condi cions of the tother, and to apply hym selfe accor dyng to the same, in asmuch as they must nedes dwell togyther, one enioye another, and the one dye  lyue with the other. Reme~ber youre selues well on both the sydes, that if ether of you wyll be so styffe mynded,  stand so in his owne con|ceate, A good lesso~ both for the man and the wyfe. ye shall neuer haue good nor good dayes to gyther. What auaylethe you then youre owne noysome condicions? Wha~ thou perceauest thy selfe to haue ought in the (whiche dothe displease

thy husba~de, the best is that thou amende it. Yf any thyng the~ do displease the, speake thy myn|de,  that discretely vnto thy husbande, to the in te~te that he may leaue it, yf sensualite go to wor ke, it marreth all. Wyth the first can we not op teyne, alwaye,  of euery man, what so euer we wolde fayne haue. Contracy wyse: Chastening hath yet hyr owne dew tyme  place. The tyme also and your dwellyng together shall minister much occasio~, so that in processe of tyme manye thinges shall be more tollerable vnto the that at the fyrste y^u thoughtest rough,  couldest not suf fre. But afore all thynges, y^e prayer of fayth vn to god, shall make moost peace  rest. God only hath oure hartes in his hande, be can bowe the~  alter the~ as he wyl: Leaue not thou now thy cal lynge. What soeuer we desyre of God in a true beleue, yf it be not agaynst his glorye and oure saluacion, he will geue it vs. But thys prayer maye not ceasse, as Christ teacheth. Luke, xviii.
As for such as in theyr owne inordinate lus|tes not regarding thys our instruccio~ and war nynge go on styll, and as soone as in theyr first Mark the godly exa ple. dwelling together they fynd ought in theyr spou se that is agaynst them, do braule and crye. No|man, but euen the deuell himselfe sente the (vnto me, etc. Those men do, euen, lyke as yf one had bought a vyneyarde, and shulde go into it

afore y^e tyme, to proue the grapes, which yf they What ma|ried folkes ow one to another. were yet hard and sower, that is vnseasonable and not rype) he shulde therfore plucke vp the vynes, and destroye the whole yarde. For lyke as here the tyme muste be consydred, so muste the one forbeare the other in theyr fyrst commi~g together. And though the grapes be rype, yet is not the iewse immedeately wyne at the begyn|ning, but first, is it must, then sweter, at the last wyne: yee the yeare and age maketh it in manye places, the longer the better and the more plea|saunt. He that will not now tary the tyme, but cast out the wyne, because it is not wyne by and by, but is must first, and then sweter wyne that man must nedes lacke wyne at his nede: Euen so yf thou wylt suffre no infirmyte ner blemishe thou must take none to be thy spouse. For alme~ are tempted and euery one hath his own speciall blemysh and fault, ouer and besydes the weake|nesse and imperfection that we haue of our first father Adam. Wherfore let not euery man spea|ke and do here what so euer commethe into hys brayne, but remembre that we all are men, and that accordynge to the olde Prouerbe. In space commeth grace.
And to the intent that euery man in this en|fourmacion and in the state of mariage, maye behaue hymselfe the more handesomlye and the

better, I wyll nowe brefelye declare, what ma|ryed folkes (because of gods commaundemente) do owe one to another, namely ordinate obdy|ence,  coniugall loue mutuall, whiche is of all loues, the greatest For who so euer doth earnest ly pondre these thynges, and consydreth the~ well shall not onely behaue himselfe ordinately and louyngely at theyr first dwellynge together, but thorow out the whole state of mariage (as lo~g as he lyueth he shall spend his tyme well in vnite quyetnesse, and in all good maner. Touchynge this obedie~ce and loue matrimoniali, I wyll all ledge the verye worde of God, to the intente that this instruccion may generally take the more ef fect, and that euery man (not folowynge here the same, may know, that he synneth openly a|gaynste god and agaynst hys holy ordynaunce.
Paul, Ephe. v. sayeth thus: ye wyues, sub|mytt The dewtye  obedience of wyues. your selues vnto your husbandes, as vnto the lorde. For the husband is the wyues heade, like as Christ also is the head of the congregati|on,  sauyour of hys body. Now as the congre|gacion or church is in subiection vnto Christe so let the wiues also be in subiection to theyr hus bandes in all thynges. First doth Paule speake of the obedie~ce, that maried weme~ owe to theyr husbandes. Let the weme~ sayth he be in subiecti|on, that is to say, seruiseable  obedie~t vnto their

husbandes. And addeth therto, that they must esteme this obedience none otherwyse, then yf it where shewed vnto god himselfe. Wherout it fo loweth, that the sayde obedience extendethe not vnto wickednesse  euell, but vnto that whiche is good, honest, and comely. In asmuche as god deliteth onely in goodnesse, and forbyddeth euell euery where. It foloweth also, that the disobe|die~ce, whiche wiues shew vnto their husbandes displeaseth god no lesse, the~ whan he is resisted hymselfe.
Secondly, Paul doth lykewyse adde the occa he husba~d is the heade of the wyfe. sion, whye wemen oughte to be subieccion to theyr husbandes. Euen because the husbonde is the wifes heade. Whych, sayenge he toke oute of the thyrde chapter of Gene, where it is wrytten thus: And the lorde sayde vnto y^e woma~. Thou shalt depend and wait vpon thy husba~des beck, him shalt thou feare, and he shall haue aucthori te ouer the. Thus wryteth Paule himself. i. Ti moth. ii. I suffre not a woma~ to teach or preach or to haue dominion ouer her husband. For A|dam was first made and the~ Eua. And Adam was not disceaued but the woman was discea|ued, and brought in the transgressyon. For as|much then as the mastershippe and takynge of auctorite vpon her could not well be dryuen out of the woman, therfore god to punyshe the sin|ne,

humbled her, made her fearfull and subdued her. Such punyshment and ordinaunce of God ought they to regarde, and wyth a good wyll (ac cordyng to the commaundement of the Lorde, to obey theyr husbandes, leest they fall into Gods wrathe and into further punyshment.
But to the intent that the husband shall not Howe y^ hus|bande  the head. turne hys aucthorite vnto tyrany, therfore doth Paule declare, after what maner and howe the husbande is the wyues heade. The husbande (saythe he) is the wyfes head, euen as Christ is the head of hys congregacion. Nowe is Christ so the heade of the congregacion, that he shewethe vnto it the same thyng, whiche the head sheweth vnto the bodye. The head seeth and hearethe for the whole body, ruleth and gydethe the body and geueth it strength of lyfe. Euen so doth Christ defende, teache  preserue his congregacion. To be shorte, he is the sauioure, conforte, eye, harte, wisdome and gyde therof. Therfore muste the husbandes be heades vnto the wyues in lyke ma ner, to shewe them lyke kyndenes, and after the same fashyon to guyde them and rule them with discresion for theyr preseruacion, and not wyth force and wylfulnesse to entreate them.
Thyrdly, Paul setteth an ensample to the wi ues howe they must be obedient  behaue the~ sel ues vnto theyr husbandes,  saythe: Lyke as the

chyrche is in subieccio~ to Christ, so let the wome~ How the wy+ues muste o+beye and be|haue them sel+ues. be in subieccio~ to theyr husbondes in all thinges But howe is the chyrche in subieccio~ to y^e Lord? She hath respecte only vnto hym,  dependethe vpon his worde. As for straunge  fond husban+des, she harkeneth not vnto them, but kepeth her selfe pure and cleane (and that continually) vnto hym in all faythfulnes: Loke what Christ com+man~deth her, y^e receueth she into her harte,  doth it: Contrary to Christ and wythout his wyll  worde, dothe she nothyng. For in euery thyng y^t she goethe aboute, she seakethe and requireth for Christes worde, she loueth Christ only  aboue al thynges, she is glad and wyllyng to suffer for Christes sake, she doeth all for the loue of hym. Christ only is her conforte, ioye and altogither. Upon Christ is her thought day  nyght, she lo~ gethe onely after Christ, for Christes sake also (if it maye serue to his glory) is she hartely well content to dye, yea she gyueth ouer herselfe whol+ly therto for Christes loue, knowyng assuredly, that her soule, her houour, body, lyfe and all that she hathe, is Christes owne. Thus also must euery honest wyfe submit her selfe, to serue her husband wythe all her power, and gyue herselfe ouer frely and wyllyngly, neuer to forsake hym tyll the houre of death: to hold her content wyth her husbande, to loue hym onely, to harken vnto

hym,  in all thynges to order her selfe after hys commaundement. c.
Nowe followeth it in Paule lykewyse, what The dewtys and loue of husbandes. the husbandes owe to theyr wyues,  how they ought to loue them. Ye husbandes, sayth he, loue your wyues, as Christ loued the congregacion, and gaue hymselfe for it, to sanctify i, and hath clensed it. c. The husbandes dewetye is to loue hys wyfe. Nowe is loue ge~tle and frendly, she is not disdaynefull, she seketh not her owne profyt she is not proude, she is not pufte vp, she is not hastely prouoked vnto wrathe, she takethe not a thyng soone to the worste, she is not lothsome  tedious, but feruente  seruiseable, and therfore (as we sayde afore) the husbande is the wyues head, that is, her defender, teacher and conforte. Yet nedeth it no farther declaracio~, for as muche as Saynt Paule hymselfe sheweth the maner  fashyon of the loue, that is, howe they oughte to loue theyr wyues, and sayth: Ye men loue youre How menne shoulde loue theyr wyues. wyues, as Christ loueth the co~gregacion. Howe dyd Christ loue the congregacion. It is wryt|ten: No ma~ hath greater loue, than he y^ ieopar|deth his lyfe for his frend. Such loue hath christ shewed to his congregacion. For it followeth in Paul: Christ gaue hymselfe for it. For what in tent: Euen to sanctify it and to clense it.
This is the~ the measure of the mutuall loue

matrimoniall, that eche party haue nothyng to  deare, whiche he can not be content to gyue and bestow vpon his maryed spouse, in as much as it is required of hym, that if nde be, he shall also not spare his owne lyfe for hys spouses sake.
And lyke as Christ thoughte no scorne of hys churche, despised her not, neyther forsoke her be|cause of her vncleannes and synnes. So shoulde no Christen marryed man spurne at hys wyfe, nor sette lyght by her because that sometyme she fayleth or is tempted  goeth wronge: but euen as Christ norysheth and teacheth his church, so ought the husband also louyngly to enfourme  instructe hys wyfe.
But marke  consyther this well: O ye Chri|sten ow holy  thynge loue matrimoni|all i. maryed folkes, that Iesus Christ the sonne of God, and the holy Christen chyrche, and the holy body of them bothe, are set forth for an en|sample or myrcoure to the state of wedlocke and cogall loue. A more excellent, a more holy, a more goodly and purer ensample coulde not be shewed. Thus truely must it nedes folow, that loue matrimoniall is highly accepted vnto God as an ordinate, holy, and godly loue: Contrary wyse it must followe, that vnquietnesse, hatred and frowardnes in mariage displeased GOD exceadyngly. For an hyghe loue is it that God requireth of marryed folkes, therfore synne they

not but do well and ryght, whan they, because of Gods commaundement, beare great frendshyp and loue, the one to the other.
It followeth moreouer in Paul: So oughte A man  loue his wife as his owne body. y^ husbandes to loue theyr wiues, as theyr owne bodyes. He that louethe his wyfe, louethe hym|self. For no ma~ hath at any tyme hated his own fleshe, but doth norysh and cheryshe it For this cause shall a man leaue father and mother, and kepe hym to his wyfe, and they two shall be one fleshe. Therfore ought euery man to loue hys owne wyfe as hymselfe. All theyse are the holy Apostles wordes, which haue this consideracio~: Wedlocke maketh of two personnes one: For they two, sayth the Lord, are one flesh. Therfore must the husband loue his wyfe no notherwyse then his owne body. And as it is a very vnna|turall thyng for a man to hate hys owne flesh  bloud, eue~ so is it to be estemed vnnaturall, that one spouse shulde hate the other. All we cheryshe our owne bodyes and norysh them. Reason is it then that we cheryshe oure wyues, and do them good, for they are our owne bodyes. And as ther is great vnite and mutuall loue amo~g y^ partes of a mans body, so ought there to be also betwe|ne them that are maried togyther. Euery me~bre healpeth a nother, they are sory  mery togither, there in not one that checke the and obbraydethe

another, euery one hath his place  office in the body, and doth his dewty wythout grudgynge: Euen so lykewyse must it be betwene man and wyfe. Thus much haue I shortly spoken out of Paule, towthynge that loue which is due to be had in wedlocke.


The. xv. Capter.

 How the loue, faythfulnes,  dewty of ma|ryed folkes, maye be kepte and increased.

HErein now ought not a maried ma~ to be satisfyed, that he knowethe what matri|montall loue is,  how he shuld loue hys spouse, but he must apply hymselfe to loue her in dede, as y^ Lord hath co~maunded hym  not that only, but also endeuour hymselfe euer more and more, to kepe  increace the same loue. For ma|ny there be that begynne well to loue, but they endure not,  some ordre them selues after suche fasshio~ in theyr lyuing, that they deserue rather to be hated, than loued. Therfore wyll I nowe speake a lytle hereof, how the loue, faythfulnesse  dewty of maryed folk maye be kept  increa ced. Fyrst, for asmuche as true loue matrimo|niall The worde of God and prayer. co~meth of God,  is gyuen of God vnto man, there are two speciall means (namely god des worde and the prayer of fayth) that do kepe  increace it. For if maryed folkes harke~ ernest ly vnto the worde of God,  read it, they learne

dayly at it, such chynges, as augment comugall loue. And yf they praye vnto God withe a true fayth, that he wyll put awaye all suche thinges as maye mynysh the loue betwene them,  helpe them vnto it that maye increace the same, doubt lesse God shall heare them. Only let them giue them selues to co~tynuall prayer, and to the hea|ryng and readyng of Goddes worde.
Secondely. For asmuche as wedlocke mketh One harte  wyll. of two persons one, for they two are one flesh, saythe the Lorde, therfore muste they be of one harte, wyll and mynde, and none to caste ano|ther in the tethe with hys faulte, orto pryde him of hys gyfte. Yf thy wife be not al togyther cir|cumspecte and handsome, and God hath ende|wed the wyth wysdom and actiuite, than boast not thy selfe agaynste thy wyfe, but remember howe God hathe prouided the for her in mary|age, to the intent that thou shouldest supple her imperfection, and that ye both doynge your best togyther, myghte be one perfecte bodye. If the wyfe be rytche, and the husbande poore, then let not the wyfe boast her rytches agaynste the hus|bande, One castuo another in y^ teth. but considre, that thorowe mariage, her goodes are become her husbandes also. For ma|riage is a mutuall felowshyp  partakyng of al thynges. The bodye lyke wyse is more of value than the goodes. Seynge, then that thy body is

thy husbandes, muche more are thy goodes his. And thus must euery one of you iudge in others giftes, y^t what so euer the one spouse hathe more excellent then the other, the same, thorowe mari age, is his spouses aswell as his owne.
Thyrdly, it doth greatly increase loue, whan eruice and wshyp. the one faythefully seruethe the other, whan in thynges concernyng mariage the one hideth no secretes nor priuities from the other, wha~ of all that euer they optayne or get, they haue but one comon purse togither, the one lockyng vppe no|thyng from the other, whan the one is faythfull to the other in eatynge, drynckynge and all ne|cessite, whan the one harkenneth to the other,  whan the one thyncketh no scorne of the other,  whan in matters concernynge the rule of the house, the one wyll be councelled and aduised by the tother. But muche discorde commeth of it, whan the one hateth and wyll not suffer them, whome the tother loueth and can not forsake, as namely a mans frend, father, mother, syster, bro ther, and such other lyke.
Fourthely, let the one learne euer to be obse|quious Obsequiou .  seruiseable to y^e other in al other thi~ges And this shall come to passe, yf y^e one note what thyng the other can awaye wyth all, and what pleaseth him. And so from henceforth to meddle with the one and eschew the other. Some wiues

are so frowarde, that whan theyr husbandes are mery, they are sadde: And contrary wyse, there be diuers men, that fyrst desyre to meddle wythe that thyng, whiche they perceaue y^ theyr wyues Thynges  be eschewed can not awaye wythal. Some nether canne nor wyl heare theyr infirmities more nor lesse. Som tyme whan the wyfe is sad and disquietted, then wyll the husbande haue to muche sporte and pa|styme of her. And sometyme if the husbande be displeased, than the wyfe wyth spytefull wordes and wanton fashyons prouokethe hym to more anger. Some hadde rather haue theyr backe full of strypes, than to holde theyr tonges and forbe|are a lytle. But where the vnderstondyng of ob|sequye and obedience is, then lette euery one re|member that the other hath the nature of man|kynde in hym, and is tempted, lette the one lende to the other somewhat in temptacion, forbeare wythe hym,  gyue hym the place gentylly for a tyme. And thoughe thy spouse in hys displeasure do happen for to speake an vnkynde or vnientyl worde, yet thynke that it was not he, but wrath that spake it.
Fyfthly. There is no manner of thyng, that Humilite  gentylnes. more strongly kepethe and increasethe loue ma|trimoniall, then doth curtesy, kyndenesse, playn|nesse and gentylnesse in wordes, manners and dedes. But there be diuers marryed parsonnes,

among whome is not fou~d a good worde, but al way brawlyng, chidyng  discorde. And yet fyll they all the world wyth complayntes, what a mi serable lyfe they haue togyther. And they them selues neuerthelesse are gylty of theyr owne mis chefe. Let them leue theyr churlyshe fashons, and be frendely and louyng one to another, and then shall they come to rest. And if happely they can not excell in that behalfe, yet lette them shewe a good mynde and louynge wyll in theyr wordes and dedes,  so shall an honest vertuous spouse be contented therwythe. For euident it is, that many a man wolde fayne be endewed wyth hu|manite and gentlenes. And yet by the means of imperfeccion, not for any frowardnes, he canne not. One man also is of an heuyer nature than another.
Syrtely, it lykewyse heapeth and encreasethe They muste secretly kee no euell myn des, but tell theyr grefe. loue matrimoniall, whan the parties swell not one agaynst another, and whan eyther openeth to the other theyr grefe in due tyme, and wythe discresion. For the longer a displeasure or euell wyll reygnethe in secrete, the worsse wyll be the discord. The dyuell also sometyme maketh theyr hartes so hard  styffe, that at the last they both become croked vessels. Therfore (I saye) woulde I haue the due tyme obserued, bycause that there is some season in the which yf greues were she|wed,

it shuld make greater debate, as yf thou shuldest tell it thy husbande, when he is oute of pacience, or moued. And specially who so spea|keth to a dro~ken man, talketh wyth hym that is not at home. Therfore Abigail perceauyng Na|ball her husbond to be dronken, wolde not speake her mynde vnto hym vntyl the mornyng. i. Reg xxv. Thus ought euery one to wayte his conue nient and due tyme.
Wyth discrecion, I saye, must it be done also for some shewe theyr grefes so vnmannerly, so spytefully, and so vncurteously, that they make nowe a greater discencion, than was afore. And yf the one, of a good faythfull meanyng, begyn to speake of the tother, the same shall not onely take indignacion at hym wythout pacient hea|ryng oute of his tale, but also begynne to make spytefull rehersals agayne of the newe. Remem|ber your selues well both of you, for if ye so con|tinue in dissencion, brawlyng and chydyng the one wyth the other, truly ye can not haue Gods fauoure. For who so wyll be forgyuen of God, must and ought fyrst to be at one with his negh boure, and also to forgyue hym hys trespasse  faulte. Accordynge to the wordes of the Lorde. Math. v. vi. xviii. So sayth Paule. Ephe. iiii. Thoughe ye be angrye, yet synne not Lette not the Sonne go downe vpon yourewrathe, ney|ther

gyue place vnto the backehyter. c. Lette all bytternes, fearsnes  wrath, roaryng and cursed speakyng be put awaye from you. Be curteous one to another, and mercyfull, forgyuynge one another, euen as God for Christes sake hath for gyuen you.
Seuently chyldren begotten in wedlocke, are a very sure bonde of matrimoniall loue. And Chyldren  gotte~ n ma riage therfore the Latinistes call them Pignora. Now is pignus as muche to saye, as a pledge, or gage or pawne. And the chyldren begotten in lawfull Pignus. marriage, are as a pledge and suerty of the loue that can not be parted asunder. For howe canst thou at ony tyme be deuided from the marryed spouse, by whome thou haste chyldren: yf thou wylt saye. Take thou one,  I wyll take another yet hath ech of you in that one chylde, somthing which pertayneth to yourselfe. For certayne it is, that the chylde cometh of you both. God also bryngeth it so to passe, that somtyme the childre~ looke lyke the father, sometyme lyke the mother, sometyme they haue the condicious and simili|tude of you both: And this God ordeyneth that the loue maye be the greater in marryage. Nowe Mark thou wyf. when thou wyfe doste loue those youre chyldren as thou shuldest, bryngest them well vp, arte di|ligent in lookyng to them, and canst take payne wyth them, then louest thou thy selfe in thy chyl|dren,

and geueste hym also an occasion to loue the better then he dyd, so that wyth the payne  trauayle that thou hast aboute the chyldren, he is pacyfyed: Lyke as it is in dede the dewetye of euery maried man, not to be vnpaciente wythe his children, or churlish to his wyfe, which hath laboure and payne ynough all readye wyth the chyldren, al though her husband were of a gentle nature, and not doggishe.
And those wyfes, whych beynge made frute|full To brynge forth childre~ is y^ blessyng of god. of god, do bring forth manye chyldren, and haue all theyr dayes much greate payne, trauay le laboure and disquietnesse wythe them, maye not thynke (as some do) that they he more vnhay pye and infortunate, then those are that haue no chyldren at al. They shulde rather consydre, that to be frutefull, is in gods true eternal wor de, commended as a blssynge of god, and that all such wyse and noble men as feared god haue euer estemed it for a singulare prosperyte, ho|noure and welth. Item that all holye  famous wemen of the olde testament, dyd mourne, com|playne, and were ashamed of theyr vnfrutefull|nesse. Upo~ a tyme there came a famous woma~ to Rome, to the noble Corneia Grachi,  she|wed her hir treasure, as namelye hir precious Iewels, rynges and cheynes of golde, precyous Childre~ are weme~s be Iewels. stones, and ornamentes, and requyred Corne|lia

that she shoulde shewe her hyr Iewelles also. Then that noble Cornelia brought forthe hyr chyldren, shewed her them, and sayde, lo, thys is my worthy and precious treasure, that all my mynde standeth vnto, yee the treasure that one ly reioyceth me, and is to me dearer then all the Iewels vpon earth.
This dyd an Heithenish woma~, What shul dest thou the~ do, thou christe~ wife, whiche ough test by ryght to know, that god vseth y^ to greate honoure, wha~ he causeth the to beare chyldren, which afterward may serue him and the who|le countre, and maye come to be honeste folkes,  a perpetuall commendacion to the? The holy scripture also saieth euidently, that a wife is in the worke of God and seruethe hym, whan she bringeth forth chyldren, and gydeth them well. Therfore what so euer she there in dothe and suffreth, she must gladlye do it and suffre it for gods sake,  put her trust in god, that he whiche puttethe her to the payn and laboure, can also shew her both comforte and helpe, yee she may not doubte, but be certayned at goddes hand, y^e Paynes ta|kyng about chyldren: is the crosse of the wyues. what soeuer she faythfully and obedientlye suf|fereth and doth with the childre~ in mariage it is no lesse good worke in the sight of god, then all mes geuyng, prayer, or mortifieng of the bodye. For that is hir crosse which the lord hath layed

vpon her to beare. Paul sayeth also. i. Timoth ii. The woman brought transgression into the worlde, but she shall recouer her honoure agay|ne by bearyng of chrildren, yf she contynue in y^e fayth, in godly loue, in the sanctifieng, and in nourtoure. This shulde Christe~ wiues remem bre in all their crosse, and to be glad, wyllynge,  of a good courage therin. And who hath she|wed the O woman) all the grefes, anguysshes  troubles, all the paynes and miseries, that tho|se wyfes haue which bring forth no chyldre~? It maye chaunce, that they haue more myserye and payne in another sort, then thou hast w^t thy children. And that happely they haue here rest  good dayes, and yet fynne therin wythe pryde, deyntynesse, voluptuousnes, wantonnesse, ydel nesse, nycenesse,  such infirmities, so that here vpon earth they get lytle honoure and worshyp therof,  must haue eternal payne in the world to come. This I say agaynst froward  wicked wifes, and not agaynst those that would be glad to take any payne  laboure so that they might haue chyldren and to lyue mekely, vertuouslye and honestlye.
The wemen also, whiche are maried vnto such men as haue had children by their former Step chyl|dren  ster mothers. wyues, must be ernestly exhorted, to shew them selues vnto those motherles chyldren, no steppe

mothers fre~dshyppe, but a ryght motherly faith ful kyndnesse. Haue co~passio~ (oh Christe~woma~) vpo~ those yong innoce~t orpha~s, whyche knowe not ner haue any co~forte ner helpe vpon earthe, saue only the. Consydre, that god the lorde hathe ordeyned the (in steade of theyre owne mother) to be vnto the~ a right true mother,  requyre the the to loue the~,  to do them good. Wo vnto the yf thou do the poore motherles chyldren harme. Reme~bre, that they are thyne owne husbandes naturall flessh  bloude,  that it is an vnnatu|rall Marke well ye Mothers in lawe. thing to hate them whych on thy husbands behalf pertayne partlye to thyne owne bodye,  are thyne owne: thynke vpo~ the worde of truth. With what measure ye meate, wythe the same shal it be measured to you agayne. What a gre|at grefe wold it be to thine hert, yf thou knewest now that thine owne childre~ who~ thou bareste i~ thy body, shulde (after thy death) haue a step mo ther, whiche wold be rough and churlyshe vnto the~? Doutles those chyldrens mothers that deed is had in hir deth no lesse care for hir childre~.
Therfore as thou woldest haue thine owne children intreated (yf thou shouldeste now dy) so deale thou also with the~ that were hers  thy hus bandes tegether. Or els loke verelye to haue of god the same measure that thou hast gyuen. Be sure also, that god will not heare the, wha~ thou

prayest thy Pater noster, for as muche as thou wylte not heare the poore Orphans that cry vn to the. O dere mother. This I saye, because expe rience leaeth, that by the reason of steppe chyl dren the loue matrimoniall is not onely iny|shed, but euen vtterly excluded. Neyther gendreth it vnite, whan a man intendynge to commend his fyrst wyfe, doth it ether out of mesure, or els fyrst of all whan he fyndeth faulte in hys newe wyfe. For such prayse doth she co~ter to be made to her dishonoure ad shame. Namely that her husbande in commendyng hys fyrst wyfe, dothe it to her reproche. I speake not this to the intnt that a maryed man shulde speake euell of hys ho nest wyfe whiche is departed, but that euery ma~ which is nowe maryed agayne, maye commend hys former wyfe in due season and wythe mea|sure, yea  in suche a sorte, that hys present newe wy fe haue none occasion to thyncke, that it is done to her disprayse.
Eyghtly. The loue matrimonial is excelle~tly Trouth and faythe must be kepte. well kepte and increaced thorowe nurtoure, clen lynesse, trouthe and faythe, yf they be stedfastly obserued togyther. Let the husband content hym only wyth hys wyfe, and so order hymselfe with wordes, manners and gestures, that the wyfe maye perceaue, that he holdethe hym onely vnto her. Let the wyfe kepe no lesse trouthe and fayth

beyng honest and not shameles toward her hus|band. Agayne, let her gyue hym due beneuole~ce, and be not contrary vnto hym, nor brawle with hym. For suche frowardnesse gyueth ofte great occasion, and ministreth improiment to matri|mony. Whrfore lette euery one here remember the wordes of S. Paule. For the auoydynge of whordome, let euery man haue his wyfe. There hath not the wyfe power of her owne body, but the husbande. Agayne, the husband hath not po|wer of hys owne bodye, but the wyfe. c. as we sayd afore in the tenth Chapter.
Let euery woman also beware of misgouer|nauuce Clenlynesse.  sluttyshnesse in rayme~t, yea in euery thyng, that wythe vnclennesse she make not her selfe hated of her husbande. Lykewyse must they bothe beware of euery thyng that prouokethe to aduoutry, or ministreth any vnfaythfull suspi cion. As it is to be droncken, to haue wanton or priuy communicacio~, to vse euell company and lyke pastyme to haue fellowshyp wyth lyght per Note thys well. sonnes, to resorte vnto suspicious places, to sto~d wyth suspicious folkes, to were wantonne ray|ment to be euer at lyght games, to renne to eue|ry daunce, to playe in euery strete, to tary ly|tle at home, to be lesse content at home then any where, to murmour, chyde, and to sygh at home. et cetera.

An honest wyfe ought not behynde her hus|bandes backe to haunt ony euell company, to be Conuersacio~ ba~cketted, nether to go ony where wythout her husba~des knowledge  leaue. Much lesse ought she to take vpon her ony farre iourney. And if her husband be gone forth, or be not at home, let her holde her selfe as a wydowe and lyue quiet|ly,  bryng no man into the house in the meane season, nether ronne oute: nor byd gestes, to the inte~t that ther grow no euel name nor fame vn to her therthorow. Nether shulde the one to the other, boast or shewe of suspicious gyftes  pre|sentes. Nether the husbande to commende other wiues afore hys owne or aboue his owne. Ne|ther is it the wyues parte to excead in praysyng another womans husbande, lest the one suspecte the other. Thy wyfe must take the for fayrest,  Good  thy husba~d must holde the for y^e best fauoured.
And for asmuche as gelousy is a speciall euell Gelousy. disease, and a great noysome plage in wedlocke, therfore maryed persons must put it awaye, or at the leest, and asmuche as in the~ lyeth tame it and suppresse it: And namely beware thou wyfe that thou impute not aduoutry vnto thyne hus|band, because he sometyme hath spoke~ with ano ther woman, or looked at her. Agayne, thou hus|bande must not be so sore tempted, as to mysin|treate, to blame or to smyte thy innocent wyfe,

nether to laye vnto her suche thynges as she ne|uer thought vpon. Lykewyse thou husband may est not deny thy wyfe to make conuentent and honest chere wyth honest folkes. For though all Women and horses muste be wel gouer ned. olde wyse and prudent men would haue wome~  horses kepte in good nourtour  gouernau~ce, yet maye there be to muhe done herein, as well as in other thynges. There is an old Prouerbe also. The bowe wyll breake, if it be to sore bent. Item, No thyng maye continue that is not bor|ne vp. Therfore an honest marryed ma~ shulde forbyd his wyfe no conuenient honest myrthe, but gyue her leaue, to the intent that she maye afterward be the more wyllyng wyth the chyl|dren, and in other trauayle  paynes takynge
It besemeth no discrete honest husba~d, to com Boasting or prayynge. mend his wyfe to much before other men. Col|latinus Tarquinius lost his noble wyfe Lucre tia, thorow his inordinate praysyug of her. Yet much lesse becommeth it the to be shamelesse in disclosynge the priuities of mariage, as many fylthy personnes vse to do. Lykewyse besimethe it no man to prouoke hys wyfe in bryngyng in naughty personnes, or in kepyng the~ styll there in his house, nether to cause his wife to be spoke~ of. Yf Menelaus had kepte Paris without, he had saued Helena his wyfe. Neuerthelesse euery honest wyfe muste faythfully and at all tymes

kepe her honeste, thoughe her wycked husbande gyue her many prouocacions. Remembre all waye the sentence of Salomon. Wha~ a woma~ Honeste is  woma~s che|fe treasure. leaseth her honeste, than hathe she lost her chefe treasure, nether hathe she any more, but is con|tempned  despysed, as the myre of the stretes.
Hereto seruethe it also, that the wyfe maye Behhueours wyth seruau~ tes. not make her selfe to familiare, to frendly, or to pryuy wyth her seruau~tes or housholde folkes, leest they shoulde be bolde to talke, to ieaste, or without reuerence to behaue them selues withe her, as one seruynge mayde woulde do wythe another. Thou wylte saye: I canne not be so oysterous nor shewe my selfe so terrible. Nowe go to, if thou wylte not be feared in the house as a dame, yet hold the so vnto them, that they may stande in awe of the, that they be not to rashe and to bolde of the, but shewe the reuerence, be|yng shamefast and well manered towarde the, as to the mother in the house. For thou ough|test A good lesso~ for wyues. with no man to be so familiare, so frendely, and so homely as wyth thy husband. Lykewyse also must menne behaue themselues vnto theyr maydens in the house, and commyt all the rule and punyshme~t of them vnto theyr wyues, and not to meddle wythe the seruauntes agaynste them, excerte the wyfe wolde deale vnreasona|bly and wylfully wyth theyr poore seruauntes.

Co~trary wyse, the wyfe must not take vpo~ her the rule or punyshment of the men seruauntes. For hereof commeth great vnite: Lyke as wha~ the husband medleth to muche with the women seruauntes, and the wyfe wyth the menseruau~|tes, there ryseth great suspicion and discencion amonge marryed folkes.


 The xvi. Chapter.

Of conuentent carefulnes, and iust kepyng of the house lyke Christen folke.

IF thy wyfe be vertuous and trusty, let her be also carefull in kepynge and prouydynge for thy house. For such study  ordinate care gendreth great loue  encreaseth thy substaunce For such study and care is not forbydden. For the godly Patriarch Iacob thought it necessary for hym  his wyfe to be studious for theyr hou sholde. Paule affyrmynge it, If a man prouide not for hys owne housholde, he denyeth the fayth Gene. xxx. and is worse than an Infidel. Wherfore all that Christ speaketh agaynst carefulnes, he speaketh it agenst all inordinate mistrustyng  to muche couetous care and sorow, that desperately  insa Math. vii. ciably torme~teth  vexeth the mynde. Ordinate care expelleth idle slouthfulnes and monysheth vs of our duty  iust vocacion. Which care on|ly loketh vnto God, the author  gyuer of all, to him she prayeth to prosper  blisse al y^t she goeth

about. Whych prayer of fayth hath her forme  Pro. xx. circu~stances te~dyng to Gods glory. Two thin ges I aske of the, o Lorde. remoue fro me vanite and lyes, gyue me nther pouerte, nor rytches, onely grau~t me a necessary lyuyng, lest I beyng to full, deny the sayeng, Who is the Lorde. And lest I constrayned thorowe pouerte fall to thefte and forsweare the name of my God.
This ordinate care and study must be take~, that ye maye haue to socoure the nedye and to Ordinate care set forthe youre chyldren, and that youre selues want not, and so by your idle ignauy, ye be one|rouse and a burden to other good menne. La|bour to haue wherwithe to lyue in age, yf God call you to it. Who so hath stolen, sayth Paule, let hym nowe stele no more, but labour with his Ephe. i ii. handes some good occupacion y^t they maye haue to healpe the nedy. And as for them that inor|dinately care and study to be rytch, and to haue more than is necessary, they fall into the temp|tacions and snares of the dyuell, and into ma|ny lustes (as saythe Paule) which drowne men into perdicion and damnacion, sode~ly fall these rytch welthy bullockes from theyr goodes  god|des, Luke. xii. euen theyr euell gotten, worsekepte,  worst of all bestowed mammons.
What so euer is to be done wythout y^e house that belongeth to the man,  the woma~ to study

for thynges wythein to be done, and to se saued Theoutwar de busynesse pertaynethe to the man, y^ enward to y^ woman. or spent conueniently what so euer he bryngeth in. As the byrde flyeth to and fro to brynge to y^e nest, so becommeth it the man to applye his out ward busynes. And as the da~me kepeth the nest atcheth the egges, and bryng forth the frute, so let them bothe learne to do of the vnreasonable fowles or beastes created of God naturally to obserue theyr sondry properties.
The man in his gaynyng  occupieng must be iust  faythful, ferue~t, diligent  earnest, ma|kyng all thyng substancially surely,  wythout ony deceyt. For faythfulnes euer abydeth whan vnfaythfulnes  craftines destroye themselues: as ye se in the faythefull dealynge of Iacob and in the couetouse disceate of Laban. The worde Gene. xxxi.  promyse of an occupyer must be as ferme and fast as the rocke of stone, fayth and trueth con|serueth many mens occupyeng wha~ vniust de lyng bryng hym out of credyt.
Let not a man meddle with vnhonest occupa|cions not necessary for a common weal, but as Paul commau~deth, wyth such as are good and profitable for the citie or countrey wythout de|ceyte, and euery man to medle wyth, and in hys ne callyng, nether sekyng other mens lucre, nor enuieng other mens profyt, but walke ordi|nately and quietly labouryng wyth theyr owne

handes, auoydynge vsurye, but doynge to other as thou woldest be done vnto thyne owne selfe. And yf thou (for all thy true and iust dealynge) yet prosperoussest not subiect to many euel cha ces, wherof the world is ful, yet be thou content with Goddes wyll, for the pouerte of the ryght|ous, sayth Salomon, is better then the infinite treasures of the vngodly. And a pece of bread or a messe of potage with quietnes, is better then a fatte oxe with brawlyng. Many menne haue great goodes wyth muche vnquietnes and lytle hone, for he hath sette his soule to pledge, for|saken God  taken the dyuell to helpe hm to lye  to deceaue that he myght be rytch to leaue his good to an vnknowen hayer. Dauid saythe, fol|lowe not hym that doth euell because thou seest Psal. xxxvi. hym prosper in his wyckednes: for he shall sone be cut downe lyke grasse,  lyke the floure faad awaye. But put thou thy trust in the lorde  do ryght, dwell in y^e Lorde  get thy lyuynge wyth trueth and iust dealynge. And freat not nor be agreued wyth hym that prospereth in his owne waye, and leadeth a wycked lyfe. c. Unto thys holye Psalme let euery Christen man attende. The wyues worckynge place is wythein her The wyues must worcke wythein the house. house, there to ouerse and to sette all thynge in good ordre, and to beware that nothyng be lot, seldome to go forth, but when vrgent causes call

her forth. And therfore Phidias that ingenous Phidias. worckemanne entendynge to describe an honest faythefull housewyfe, dydde sette her ymage vn|der the shel of a snayle, signifieng that she shulde euermore kepe her owne house. Necessaryly it is Comonsente~  far the ke ng or thy ouses. that she knowe these common sentences  learne them by harte. Thou muste not regarde what thynge thou woldest fayne haue, but what thou canst not lacke. Stretche out thyne arme no far ther than thy sleaue wyll reatche. What so euer thou neest not, is to deare of a farthyng. Who so spareth not the penny, shall neuer come by the pownde. Sparynge is a rytche purse. A thynge is sooner spared then gotten. Spare as thoughe thou neuer shuldest dye,  yet as mortall, spende measurably. To spare, as thou mayste haue to spende in honeste for Gods sake, and in necessi|te, is well done. Thy sparing is but vayne, whe~ thou arte come to the bottome. Begynne eue|ry thynge in oue season. What so euer thou mayst do to nyght, dyffer it not tyll to morow. Mathe these se~tences wel That whiche thou cannest do conueniently thy selfe, committe it not to another. If thou wylte prospere, than looke to euery thyng thyne owne selfe. Lette it not be lost, that maye do any good in tyme to come. Spende no more than thou wottest how to get it: whan thyne expenses and receytes be alyke, a lytle losse maye ouerthrow

the. Spare for thy age. Take paynes in thyne yougth. Bye such thynges as thou nedest not to repent the therof. Uyle pedlary bryngethe beg|gery. Araye thy selfe honestly. Holde thy chyldre~ in awe, and they shall haue the in reuerence.
Muche spendynge and many gyftes, make bare cellars and empty chystes. Euellfellowshyp  vayne pastyme maryeth pouerte and begetteth a sonne called derision, lyuethe gorgiously and costely in excesse, and leauethe the a fare well, whose name is this. In thyn age go a beggyng: Such and many mo godly and wyse sentences are found in Salomons Prouerbes, and in the Precher, and in Iesus Syracke, which an honest housewyfe must take hede vnto.


 The. xvii. Chapter.

 Howe maryed personnes shall behaue the~ selues not only in workes of mercy, but also in the crosse and aduersite, and wythe theyr seruauntes.

IF Christen maried folkes thorow theyr iust laboures and Goddes blyssyng obtayne rit|ches aboue necessite. then let them remembre Paules exhortacion, sayeng: Commaunde the i. Timo.  rytch men of thys worlde that they be not hygh mynded nor trust in transitory rytches, but in the lyuynge God, whyche giueth vs all thynges abundantly to enioye them. Charge them to

do good  to be rytche in good worckes, to gyue wyth good wyl, to distribute, layeng vp tresure for them selues agaynste the tyme to come that they maye laye hand of eternall lyfe. For when Math xxv. the Lorde shall come to iudge the quicke  dead, he shall saye to the mercifull. Come hyther, ye blessed of my Father and take the kyngedome prepared for you from the begynnynge of the worlde. For whan I was hongrye ye fedde me, I was thyrsty and ye gaue me dryncke c.
Gyue almes therfore of thyn nowne substa~|e and turne not thy face awaye from the poore Shewe mercye after thy power. If thou haste much, giue plenteously. If thou haste lytle gyue therof after thy power. For a good treasure shalt thou lay vp in store for thy selfe agaynst y^ day of trouble, yea that small substa~ce wherof a poore man giueth almose pleseth the Lord much better then when welthye men gyue theyr lytle of theyr great rytches. Example in s. Luke: Re|me~ber Luke. xxi. the comon Prouerbe. That thou sparest from gyuyng for Gods sake, shall the dyuell ca|ry another waye. So saythe Salomon. Some man gyueth out his goodes and is the rytcher, but the nyggarde hauyng ynough wyll departe from no thynge: And yet is he euer in pouerte. He that is lyberall in gyuynge shall euer haue plenty. God increaseth loue and fauoureth ma

ryed folke bycause they shewe mercy  charite to the nedy.
And yf God maketh the ritch man poore, he doth well: For he seeth that if he shuld haue rit|ches Affliccio~ tech to know god he would be to proud and forget God and himselfe to, with pouerte therfore and adfliccio~ wyll he nourtour his chyldren so to teach them his wayes, lest in abundaunce and wealth they runne after theyr owne wayes and lustes. For Tribulatio~ is fyer and salte. tribulacion and aduersite are the fyer and salte that purge  preserue vs from stynkynge  not destroye vs, but they teache vs to put our trust in God and not in oure selues nor in no crea|tures, they draw vs from transitory thinges to fasten vs sure to God, and because we shoulde not be condemned wyth the worlde, he plucketh i. Cor. xi. vs wyth his Crosse from the worlde. Into the which troublouse state of the crosse, whan ma|ryed cowples be cast of GOD, then haue they the moost present co~solacions out of sriptures to conforte them, and to cause them to reioyce in theyr affliccion, as are the holy Psalmes of Dauid, we haue also the godly ensamples of the deare beloued faythefull seruauntes of God as were Iob, Abraham, Iacob. c. Item the wordes Math. xvi Ioan. xvi. of Christ. Who so wyll serue me, let him dayely take his crosse vpon hym and folow me. And in Ihon, and Paule is full of conforte in hys epi|stles

specially. Hebreus x. Whan ony of the H. xi. xii. xiii maryed personnes be tempted or troubled wyth syckenes or any other fortune, then shulde the to ther, conforte hym or her wythe these conforta|ble ensamples, Psalmes and sentences of gods Syckne spirite of all consolacion, one suffryng wyth the tother, for so shall the affliccion and Crosse be the easylyer borne, and loue mutuall the more encreased. Trewe loue sheweth her selfe moost clearely in trouble and syckenes. And yf the one grudge at the tothers syckenes, he doth agaynst Gods wyll. And if he reioycethe at her, or she at hys affliccion, it is a token of lytle loue excepte hys reioyce be in the Lorde, so to conforme hym to the similitude of hys sonne Christ, that he myght be lyke hym in glory.
Paul co~maundeth you to do to your seruau~ tes, that y^t is iust and equall, louyngly  frendly How seruau~ tes must be in treated. Iob. xxxi. vsynge them, remembrynge that ye your selues haue a master in heauen, learne of Iob also the same, for your seruauntes are of Goddes crea|cion as wel as ye, derely beloued and hys chosen children also, yea and your brothren and systers in Christ. Let them therfore for theyr laboures haue theyr conuenient food and wages, be not bytter, harde, nor iniuriouse vnto them in no wyse.
A great offence it is before God to kepe the

labourynge seruauntes wages fro~ hym. Iames Iac. v. sayth vnto such rytch me~. Beholde the hyer of y^ labourers that haue reaped downe youre feldes which hyer ye haue kept backe by fraude, cryeth and the complaynt of the labourers is entred in to the eares of the Lorde of Sabbaoth.
Ye haue had good dayes vpon erth, and lyued at your pleasure and delyghted your hartes, but it is only agaynst the daye of your slaughter. So Iames sayth that the defraudynge of mens wages wyll be at last a slaughter. Many men vse theyr seruauntes as slaues and beastes, and therfore is theyr ertorted seruyce vnprofitable  vnfaythfull to suche cruell masters, more fayth|full is the seruice done of loue, than for feare  compulsion.
Agayne the seruauntes must laye a parte all euel condicions, prydevnfaythfulnes, brawlyng The dewty of seruau~te and murmurynge, pyckyng and tales tellynge, remembryng Paules exhortacion, sayeng, ye ser uauntes be obedient to your masters with feare and tremblynge in singlenes of youre herte, as vnto Christ, not with eye seruice as me~ plesers, but euen as the seruaunt of Christ, that ye may do the wyll of GOD from your hartes wyth good wyll. Thyncke that ye serue the Lorde and not men.


 The. xviii. Chapter.


How chyldren shuld be well and godly brought vp.

GReate ioye  quietnes it bryngethe to the Wome~ shuld ourse theyr own chyldre~ pare~tes to se theyr childre~ godly  vertue ously brought vp. And agayne, besydes y^e sorow y^t euell brought vp chyldre~ bring to theyr parentes, yet shall they render a strayght reke|nyng to God for theyr euell bryngynge vp of them. The women shulde noryshe theyr owne chyldren wyth theyr owne brestes or els yf they maye not for weaknes, yet oughte they to seke honeste and godlye nourses of sober lyuynge that wyth theyr mylke they myght drinkin also vertewe. And the pare~tes especiallye the mo|ther must endeuour to speake fyrst to the chyld perfectly playne and ncte wordes, for as they be fyrst enformed to speake so they wyll contynew. Caius and Tyberius the sonnes of Caius  Ci berius. Cornelia Grachy were ornate and eloquent in theyr speche for theyr mother was eloquent of tongue.
And euen from theyr infancy forth let the parentes teach theyr hyldren no fables nor ly|es nor no vayne nor lyght communicacio~ but that onely which is godly, honest, graue and frutefull let it be planted in theyr new hertes.
They must teach them fyrst certayne godly sentences, though they yet can not vnderstande

them, yet let them commende them to memo|ry and practyse them in speche tyll they maye here after the better perceaue them, as are these folowyng.
As certaynely as thou seyst the heauens and Sentence to be taugh chyldren in theyr fyrst yonge age. the earth: so certaynly muste thou knowe, that ther is one i~uysyble god, one alone for all suffy|cient, hauing hys beyng of himselfe,  all crea|tures ther being of him.
Heauen and earthe and all that was made, is of goddes owne creacyon. God is the mooste hyghe goodnes. Wythout God theris nothing good. God nedeth no creature to be ioynedde wyth hym in hys dedes and cownselles to for|geue, dampne saue or healpe. It is he alone that vpholdeth all the wor preserueth it, and gy|ueth euery thyng the lyfe  beynge, whyche it hath. He is louyng graciouse and mercyful to them that so beleue and trust vpon him.
God is trewe, and iuste, and holye in all hys workes, God loueth vertue, and hateth synne  vyce. It is good that God commaundeth, and euell that he forbyddeth God punysheth synne  euell. A man must loue God aboue all thynges. He may not murmur agaynst god, but be wyl|lynge and thankfull in all aduersite to beare it. He must call onely vpon God, and complayne to hym onely in all hys nede. And here muste

the chyldren be taught thus to praye. Oure fa|ther The Lorde prayer The articles of the fayth The ten com mademe~tes The prouer|bes of Salo mon. which arte in heaue~. c. And to expresse the articles of our fayth distinctly  perfectely. And in processe of tyme lerne the~ truly to vndersta~d them, and the ten Commaundementes also by harte. Then teache them the Prouerbes of Sa|lomon and the boke of the preachet, and such co|monsentences as are these: Uertue excelleth all thynges. To lye is the moost shamefullvice of all. Thou shalte hurte no man, but profyt euery man. Speake euell of no man. Backebyte nor curse no man. All men are brethren. And suche lyke godly sentences, lette them be planted into yonge hartes. Aboue all thynges shall the pare~|tes vse godly  honest co~uersacio~ in y^ presence of theyr chyldren, teache them more vertue  good|nes, than theyr wordes. For wordes althoughe they maye do muche, yet shall good ensamples of lyuynge do more to the yougth. Let not your chyldren be conuersaunt wytheuell persons and lyght company, lette them not heare vicious nor wanton communicacion, nor se no synfull sygh tes. The parentes must vse them selues before Cato. them as before GOD and all honest people. Cato the wyse Senatour of Rome expelled Ti tus Flaminius out of the counsell, only because that in the syghte of hys yonge doughter he em|brased his wyfe.

Christen folke shulde remember the fearfull Mat. xviii. sentence of Christ, sayeng: Who so euer geueth occasion of euell to any of these yonge chyldren that beleue in me, it were better forhym to be drowned wyth a mylstone tyed about his neck Thou must dilige~tly beware, lest any in thyne house gyue any euell ensample and speke that at naught is in theyr presence. And take hede leest thou receaue any persone into thyne house, that maye ether by worde or dede corrupte thy chyl|dren or seruauntes. Remember that euell speach maye soone corrupte  destroy that which thou hast bene long in plantyng  buyldynge. Wan|ton and euell communicacion (sayth Paul) con|rupteth good manners. And begynne by tymers Begynne b|tymes. to plante vertue in thy chyldrennes brestes: for late sowynge bryngethe a late or neuer an apte haruest. Yong braunches wyl be bowed as thou lystest, but olde trees wyll sooner breake than ow. And what soeuer good liquour is put first into a newe arthen potte, it wyll kepe the sent therof euer after, if it therin stand any ceason.
And as for the yeares to set the chylde to the scole, fyrst considre the apte, sharpenes of witte therof, for some are apte at fyue yeares,  some not before syxe or seuen yeares. And what they shall be fyrst taught, it is tolde before.
And here must ye chose out discrete, learned 

godly masters for your chyldren, which shall  The scole master. cordyng to theyr capacities ently  wysely en|structe them, as is contayned in theyr primers in Englysh and dialoges as are there made for them, whiche whan they can read both prynted and written letters, and can well commyt that y^ they haue lrned to memory, saye~g it distinct ly  perfectly by hart, te~ let the~ learne to write to cas a compte, to yfre, adde, subtray, c. And let them exercyse theyr penne and theyr tonges Godly coun|cell for the ryghte bryn, gynge vp of yougth. in readyng diuerse prynted bokes pertaynynge to the holye scriptures, and come to  heare the trewe prechrs of Gods word, and in ony wyse let them not heare the papistike preachers, and whan they come home from any good sermone aske the~ what they haue borne awaye,  exhort them to marke diligently another tyme and to rehearse it when they come home. Let them saye the graes at the tables. Let the~ prepare the ta|ble  serue you therat clenly and manerly. Let the~ spend all the tyme in vertuous vses  neuer be ydle, for the tyme of yougth is preciouse and Math. x. passeth away swyftly. Be ye circumspecte, o pa rentes in fedyng and apparellyng your childre~ let the~ not be paumpered vp to dilicately withe meates  wines, nor yet arayed to sumptuously  proudly. Daniel was as wel lyking  as pure of co~plexion with a messe of potage euery daye

 a draft of water as were they y^ were fedeuery Gorgio ap|parell  deli|ciou fare oughte to be exchewed in chyldren. daye of the kynges table. Excesse of meates  drynckes in yougth and gorgious apparell is y^ dore vnto glotony, dronckennes  lecherye, and the way to pryde  al maner of vyce neuer to be pluckte from the~ in age. For the which enormi|ties  vyces, theyr parentes  vp bryngers shal gyue strayght rekenyng vnto God, let not thy yougth ru~ne out of thy dores nether by day nor nyght without thy lycence: and take a rekening of theyr behauyoure in thyne absence. Suffre the~ not to come into any lyght wanto~ co~pany.
Se that ye correcte the~ dewly  discretely for Correction. theyr faultes, so that they stand in great feare  awe of the, and if wordes wyl not reclayme the~ than take the rod or weapo~ of correccio~ discrete ly vsed. For the rodde of correccion ministreth wysedome, but the chyld suffred to do what he listeth, is y^ confusio~ of his mother. And who so spareth the rod hateth the childe, but he y^ loueth pro, xxix. and xiii. xxii. and xxiii. him, nourtereth him in tyme: the childes hert is ful of folyshnes, but the rod of correccio~ driueth t forth. Better it is that chyldre~ wepe the~ olde men. Se that they pycke not, steale not, nor vse no vnlawfull games, be not to rough nor to ha|stye weth them, but so order your selues to them that they maye both loue and feare you.


 The. xix. Chapter.


Chyldren wher vnto they be apte, lette them learne that science or handye crafte.

COnsyther well wherevnto thy chylde is naturally enclyned. And vnto that occu|pacion let him be put to: many me~ nowe a dayes al be it they se theyr chyldre~ apt vnto let ters  good learnyng hauyng substau~ce ynough to fynd the~ therat, yet wyll they not suffer them to continewe therat, because the~ selues ca~ not fa uour it, or els they se no aduauntage worldly f low, but great trouble  secucio~, which world|ly me~ in thus doyng declare the~ selues vngodly destroyers both of them selues theyr childre~  of all common weales  congregacions. For what publique weal, towne, cyte or parysh can be wel gouerned, wythout y^ Prince, ruler, preste, or bi Why meune nowe set not theyr chyldre~ to scole. shop be lerned in gods lawe, Prophetes and in his gospel? what is the cause of all this dissensio~ cruell persecucion, tyranny, euell lawes making vniust actcs, false religion, wycked ordinaunces  vngodly decrees  institucions, but onely the blynd ignoran~ce of vnlerned rulers? which mea sure all thyng after theyr owne fonde fleshly af|fectes and reason besydes all scriptures:  wolde haue theyr owne carnal wylles to stonde in the steade, yea rather to be aboue God  hys lawes. In tymes paste, when men sawe so many spiri|tuall promocions vnto rytch bysshoprykes, be|nefices,

deanrykes, Abbayes; Pryories, chaun|celershyps. c, then they dyd set fast theyr childre~ to scole, to make them popysh prestes, ydelly to lyue by other mennes sweates, but nowe they se howe laborouse and perellouse an office it is to preach and to teache Gods worde purely, freely and faythfully. And how vnthankeful an office it is to rule cominalties after iustyce and equi|te, and what an heuye intollerable laboure it is to minister iustyce and iudgement after Gods worde, lookyng for no aduauntage, but to be a comon serua~t for the comon wealth sustayning suche intollerable burdens, labours and perels, as the offyce dewly ministred askethe, no man is glad to haue his chylde learned vnto such vn|profitable and laborouse endes. It was once an holy sacrifyce to God for a manne to dedicate his doughter or sonne vnto Fra~ces, Clare, Be|net, Thomas, Austen, Mary. c. ydelly to lyue in all fylthines, wha~ riches, dignites  worlde|ly vayne worshyp and priuate profyt followed or rather whe~ they gredely aspired and folowed it. But nowe whan the comon laboure, godly|nes, and the publique profit of all como~ weales  congregacions depend vpon it, no ma~ regar|deth nether good learnyng nor vertue, so far of are they nowe to set theyr chyldren to godly sco les. When yougth was nothynge apte to good

letters, and when there was no good learnyng nor no good teachers, then well was he y^ might sette his chyld to scole. But nowe when yougth was neuer so apteto good learnyng as it is this daye, learnynge,  good letters neuer so plente|ously floryshyng, restored and redact into such acompendious clere brifnesse, neuer so good, di|ligent and learned masters, neuer so plenty of so good and playn bokes prynted, neuer so good cheape, the holy Ghost as it were into mennes mouthes mercifully offerynge hys gyftes, and yet wyll there no man open his mouth, his ey|es to se so cleare lyght, nor his eares to heare so pure, manifest and holesome doctrine, euen the worde of theyr owne saluacion. For oure vn|thanckefulnes, therfore all these infinite heaue~|ly benefites shall be take~ fro~ vs,  giue~ to some other nacio~, as to the Turkes  Iewes, whyche shall thanckefullyer then we receaue them. And we shall haue the popysh prestes wyth all papi|strye haltered and captiued vnder hardenecked Pharao in myer and claye neuer to be delyue|red out of that yerney seruitude of his intollera ble bondage.
But nowe therfore O ye Christen parentes seyng that your yougth is now by the fauoure An exhortaci on to the chri en pare~te. of God endewed wyth so good wyttes  encly|ned vnto good letters, let not the graces  gyf|tes

of God be offred you in vayne, but exercyse them in good autors both Greke  Latine, and in noble hiortes, in Logyke, Rethoryke, and in the tonges, let them read the holy Byble, and commend it to memory,  so shall they in tyme to come be profitable vnto the comon wealthe, whervnto they be borne.
And such as are apte to handy occupacions, let them b set to the~ which be moost profitable  necessary for a co~mon weale, as for payntyng  keruynge wyth suche lyke, they are more ucy|ouse than necessary, And consyder that alust and true occupacions iustly erercysed and vsed, Goddes blessyng maketh them to prosper, and the truedoers and labourers in theyr callynge hys blyssyng make them rytch Euery man to put his chyld to that master which is moost ex cellent and connyng in that craft, it is no nede to monyshe, nor to exhorte your chyldren to be trewe, of fewe wordes, faythfull in dedes and promises, diligent and seruiseable to euery man obedient to theyr masters, clenly, quycke, hand|some and wyllyng to do theyr commaundemen tes.
Nowe when thou hast perfectely learned thy Trauay ling among stran gers. crafte, it shall be profitable for the to trauel into straung countryes, to se the workyng and ha~d lynge therof amonge other nacions, wherby

ether thyselfe mayst lerne both a perfayter prac+tyse and also more experience, or els they of the maye learne the same into thy nowne profyte. And in so trauaylynge holde thy selfe modeste, styll and sobre, medlynge not beyonde thyn own facultye. Be ientle, frendely, faythfull and cur|teous to them, conformynge thy selfe vnto theyr honest fashions and godly manners, Beware of euell company  dronkennes, beware of lyght  wanton women, learne no vyce nor euell ma|ners of them, but only vertue  such occupacio~s as are profitable, bryng home co~nyng  vertue  no syn nor euell maners, of which thou shalte se to much,  to lytle of that good is. Cutte clo|thes  iagged  al to hagged hosen disfigure and deforme honest persons,  declare lyght me~ and wantonnes in thy harte.
But before all these experiences seakynge, se that thou prouidest thy chyldren honest mates (if they desyre it) and let the~ rather togither liue at home, and not the one to departe anye longe tyme from the tother for trauaylynge in strau~ge countreyes, bryng some yonge euell disposed per sons into great inconueniences and noughty li|uyng, as it was wonte to be sayde of the Rome runners neuer to be good after.


 The. xx, Chapter

LEt not your yo~g daughters be to proudly yong wem apparell.  costly appareld, but modestly  honestly for thys gorgyouse apparel is not els but a minstrelsy, pypyng vp a dau~ce vnto al lechery i. Pet iii. Reme~bre that Peter saithr That the apparel of wemen maye not be vtwarde inbroydred, oute layd hear which is an whorishe fashyon, nor in hangyng on of golde, or puttynge on of costelye gorgious flaryng clothes, c. The vtward light apparell declareth a corrupt proude and sinfull inward hert. Let shamefastnes chastite, mo|desty, mekenes few wordes sadnes and sobryete be the yong womans aparell to sette forthe hyr bewtye. For after thys maner, in the olde tyme sayth Peter were holy yonge wemen decked of theyr matro~s,  were obedient to theyr housban|des, As was Sara vnto Abraha~, callynge hym Lorde, whose doughters ye are as longe as ye do well: Let the examples of Rebecca and Ra|chell be at youre eyes, whyche godlye and fayer women desyryng and sekynge the loue of theyre husbondes were glad to please them, Learne al|so i. Tim. ii. of Paul howe to tyer your selues: Bewar ye wound not your pouerty and proud hert and to precious and sumptuouse apparell, yf ye wyl go forthe in your prowde araye, so neglecte you the doctrine of god and procure youre selues da~p nacion.

But yf ye saye, ye decke your selues to be the more clenely,  so to please youre husbandes, I tell you agayne, that ther is a meane  measure in euery thynge,  accordynge to euerye state  degree theris a comlye apparell, whych comely|nes and measure no honest husbond nor honest wyfe wylbe glad to tra~sgresse  exceade. Such eccesse  pryde maye procure the dyshonestye  harme to thy husbonde.
As for ientle wemen  suche, as are of noble Whether ge~ tle, wemenne ay go so y ly appa|eled. byrthe, whether they maye excede in lyght  wa~ ton apparell, or in apparell to costly. I wyl first as them whether they be Christen  faythfull wemen or vnfaythfull? If they be vnbeleuers then let them walke as they liste. And the more gorgyouse tenderlynges they be, the better shall they please theyr head the dyuyll. And seynge th y haue wanto~ proude sprytes, they muste ne|des haue lyke garmentes to declare what they b within in herte and mynde, wyth these we|men I wyll not wrestle. But yf they be Chry|sten faythfull wemen, they maye well knowe that the holy Apostles Peter and Paule haue wryte~ theyr erhortacio~s for sober apparell, vn|to them which haue such ryche Iewels, stones, gold  syluer,  not to poore women, that haue them not. Seyng then that the word of God is pryncypally spoken to you that be ientle wome~

of noble parentel whych haue these ryches and Iewels to laye the~ awaye wyth all youre po~pe and pryde,  wylbe taken for Chrysten folkes, then folowe you the exhortations of the myny|sters of Iesu Christ. What  y^ true nobil te.
Moreouer ye shulde remember what is the very nobilite,  what maketh gentle men and weme~, that it is not apparell, but mkenes, gen tle behauyour, discrete conuersacyon, prudence, wysdome, lernynge  vertue. And they that in Chryst Iesu are baptysed, are baptysed into one body of Chryst, where we are all one  no diffe|rence betwixte noble nor bloude, poore nor ritch Galat. iii. And therfore in thys respecte there is no boast to be made of bloude, but remember y^ oble quene Hester, whych sayde: Thou kno|west my state o Lorde,  that I hate the sygne of preemynence  worshyp whych I beare vpon my head, what tyme I must go forth to be sene  that I abhorre it as an vncleane clothe, and that I weare it not whan I am quyet alone by Why ritche be gyuen to menne of no bilite. my self. GOD therfore hath geuen you ryches to dystrybute them to the poore,  not to mayn tayne your pryde therwyth. So were Iewelles bestowed euen amonge the Heathe~, for at Ro|me was a lawe called Lex Oppia, wherby all pompe  excesse of rayment was forbodden all honeste wemen,  they were commaunded that

none (how myghty or rytche soeuer they were) shulde not weare aboue an vnce of golde vpon theyr bodies.
Cypriane sayeth that wemen, albe it they yprian. be ryche, yet therfore ought they not to vse the more pompe  pryde, but to knowe those onelye to be riche, which are ernest in godlye workes,  helpyng the poore. A shamefull and blasphe|mous thynge it is, to weare syluer, golde, vel|uets Mark thys well o ye ge~ il women and sylkes, and to suffer the poore to want clothes  foode. yee she that proudlye decketh her selfe, destroyeth hyr owne soule,  geuethe other folkes occasyon of destruccyon. For she stereth vp euell affeccyons and lustes in them that be|holde hyr, yee such one is poyson and swearde to the~ that se her. Nether may suche gorgyouse fla rynge prowde wemen be iudged godlye nor ho|nest. i Cor. xi. And therfore sayde Paul, That euerye woman comming into the church to pray or to heare the worde preached must be honestly coue red, and especially hyr heade, for yf she come in bare headed or shewyng any parte of her heare Marke Mala. ii. (as some saye it out, and manye haue borowed heare) she dishonest hyr head whych is hyr hous|band: let them therfore be decked and koueredde wyth comely veales for the angelles whyche are the~ ministers and messa~gers of God And what madnes were it to come into the church vnder

a pretence of humblenes to pray to God for gra ce, wher by such proude fashyons thou prouo|kest hys heuy wrath vpo~ the? It were better for such people to be thrust into a sacke, with a myl stone hanged aboute theyr neckes (as Christ sai eth) drowned, then thus to offende anye one of the least in the congregacyon.
What shame God threateneth vnto suche prowde personnes, ye maye reade Esa. iii. say|ynge: That for theyr chaynes of golde the shall haue halters of hempe and fetters and colers of yerne for theyr muske and pomaunders, they shal haue stynke for theyr brodred heare euerye man shall se them balde, and for theyr stoma|chers of golde they shall weare sack, whyche all wythe a myserable destruccion of Israhell and Iuda by theAssiryans and Babylonites came iustlye to passe in the dayes of these kynges Ioa chas Ioakim and Zedechias, Wherfore let xxii. cha. iiii. Lib. Reg. . o forth. euery honest woman accordyng to hyr state  abilite be comely clenly and honestely apparel|led auoydynge all sluttishnes and vnclennelye|nes, and so teche theyre chyldren and refrayne from all excesse and super fluite, that God may be praysed  noman offe~ded at your apparel, ra ther garnished with vertue  vtward honestye the~ w^t pryde whych procureth you euuye, and it wyll in conclusion haue a shamefull fall.



 The. xxi. Chapter.

 Howe daughters and maydens must be kepte.

NOw to returne to yong daughters how . they shuld be enstrut in prayer  know lege of theyr christe~ religio~ according as it is set forth in dialoges  institutions of y^e chri stians, yet shall they not be to busy in teachyng  reasoning openlye, but there to vse sylence and to learne at home, openly to heare, and at home let them reasone and teache eche other. Neyther wold I nothaue them euer shutte vp, as it were in cage, neuer to speake nor to come forthe, but Good coun|sel for mens daughters  maydes. sometymes to se the good fasshions and honest behauiour of other for to kepe the~ euer in mew is ynough eyther to make the~ starcke fooles, or lles to make the~ naughtes, whe~ they shal once come abroad into company. As for this thyng, euery discrete parente shall knowe by the afore|sayd rules howe to order them, to auoyd all wa~ tonnes and nycenesse in wordes, gestures and dedes, to eschewe all vnhonest games and passe tymes, to auoyd all vnhonest loues and occasi|ons of the same, as vnhonest daunsynge, wan|ton communicacion, company wythe rybaldes and fylthy speakers, teache them to auerte theyr syght and sences from all such inconueniences, let them auoyd ydlenes, be occupied ether doinge

some profitable thyng for your family, or ees Bokes of  bles of fon  lyght lou women ought not t reade. readynge some godly boke, lette them not reade bokes of fables, of fond and lyght loue, but call vpon God to haue pure hartes and chaste, that they might cleue only to theyr spouse Christ vn to hym maryed by fayth, which is the moost pu rest wedlock of vs all, pure virgins, beyng both maried and vnmaried. Euell wordes, saythe Paul, corrupte good manners, vnclennes and couetousnes, let them not once be named amo~g Ephe. v. you, nor no foolysh rybaldry talkyng, nor light testyng, which are not comely, but be occupied in prayers and thankesgyuynge. Bokes of Ro|byn hood, Beues of Hampton, Trous,  such lyke fables do but kyndle in lyers lyke lyes and wanton loue, which ought not in yougth wyth theyr fyrst spettle to be droncke~ in, lest they euer remayne in them. If ye delyght to synge songes ye haue the Psalmes and many godly songes  bokes in Englysh right frutefull  swete. Take the new Testament in your handes,  study it diligently,  learne your profession in baptyme to mortify your flesh, and to be reuyued in the spirite, learne the vse of the Lordes supper, to re member his death, and to gyue hym perpetuall thankes for thy redempcio~. Mothers must also teache theyr doughters to worcke, to loue theyr husbandes and chyldren. And lette them laye

their handes to spynne, sewe, weaue. etc, For Lerne them to worke. the noblest wemen, bothe amonge the Heathen Romans and Grekes  Hebrewes had greate commendacyons for theyr houswyfly working wyth theyr handes, as ye maye reade of Salo|mon, sayenge: He that fyndeth an honest fayth|full Pr. xixi. woman, she is more worth then precious perles. The herte of her husband maye safelye trust to her. All the dayes of hyr lyfe wyll she seke hys profit. She occupieth woll and flaxe, and laboureth gladly wyth her handes, She is lyke a marchauntes shippe. et ce. It is expedient that a man handfast not his daughter before he hath good experience of hyr housewyfrye,  go uerning of an house. For it becometh hir better to haue a payer of roughe and harde handes, then tobe fayer  softe glisteryng with rynges Fay han|ded and ten|der fyngered women are not to be praysed. or kouered co~tynually wyth smothe gloues. And let the parentes be ware that they bryng them not vp to tenderly wanto~ly and delicately or to nycely. And at dew tyme let the~ be prouyded for so that they maye gouerne theyr owne houses wyth theyr owne husbandes.
Thus moche haue I spoken concernyng ho|ly wedlock accordyng to the Scriptures of god Desyryng all men, that shall reade thys lytyll treatyse hereby to take an occasyon to hate and deteste all vnclennes,  godly to embrace holye

wedlocke, which is honorable among all person|nes, and so to lead theyr lyfe here in all godlynes and honeste, that after theyr departure oute of this world, they may reygne for euermore in perpetuall glorye with the Bryde. grome Iesus Christ, to whome be all honoure and prayse worldes w^tout ende.
AMEM.

 Gyue the glory to God alone.




 Here after foloweth a table wher by thou shalte fynde, in what leafe euery Chapter begynneth, what is co~tayned in y^e same chap|ter,  also al other princi pall thi~ges co~tayned in this boke.


 The fyrst Chapter.
WHo instituted wedlocke, where  whan, for what ende, c. in the fyrst leafe.
The creacion of woman or of ma~. ii.
Adam and Eue were marryed the leaf iii.
The occasions of loue  consent into mariage. The leaf iii.
The knot and couenaunt in mariage iii.


The second Chapter.
Wedlocke what it is. iiii.


The thyrd Chapter.
Contaynyng the declaracion of wedlok. v.
No man maye separate that God coupleth. v.


The fourth Chapter.
The iust couplyng togyther of man and wyfe The leaf vii.
Religion and fayth must be consydred. vii


The fyfte Chapter.
Chyldren must haue the consent of theyr paren tes or els the mariage is not right x.
Chyldren must honour theyr parentes xi.
Chyldren maye not vow nor promyse without theyr parentes consent. xii.
Menstealers and women stealers. xii.
Themistocles desyred a wyse wyfe rather then a rytche. xiii.


 The syxe Chapter.
The parentes maye not compell theyr chyldren

to mary agaynst theyr wyl nor before theyr iust tyme. xiiii.


The seuenth Chapter.
Of the iust co~sent of both the parties into wed lock, and howe mariage ought to be fre and not compelled therto. xv.
The consent what it is. xv.
The wyll of maryage cometh of God. xvi.
The inordinate affeccio~ of yong folkes. xvii.
The inordinate affeccion of parentes xviii.


The. viii. Chapter.
Wherfore wedlocke should be co~tracted. xviii.
To brynge forth chyldren and to auoyd whore|dome. xviii.
The worke of wedlocke is no synne. xx.
Deflouryng of virgyns. xx.
Measure and shamefastnes. xxi.
To auoyd solenes of lyuyng, to helpe and con|forte one another. xxii.


The. ix. Chapter.
The ende, frute  comendacio~ in wedlok. xxii.
How blyssed and honorable it is. xxii.
The operacion and ende of wedlok. xxii.
Wedlok is holy and honorable. xxii.


The. x. Chapter.
Howe shamefull and abhominable whoredome is. xxiiii.
Whoredom defylethe the members of Christe

which are thyne owne body. xxliii.
Whordome robbeth God of his owne. xxv.
Whordome defyleth the temple of God, xxv.
Whordome shutteth men out of heauen. xxv.
Whordome spoyleth a man of his honeste, body and goodes. xxvi.
Whoremongers haue no rest. xxvi.
Stewes vpholders and mayntayners shall be punished greuously of God. xxvii.
Godly to mary maketh no beggers. xxix.
Whordome, wanton counsayle. xxix.


The. xi. Chapter.
Contayneth, howe shamefull  wycked a thyng is aduoutry, and how it hath of old tyme ben pu nyshed hitherto. xxx.
How god plaged aduoutry before y^e law writte~. The punyshment of aduoutrye in the lawe of God. xxxi.
Howe aduouiry was punyshed among the He|then. xxxi.
How the Lepreanes, Locrenses and Germans punyshed it. xxxi.
Howe the Romans punyshed aduoutry. xxxii.
The lawes imperiall punysh it. xxxii.
Why aduoutry was so sore punyshed. xxxii.
Aduoutry compared with thefte. xxxiii.
Aduoutry alienate heretages. xxxiiii.
The defence that aduoutrers vse. xxxiiii.

Aduoutry punyshed wyth death. xxxv.
The aduoutry of Dauid was not punyshed w^t death. xxxv.
The aduoutresse broght before Christ why she was not stoned to death. Repentaunce. xxxvi.


The. xii. Chapter.
Howe one should chose hym an apte, honest and vertuous mate. xxxvi.
Ther lyeth great wayght in the chosyng of thy mate, what the chosyng is. xxxvii.
The maner of riches in man or of ma~. xxxviii.
The rytches of the mynde. xxxviii.
Language and the feare of God. xxxviii.
Reputacion, rayment, company, the bryngynge vp of chyldren. xxxix
Froward wicked qualities of the mynd. xxxix.
The dispysyng of Gods worde. xl.
Unshamefastnes, lyeng. xl.
Pryde, The rytches of the body, beauty. xl.
Temporall rytches, Nobilite. xli.
Wynnyng and occupyeng. xlii.
The effecte of the eleccion. xlii. Prayer. xliii.
A noble ensample of the eleccion and earande in the cause of matrimony. xliii.
A fourme of the earand in mariage. xlv.
Trueth in contractyng of mariage. xlv.


The. xiii. Chapter.
Of the weddyng. rlvi.

They must go to churche before they go to bed. The leafe. xlvi.
The co~modities y^ come of this ordina~ce. xlvii.
The abuse at weddynges. xlviii.
 ynne  excesse co~mitted at weddynges. xlviii.


The. xiiii. Chapter.
Of the fyrst cohabitacion. l.
Daunger in the first cohabitacion. l.
How they must behaue them selues at first. li.
The duty of the maryed one to y^e tother. lii.
The duty and obedience of wyues. liii.
The husband is the head of the wyfe. liii.
Howe he is the head. liiii.
How y^ wiues must obay  behaue the~ selues. liiii
The duty and loue of husbandes. lv.
Howe men shulde loue theyr wyues. lv.
Howe holy a thyng loue matrimonial is. lv.
A man must loue his wyfe as his owne bodye. The leafe lvi.


The. xv. Chapter.
Howe the loue, faythfulnes and duty of the ma|ryed persons must be kepte. lvi.
One maye not cast another in the tethe. lvii.
Obsequtousnes and felawshyp. lvii.
Humanite and ientylnes, kepe no secret grudge. The lefe lviii.
Chyldren are the pledges of loue. lix.
To be frutefull was once y^e blessyng of god. lx.

Chyldren are womens Iewels. lx.
Steppe children and step mothers. lxi.
Trouth and fayth must be kepte, clenlines. lxii.
Good conuersacyon, auoydynge gelousy lxiii.
Bosti~g or praysyng of wyues or husba~des. liii
How ye shuld behaue you agaynst your seruau~ tes. lxiiii.


The. xvi. Chapter.
Of co~uenient care and iust keping of the house. The lefe, lxiiii.
Ordinate care for our lyuynge. lv.
Phidias dyd set the good houswyfe vnder ashel. The lefe. lxvi.
Comon sentences for the kepyng of thy house. The lefe. lxvi


The. xvii. Chapter.
How the maried must be mercyful  pacyent in aduersyte,  behaue them to theyr seruauntes. Affliccion techeth vs to knowe god. Tribulacio~ is fyer and salt. lxviii
How seruantes must be entreted. lxviii.
The dewtye of seruauntes. lxix.


The. xviii. Chapter.
Hw children shuld be well brought vp. lxix.
Catus and Tyberius, why they were so elo|quent. .
Correction dew and discrete. lxxii.


The. xix. Chapter.

Children must be set to that science and crafte where vnto they be most apte. lxxii.
Why men now set not their chyldre~ to scole as thyck, as they were wont. lxxii
Trauellyng among straungers. lxxiiii.


The. xx. Chapter.
Of yonge wemens apparell, lxxv.
Whether ientle women maye go so rychelye a|rayed. lxxv.


The. xxi. Chapter.
How daughters and maydens muste be kepte. The leafe. lxxvii.

The ende of the Table.


 Imprinted at London in Botulph lane at the sygne of the whyte Beare, by Iohn~ Mayler for Iohn~ Gough. Anno Dn~i. 1543.
Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Per Septennium.





