




A
BRIEFE OF
THE BIBLE,
DRAWNE FIRST
into English Posy,
and then illustrated by
apte Annotations:
togither vvith some
other necessary
Appendices. By HENOCH CLAPHAM
PRINTED BY
Robert Walde-graue, Prin|ter
to the Kings Ma|iestie.
1596.
Cum Priuilegio Regio.




TO THE RIGHT
WORSHIPFVL MA|STER
THOMAS MY-LOT
Esquier, encrease of all true hap|pines
in Iesus Annointed.
_FInding (right
Woorshipful)
so great vtte|rance
of your
Christian af|fectto~,
imme|diatly
after the spirituall exerci|ses
I kept at CHESTER in the
STREET: I could not but now in
dedicatio~ of Loue-memorials,
signifie my duetifull thankfulnes
towards you, not onely amidst,
but that more is, in the fore|front
of my Friendes. Accept

therefore I pray you, not a hand|full
of the Persians vvater offe|red
to an vncircumcised Kesar:
but a handfull of the vvater of
Life, offred by the Lord his poor
servant, vnto an open professed
Christian. A vvise Lapidarie
chooseth not stones so much for
outward quantitie, as inherent
qualitie: nor I hope, vvill you so
much measure my guift with the
bodily eye, as by the Line of the
Mind, or spirituall eye: where|upon
setting downe my wrest, I
here rest: Beseeching the Lord in
all goodnes, to be vvith you and
yours for ever, Amen. 
EDIN|BVRGH,
1596. Your poore vnworthie Kins|man,
HENOCH CLAPHAM.



TO ALL YOVNG
ones in Christs Schoole, in|crease
of knowledge and san|ctification
be multiplied
daily from aboue Amen.
_I Haue heere for thy
vse, drawn a Summe
of the Sacred-writ,
vsually caled BIBLE,
from the greek word
that in English is, BOOKE: be|cause
it is the Book of al books;
with which Book, other books
compared, they are but blots
of mans braine, whereas this is
the Sacred-writ and wisedome
of ELOHIM, or, of that
ONE ESSENCE IN TRI|NITIE.
That Holy-booke,
before the Incarnation of the
PROMISED SEED, was divi|ded
into Lavve and Prophets:

but since the CHRIST assu|med
our nature,  in the same
ascended to the right hand of
Majestie, from whence HE sent
downe the HOLY-GHOST to
fill all thinges, especially the
hearts of his APOSTLES, for
speaking  penning the minde
of IESVS: after that time (I say)
The Book of God was divided
into PROPHETS and APO|STLES,
Iesus Christ himselfe
being the chiefe Corner-stone,
Ephes. 2. 20. The whole then
consisteth in these Books:

These are called the fiue Bookes of Moses, or of the Lawe.
1 Genesis,
2 Exodus,
3 Leviticus,
4 Nombers,
5 Deuteronomie.
6 Iob: which for order of time might be placed
next Genesis: but here for order of Books.
7 Ioshua.
8 Iudges.
9 Ruth.
10 Sam. 1.
11 Sam. 2.
12 Kings, 1.
13 Kings, 2.
14 Chon. 1.
15 Chron. 2.
16 Ezra,
17 Nehemiah.
18 Hester.
19 Psalmes.
20 Proverbs.
21 Ecclesiastes.
22 Song of Songs.


These be called the 4. great Prophets.
23 Isaiah.
24 Icremiah.
25 Ezechiel.
26 Daniel.

These 12. bee called, the small Prophets.
27 Hoshea.
28 Ioel.
29 Amos.
30 Obadiah.
31 Ionah.
32 Micah.
33 Nahum.
34 Habakkuk.
35 Zephaniah.
36 Haggai.
37 Zechariah.
38 Malachi: The last Prophet of the olde Testa|ment,
and the last book of the OLD COVE|NANT.



Betweene this Malachi and
the NEVVE TESTAMENT,
haue (too inconsideratlie) bene
inserted, certaine PRIVATE
writings, called Apocrypha: an
Humaine Breath, betwixt the
Lips of the two Testamentes.
Malachi (in English, Messenger
or Angel) (prophecieth plainly,
(Chap. 3. 1. and 4. 5.) that IE|HOVAH
will sende vnto the
Iewes a Messenger, even Elijah,
to prepare the way before the

MESSENGER OF COVE|NANT,
viz. CHRIST. These
speaches of Malachi, (or last
ANGEL of the old Covenant)
are the very Face of the Newe
Testament or Covenant made
for Many. Matthew, he repor|teth
the ANGEL from Hea|uen,
Chapter 1. 20. bringing
newes of IESVS: and Chap. 2.
1. The Messenger of Covenant
is borne: and Chap. 3. IOHN
BAPTIST the PREPARER
of Christ his way, is introduced
in that worke. Mark begin|neth
with the same: and Luke
(Chap. 1.) bringeth in the AN|GEL
publishing the birth of
the Messenger appointed to
prepare the waye: as also pro|claiming
the birth of the AN|GEL
of the NEVVE COVE|NANT,
for whome he was to
prepare the waye, calling this
IOHN, ELIAS: because hee

goeth before Christ in the SPI|RIT
and POVVER of ELI|AS,
or Eliiah. The Evangelist
Iohn in his 1. Chapter, bring|eth
in the saving LIGHT Ie|sus,
and the MAN SENT from
GOD, viz. Iohn. Thus the
last BREATH of the olde Te|stament
in Malachi,  the first
BREATH of the Newe Testa|ment
in the mouthes of the E|VANGELISTS,
is all ONE
BREATH CANONICALL
from Heaven. They looke not
with Ianus, into two contra|ry
Coastes: but Hand in hand
they joyne, kissing each other,
and both of them looking in|to
the EAST, from whence
the Glorious DAY-STAR did
visit the Earth.
Who nowe dare hinder their
lips from meeting, by inserting
Vn-canonicall writs, a Darke-Cloude,
and Private (if not, a

stinking) Breath. The Iews that
kept the Canon, received them
not: As also, they were not writ+ten
in Hebers sacred tongue: a
sufficient Brand, that they were
no Orackles from IEHOVAH
to Hebers People. Leaping the~
over them Logs, we come vnto
the Newe Testament, whose
Books be these:

1 Matthewe.
2 Mark.
3 Luke.
4 Iohn.
5 Acts of the Apostles.
6 Paul his Epistle to the
Romanes.
7 Corinthians 1.
8 Corinthians, 2.
9 Galatians.
10 Ephesians.
11 Philippians.
12 Colossiaus.
13 Thessalonians, 1.
14 Thessalonians, 2.
15 Timothie. 1.
16 Timothie. 2.
17 Titus.
18 Philemon.
19 The Authour to
the Hebrewes.
20 The Epistle of
Iames.
21 Of Peter, 1.
22 Of Peter, 2.
23 Of Iohn, 1.
24 Of Iohn, 2.
25 Of Iohn, 3.
26 Iude.
27 Revel.

Exercise thy selfe in pervsing
the Bible, the whole of al these
several writs, and thereby thou
shalt easilie (God his Spirite as|sisting

thee) discerne the true
Christ from False, the True
Church from the False: True
writ from False: and so conse|quently,
all holy Trueth from
Falshood. And for helping thy
weake Memorie, as also, for gi|uing
a taste of that large Truth,
in short speach, I haue (throgh
God his helpe) manifested my
poore power, but riche good|will,
in this little booke. First,
I haue in English Posie (drawn
according to an ancient staffe)
delivered summarily the hysto|rie
of the olde and newe Testa|ment:
Secondly, vpon the most
difficult points of the Posie, I
haue dilated by way of Illustra|tion,
not only for the fulfilling
of the hystorie: but also for dis|cussing
sometimes, some neces|sarie
question: as also annexed
hereto, such certaine computa|tion
of time, for speciall joynts

of the Story, as whereby the
spirituall minded, may some|thing
bee furthered to deeper
points contemplatiue. As thou
shalt receiue any good hereby,
so I pray thee be thankful vnto
God therfore,  quickly thou
shalt finde his hand vpon thee
to every good work. The Lord
be with thy spirit Amen.
Dedicate to shewe all duetie,
chiefly to England. H. C.





A BRIEFE
OF THE BIBLE,
WITH NECESSARY
Annotations vpon the
most materiall pointes
in the Posie.

1. Staffe.
VVHen Elohim (a) El, (b) Shaddaj, (c) Iehovah,
(d)  Iah, (d) Ehjesh (that is, GOD (e) in Persons Three,
But (e) Essence One, On whome all things do stay,
Cause of all Cau|ses and Sufficiencie)
when (f) HE the Heavens and Earth  Host hath fram'd:
He create (g) Man and (h)  woman, (i) Ada~ nam'd.


(a) sig|nifying Strong o Potent: The first Atribute or Name of the Strong GOD given in the Ho|ly Booke (Gene. 1. 1.) by Moses. Elohim, is the Plurall number of EL: so that ELO|HIM did Create, is as much as: , the strong One did create: the Plurall number denoting the pluralitie of Persons; but ioyned with a word of the Singular Number, it pulleth vs back to considder, that That Three, are but One ssence of Sbstance. The Essence then is one and spirituall, (Iohn 4 24.) but distinguished (not devided) into Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost. 1. Iohn 5. 7.


(b) Signifieth, All sufficiencie.


(c) Signifieth Bng or Eternall: namely, such a Being as hath his Being of None, and by whome All other things haue their Being (Act 17. 28) and so Eternall, as is not onely without Beginning and End, but by and in whome, All things beginne and end. This woonderful Name, is deeplie graven on the Forehead of the Tenne Commandements, I IEHOVAH, Exod 20. 2.


(dd) signifying, I AM, so he speaketh to Israel by Moses, I AM, THAT I AM. He speaketh of himselfe in the Present Tense or Time, because All time with vs passed and to come is presentay before him: wee should so shape our selues as ha|uing our first Creation, Fall and future Iudgment, alwaies present befoe vs: then we would not con|tent our selues with I was good, or I will be good: but wee would labour, that howe sodainl soeve God come vpon vs, even at that Present, to bee founde watchfull and sober. Heare not the High sacred Titles of God, but be thereby in all estates edified.


(ee) This one God is distinguished into Three Persons, the Powerfull Name, into which Man was first Created, Genes. 1. and lastly baptized. Math. 28. 19. not one Person before the other in Time, but in a certaine respect, or order, whereof anone.


(f) In the beginning of Time (and each Moti|on must haue a Moover before it) that mightie Elohim steppe oorth (according to his Eternall Decree) and createth Creatures for his own sake, Prov. 16. 4. which work, he manifesteth by dividing it into partes: every part declared within a certaine Nomber of Motion or Time.
First, he of Nothing, created Something: name|ly, the Heauenly and Earthly Mattr (Genes. 1. 1.) whereout, Al other Creatures were to be diduced. And as. To Create is properly to make Something of Nothing, so this saide Matter is onely propelie Created, and the Creatures formed out of That, properlie Mde. These, that by Heauen and Earh, in that first verse, haue vnderstood the whole Sub|sequent (as though the first verse delivered gene|rallie, what afterwards is handled particularly) haue therein failed. If this were no so, then Moses shuld afterwardes tell vs, that Man was made of Earth, and then haue omitted the Creation of Earthlie matter, without which first knowne, wee cannot conceiue the second. Having Created that Hea|uenly and Earthly Matter. oe it was as a confused Chaos, or rude Lumpe, but over-covered by the Breath (or Spirit of EL) as egges covered by the Hen, for bringing soorth a more excellent Crea|ture: without which sitting vpon, as not only there woulde be no newe Creature, but also the egge wold in time cease to be that it first is so (and much more than so) without that over-spreading of the Spirit, that first Matter would haue returned into Nothing, and haue ceased Being. But brieflie, (for I professe brevitie in this Book) that Matter Crea|ted, all being darknes, ELOHIM calleth Light out of darknes, and separating them, hee calleth Darknes (for it first had Being) Night; and the Light, day, and so was Created the first daye. Into which day, most liklie may be referred the Crea|tion of Angels, wherevnto I am the rather led, be|cause they are tearmed by the holy Ghost, Angels of Light, . Cor. 11. 14. and it may be, they had their Being from the Heavenly nature. But in which of the Six daies soever they were Created, sure it is, that before Man his Creation, they had forsaken their Originall, Iob. 4. 18. Iude 6. compared with his time of tempting the Woman.
In the second day, was created the Firmament or superiour Region, calling it Heauen, putting a separation betwixt the superior  inferior waters.
In the third day, ELOHIM first commanded the inferiour waters to gather into appointed pla|ces, calling them waters so collected, Seas: and the drye part, Earth. Secondly, hee commaundeth the same Earth to bring forth Hearbs and Trees.
In the fourth day, the Lord commaunded two great shining Starres to Exist in the firmament, ap|pointing the Greater (namely, the Sun) for the day: and the lesser (namely, the Moone) for the Night.
In the fift day, God commaunded divers Crea|tures to haue their Being out of the Waters: first, creeping water Creatures, as Eeles, Snakes, c. Secondly, he commaundeth Being to Whales and all Fishes: Thirdly, to all feathered Fowles: blessing all of them to multiplication.
In the fxt day, hee commaundeth the Earth to bring forth every kind of Beast, pasing or creeping. As I vnderstand the Serpent (Genes. 3. 1.) in English Creeping, not to be a Creeper of the Waters, long|ing to the fift daies work; but of these Earth-cree|pers, because there he is called a Beast of the Feild: So, I marvell at some, who haue peremptorilie af|firmed, because ELOHIM there commaundeth him to go on his bellie, that he crept not before As M. Caluin thereon, might haue staied such resolute heades: so (in a case at least doubtfull) they should haue feared, lest they should haue rushed on Mo|ses: who in the fift day, giveth amongst watry Cre|atures, the Creepers first place: as in this sixt daies work, placeth the creeping Beast next immediatly before Man: being in the same day, and in the place next before man Created: which done,


(g) Hee, E|LOHIM, doth of the dust of the Earth make Man, breathing into him a reasonable Soul. In this Soul (a spirituall Substance, as is God; but finite and not being of it selfe, so is not GOD) in it, ELOHIM stamped his owne likenes, of an holy Vnitie in Tri|nitie, and of an holy Trinitie in Vnitie. As the Soul is but one Essence, so there ariseth three divers Fa|culties, or Powers in that one Substance. First, there is the Mind: Secondly, the Will: Thirdly, the Power of Doing or working. The Minde conceiveth and vnderstandeth things: the Wil, affecteth the obiect, accordingly as the minde first conceiveth of the thing: and from this minde conceiving, and will af|fecting, there proceedeth a working power, or a power by which something is done. The Minde so conceiving, resembling the Father: the Will hauing his affection begotten of the Minds Conceipt, re|sembling the Sonne begotten of the Father: and the Power of Doing, proceeding both from the Minde and Will, resembling the Holy Ghost, pro|ceeding from the Father and the Sonne. And as them three Persons make but one God: so these three Faculties (for the Soue being a single Sub|stance it cannot be parted) do make but one spiri|tuall Essence, or Soule. But as the Father worketh not without his Sonne; nor the Holy Ghost with|out the Father and the Sonne: so neither doth the minde, or will, or working power, effect any thing sundred, but ioyntly: yet as wee attribute Creation to the Father: Redemption to the Sonne: Illumi|nation to the Spirit: So, to the Minde we attribute Vnderstanding, conceipt: to the Will, we attribute well or ill affecting: and to the working power, we attribute the thing wrought or done. As in that one God, no Person is before or after another in Time but in Order of some externall work to vs wrought: So neither in that one Soule, is the minde before the will in Time, nor the working power behinde them in time (For the power of working is before the hing wrought) but onely in Order: for there is no sooner a Soule, but there exist all them three, and without any one of them the Soule cannot be. If one demaund, what is it that Createth all things? I answere, God. What is it that Redeemeth Man falne? God. What is it that enlightneth man? God: yet there are not three, but One God So demand what it is in mee that vnderstandeth? I answere, a Soul. What is that which willeth or affectionateth any thing? the Soule. What is it, whereby thou art enabled to liue, mooue? I answer, a Soule. yet are there not three, but one Soule in me, whereby them things are wrought. Philosophandi quia non institutum, Dixi. But as no Image can almost any whit attaine the pefection of that Thing, whereof it is an Image: so neither this Image of GOD in man, able to attaine the excellency of the Highest, who in every thing is Infinite, Onely, and the Cause of other things.


(h) Hauing Created man, ELOHIM bringeth all inferiour Creatures before him, to see howe he will call them: who in the depth of his vnderstan|ding minde, willeth and vttereth such names, as the Lord approved. But euery living thing hauing his yoke-felowe, man was alone, and therfore imper|fect. ELOHIM casting HIM therefore on sleep, doth from his side extract a Rib, whereof he made Mans-mate: putting Her vnto Him, with blessing to Encrease.


(i) He giveth vnto Both but one Name, Gen. 5. 1. contrary to some Cuntries custome nowe, where the Wife beareth not her Hus-bandes Name) to teach them that they were but One: He the Root, She the Braunch sprong out of his side.





2. Staffe.
That (a) Man and (a) Mans in (b)  Eden placed were:
To whome God gaue Commaund of all the fruites,
The fruit of (c) One Tree only to forbeare,
In paine of death, as holy writ disputes.
Which Precept kept, A sacramentall wood
of Life (d) during before their eies there stood.


(a) He was cal|led Ish, that is, Man: she was cal|led Ishah that is, Mans: fist, be|cause she was deri|ued from Man: se|condly, for that she was made for Man.


(b) They being made of Dust, Genes. 2. 7. God notwithstanding preferreth them before all other Creatures: First, by putting in their Soule an Image of himselfe: Secondly, by seating them in the most glorious plot of the Earth, called Eden or Paradis: Thirdly, by giuing them dominion over other his Creatures: Fourthly, by commending onely vnto them Hierogliphiks, or holy preaching signes, as followeth.


(c) One Commandement was laid vpon them, that thereby they might professe subiection to the Creator. The Tree was called, the Tree of know|ledge of good and evill. Gen 2. 17 because it prea|ched sacramentallie to Adam, that hee should do Good in not eating of it: but hee should do Evill in eating of it.



(d) This second Tree, sacramentally preached to Ada, that to them and their seede, Life should be immortall, if so they kept ELOHIM his Precept.




3. Staffe.
But (e) Satan (f) Devill, envying God and Man:
Possest the Serpent, beautifull and feate:
Who vnto Woman subtellie soone came,
And her perswades, on fruit forbid to eat.
(g)  She eat and gaue to Man: so both did sinne:
And cruell (h) Death his kingdome did begin.


(e) Adver+sarie.


(f) Accu|ser. when this Ad|vers-spi|rit was created I knowe not: ex|cept in the first day, to|gither with the Light: But created an Adversarie he was not: but first to|gither with the whole Armie of Angels, hee was created good, but sinning against God, God cast him and all that sinned with him downe to Hell: 2. Pet, 2. 4. He can yet transforme himselfe into an Angel of Light, in being a false Spirit in the mouths of men. 2. Cor. 11. 14 15. and King. 21. 22. No mar|uell then, if here hee could occupie the tongue of the Serpent (the Serpent then beautifull) and so speake from his Iawes vnto Heuah, she as yet not hauing like knowledge of the Creatures nature, as had Adam: who before her Creation had seene and named the Creatures.



(g) As Satan durst not first assaile Man: so hee hoped that Woman once perverted, shee would easilie pervert Man.


(h) Sinne brought in Death, for hauing sinned Mortalitie seazed on their nature: so that from the day of their sinning, their nature ever was dy|ing. Before immortall, but thencefoorth mortall, subiect to diseases, agues, gripings, by the which Nature finallie is overthrowne.




4. Staffe.
Their soules once stript, of (a) Light and Holines,
(b)  They flie from God. He calles them back againe:
And then besides the Soule his dead distres,
He doth inflict on both their (c)  Bodies pain:
But promiseth, that (d) Woma~ seed shuld bring,
who should destroy Satan his deadly sting.


(a) Thus They lost the Image of God: and in, roome of Light, the mind was cove red with spirituall Darknes: the will possessed with vn|holines: from both which, proceeded the Power of doing Evill. In this perversion therefore of the Soules Faculties, they caried in them the Image of the Deuill.


(b) Their Mind conceiving wrongly of God, the Will (which is as the foote of the Soule) willed to walk a wrong way. The erroneous mind, begetteth an vnholy Wil, and from them both proceede that Power, whereby they conceived and brought forth evill: where is nowe Free-wil vnto good? This spiri|tuall death of the Soule (for life to good, was lost) liuelie preached the desert of eternall death.


(c) He enjoyneth Man (and all in Man) to labour in honest calling. And to the end, that there might be occasion of Mans labour, the Earth is cursed: af|ter which Curse, it bringeth foorth bryars, bram|bles, and other annoying Creatures, which had no place in the first Creation holy. The sight of these things, should teach Man much wisedome. Vnto Woman he appointed dolor of the womb, in bring+ing foorth Children. As for the Serpent (Satans In|strument) he is enioyned, to go on the Earth with his bellie, and to feed of dust betwene whome and Mankind, there should ever be enmitie. Hereof it commeth, that nether Man can abide the Serpent, nor the Serpent brooke Man.


(d) Woman being the first in transgression, is (by ELOHIM his free-favour) here appointed to bring foorth the Saving seede: namely, Iesus, the Christ. Betweene this blessed seed, and his members faith|full on the one side: and Satan (the Serpents posses|sor) and his seed of vnfaithful and rebellious people on the other side: betweene them (I say) is heere fore-decreed a spirituall Battell. Satan (called the Dragon, Rev. 12. 7. it may be, because hee here pos|sessed that kind of Serpent) he sha bruise the heele of Christ and his mysticall body. (far enough from the heart) but the Blessed-seed in the end breaketh the Dragons head, and casteth him out of Heaven, into the Earth, as worthie to be excommunicate to the death. This Seede of the Woman darklie prea|ched heere, is afterwards in God his booke, more and more clearlie revealed and taught.





5. Staffe.
Promise of Life made through that holy seed,
Adam he calles her (a) Heuah, dame of Life:
Then God to let them haue their right  meed,
Our of the (b) Gar|den sends Man and his wife.
Life and Heaven lost, they lost the Signes withall:
which holy Signes, we Sacraments do call.


(a) Gen. 3. 20. As the Lord of Life was to come of womans (not o Mans) seed: so he entit|leth his wife He|uah, that is, Giving Life. From the Beginning, holy significatiue names were given, but we neglect the wisedome of God.


(b) As the Lord is the onely Institutor of Sacra|ments: so he hath appointed, that the sacramentall signe shuld be removed from These that haue not the Thing signified by that signe. Adam Heuah hauing in themselues (and for their seed) lost Hea|uen: they therefore are expulsed the Garden, the signe of Heaven: hauing lost Life, they are banished from the sight of the Tree, that signifyed Life. Sa|cramentall Signes therefore, are outwarde visible Creatures preaching vnto Man some inward invi|sible grace: which inward thing or thing signified, is as verilie to bee apprehended by Faith, as is the outward Sign to be apprehended by the eye, hand, mouth.





6. Staffe.
HEVAH after conceiu'd and brought forth (c) Kain,
Then holy (c) Ha|bel, churches figure right:
Who for his good|nes, was by brother slaine:
In roome of whome, God gaue her blessed (d) Sheth.
As of Kain came the seede of Serpents brood:
So, of this Sheth came many Persons good.


(cc) whe|ther Kain and Ha|bel were Twyns: Kain first came foorth, and af|terwards Habel in the same Concep|tion, it is not plain. Yet con|sidering, that Heuah was to increase and multiplie for fil|ling of the Earth, it is not vnlike, that in that her strength, shee brought foorth more than one at a Birth-time. Kain being taught Husbandrie by his Father, and Habel instructed to keep seep, Gen. 4. they brought sacrifices to the Lord. Kain (as it see|meth) rather as standing in awe of his Father, but Habel offered with a free heart: which was cause that the Lord reiected Kain and accepted Habel. Kain seeing this Reiection, he therefore slaieth Ha|bel. As hereby appeared Satans Serpentine-seede: so, the first borne of the Holy-seede, is persecuted to death. This wicked seede in Kain, argueth that Heuah had not conceived till after their fall: and therefore by consequent, that Adam had not car|nallie known the woman before their Fal. For had he, (there being no sin in them to hinder the bles|sing) she must needs haue conceived an holy seed, and so haue brought forth no Murderer. That Ha|bels sacrifices pleased God, it was because hee first professed that maner of spirituall obedience, not of his owne head, but by God his Commaundement: which precept he might well receiue of his Father. Secondly, because in that sacrifice, he did (though darkly) see, that one was to bee offered vp a slaine sacrifice, for the sinnes of the People.


(d) In the next Staffe.





7 Staffe.
To passe by Some, of (a) Sheth came Henoch he,
Who walkt with God, till God tooke him away.
Lamech and Noah, that time Sheths petigre,
Matcht with Kains daugh|ters, to their dyre decay.
That sinne so grei|ued God, as plainlie he
Foretold to Noah, the world should drowned be.


(a) Habel being slaine, God gi|ueth to Adam, Sheth in his rome Sheth be|got E|nosh: E|nosh, Ke|nan: Ke|nan, Ma|halaleel: Mahala|leel, Iered: Iered begot Henoch, the 7. from Adam, IVDI, 14. Henoch begot Methushelah: Methu|shelah, Lamech: Lamech, Noah: Noah begot Shem, Ch, and Iaphe, elder brother of Shem. Gen. 10. 21. Here Sheths seede was deeply degenerate from Henoch and Sheths sinceritie: for they seeing the daghters of Men (viz. of Kains lawles race) to be snowt-faire, Sheths Petygre marrieth with them: mixing the holy seede with the vnholy: by reason whereof, Gyants and strong Miscreants abounded. This so vexed the Lord, as hee hastely repaireth to Noah, and fore-tels him, (that hee may preach it to others) that after the expirement of 120. yeares, he would drowne the whole world with water. Com|manding him in the meane time, to build an Arke of Pyne trees, wherein HE and His might then be saved.




8. Staffe.
One hundred yeares, and twentie after then,
The (a) Cataracts were loosd,  Seas burst ope:
The rayne and wa|ters drown'd the wicked men,
And over Earth, had libertie and scope.
But re that day, as God had Noah told,
An Ark he built, of Pyne-trees, room'd threfold


(a) Noah preach|ing and building the Ark that 120. years, the people believed not the spirit of GOD preach|ing in Noa: for the which, as their bodies were drowned in the ood; so their soules nowe remaine in the Prison of God his wrath, 1. Pet. 3. 18, 19, 20. That water was a fi|gure of Baptisme: for as by that water Noah and his Familie (the faithfull, for Cham was not then seene-wicked) were saved from Iehouahs wrath: even so by Baptisme, the Faithful are saved, and the lurking hypocrite for the time fareth not the worse. But as all without the Arke, were vtterly destroyed by the same water: even so shall Baptizing water be but a Sacrament of condemnation vnto such as receiue it vnworthelie: whether they be within the Ark (the visible Church) as was Cham, or baptized in the Church of the World, or visible worldlings, such as is that great Citie. Revel. 17. 18.





9. Staffe.
Into this Ark, did Noah and his Wife,
His sonnes Shem, Cham, Iaphet, (a) enter anone:
With sortes of Crea|tures all that breathed life,
Preserved in the Ark by God alone.
(b) After twelue Months, the Men their wiues and all
Out of the Ark did go, at God his call.


(a) The Worlde was here 1656. yeares old, and so tooke his end with wa|ter: No|ah ha|uing in the Ark of every cleane Beast for Sacrifice, and of vncleane for preservation of their kinde to the Newe World, aswell as of the cleane.


(b) Noah and his Wife, with his three sonnes and their Wiues (even 8. Persons in the whole) as they went into the Arke at God his commaund: so they come not foorth vntill he commaund. Gen. 8. 16. Comming forth. Noah offereth Sacrifice to God, whose savour was acceptable: and therefore the Lord blesseth Noah to the beginning of the Newe World: promising, that he would no more smite the World as he had done with water: and thereof he appointed the Rainbowe to be a signe sacramentall. Here was Noah permitted to eate flesh: but forbidden to eate of the blood of Beasts, as a signe howe much he abhorred the shedding of Mans blood.




10. Staffe.
As Adam gun the former World, so this
By Noah was, begun. Of (a)Cham ther came
the Cananites, accusst for works amisse:
Of Iaphet sprong the Gentiles hight by name.
Of blessed Shem, came Heber, Abram eke,
From whome the Is|raelites their bloud-rowle seek


(a) No|ah plan|ting of Vies,  drinking the iuice of the grapes, hee be|came drunken:  so lay in the midst of his Tent Naked. Cham seeing it, telleth his two Brethren. They com|ming backwards towards their Father, doe from their shoulders let fall a covering vpon him. Noah awaking,  vnderstanding what was done, he cur|seth Cham in his sonne Chanaan, of whom came the cursed Canaanites but hee blesseth the God of Shem, and praieth that Iaphet at last may come and dwell in Shems Tent. Of Iaphet came the Gentiles: From Shem (supposed to be Melhi sedek. Gen, 14 both of Hebrewes, Greeks, Latins, olde and new and he was living, till about 77. yeares after Abram his calling out of VR in Chaldea) from Shem, I say, the 12. Worthy of the Old World, and borne be|fore the Newe world: from Him came Arphaxad; from Arphaxad, Selah: from Selah, Heber: (of whom the tongue was called Hebrewe,) rom Hber, Pe|leg: from Peleg, Regu: from Regu, Serug: from Se|rug, Nahor: from Nahor, Terah: from Terah, Abram, the Grand-father of Israel, of whome came the Israelites.




11. Staffe.
In (a) Abrams time, Idolatrie did raigne:
God therefore (b) cal|led him from Chaldea Land.
Who taking (c) Tent on back, away he came
And (d) followed God, as Child doth Nurses hand:
To him God pro|mised great seed. After the same
To (e) Abram, God gaue Abraham to name.





(a) Ex|cepting Melchi|sedek the Priest of the high God, and King of SALEM Called also IE|VS of Iebust, Gen. 10. 16. but after|wards called IERV-SALEM of IERV-SALEM mysticallie by Titles change teaching: That the Towne was changed to Sacred vse, even to be the figure of God his vniversall Church: excepting I say that Melchi-sedek, there is not mention of any that walked vprightly before IEHOVAH.


(b) The Lord (Abram then being 75. years old) picked him out of Chaldea, the Land of Shinar, and Nimrods Babel or Confusion: for there the Schismatiks from Shem builded: but their owne tongue was slit by IEHOVAH, as is coniectured, into 70. and so were scattered into divers partes of the Earth.


(c) The Father of the Faithfull liued in a Tent, and we should not think but our state is stil moue|able: for here is no abiding Citie.


(d) He followed the Sound of God, as we shuld followe his Worde in all things: the companie of which intelligible Sounde, for it is not a Romish Noise, but a distinct Voice, should drawe vs after it, as a Loadstone pulleth to it Iron. Togither with Abram and Sarai his wife, there goeth foorth Lot, the Son of HARAH Abrams brother. This LOT and his Familie were with Abram, what time IE|HOVAH (Genes. 12.) made first promise to Abram, that in his SEEDE all the Earth should receiue a blessing: for the Seede of the Woman promised, Gen. 3. was to spring from Abrams seede. But soone after, (Gen. 13.) there being a controversie betwixt Abrams Heardmen, and the Heardmen of LOT, a|bout pasture for their Cattel: Abram (though more Excellent) for peace sake, giveth LOT leaue to choose what Soyle he first would. LOT chooseth the plaine of Sodome, and so departeth, pitching his Tent at Sodome gates: But his fleshly choise was scourged: for in steed of good Abram, he found a beastly carnal People, who dailie vexed his heart, 2. Pet 27. Soone after, there being warres betwixt the 5. Kinges of the 5. Cities of the Plaine on the one side: and the King of Babel, and his 3. Neigh|bour Kings on the other side: This last Partie pre|vailing, Lot with all he had, was carried away cap|tiue. Abram vnderstanding hereof, hee mustered 318. of his owne house: pursueth and recovereth LOT againe. In Abrams returne, Mlchi-sedek King of Shalem and Iehouahs high Priest did meet him, and offered to him Bread and wine (a notable figure of the Breade and wine, which IESVS our Priest after Melchi-sedeks order, hath offered to vs believers (not to Sodoms People) to which Kingly Priest, Abram tythed or paied tenths of all he had: wherewithall the Royall Priest blesseth him, and the lesser is blessed of the greater,
Genes. 14. Heb. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. And what Man should bee greater than Abram, if not Shem, in whose Tent God was to dwel til Iaphets (or the Gentiles) returne to dwel in that Tent?
LOT by all these Crosses not profiting much, after this deliverance (even by Abram, whose fel|lowship he neglected) hee purchaseth place in So|doms Towne: But Abram returning to his place in the vale of Mamre, the Lord there by vision con|firmeth the former promise, and promiseth him a large seede, as also the Land of Canaan for their possession. Abram believing the Lord, it is imputed to him for Righteousnes. Sarai being barren, shee giveth her Aegyptian-maide to him, who knowing her, she bringeth forth Ismael.


(e) Abram being 99. yeares olde, IEHOVAH appeareth and smiteth a Covenant with him: A|bram was to Walke vpright before God: The Lord he was to be to Abram, GOD Al-sufficient, at e|uery turne and straight. For printing this Covenant more deepe in the brests of Abram and Sarah, the Lord calleth Abram (in English, High-father) A|BRAHAM


 (in English, The Father of a great Mul|titude) and Sarai, in English, Mistres, he calleth SA|RAH; that is interpreted, Princesse. The lifting vp of their Names-meaning by that letter H, teach|eth, howe Covenant-smiting with God for vpright worship, doth exalt, not embase Man and woman. Togither with his Covenant, the Lord adioyneth a SEALE, or exhibitiue Signe; for Abraham and his Male-seede henceforth was to be circumcised. The cutting of that fore-skin of the Male his generatiue part, did preach a being conceived in sinne, and therefore a need of Regeneration or Newe-birth. This Cut in the flesh, is properly called the Signe of the Covenant. Genes. 17. 11. but improperly, or Sa|cramentallie, it is called the Covenant it self, ver. 13
After this, the Sinnes of Sodom, Gomorrha, Zeboim, Admah, Bela, crying to Heaven, God sendeth his Angels first, to foresignifie their destruction vn|to Abraham (what time, Isaac was againe promi|sed, Sarah laughing it to scorne, as a thing impos|sible for her to bring forth)  afterwards to LOT. The Angels send LOT and his wife out of the Ci|tie to Belah thenceforth called Zoar, for LOT was vnwilling to go to the Mountaine. His wife look|ing back is turned into a Salt piller. Fire and brim|stone from Heaven, devoures all. LOT after that remooving vnto the Mount, his daughters to haue seed by their Father, made him drunke, and so lay with him. Vnawares he begetteth of them Moab, (of whome the Moabites) and Ben-ammi, of whome came the Ammonites.





12. Staffe.
His Wife (a) Sarai, was thenceforth cal'd Sarah:
And (b) Circumci|sion for holy Signe,
(c)  To Abrahams Male-seed, God gaue that day
Which was observ'd by Abraham his Lyne.
To Abraham was (d) Isaac borne, and than
To Isaac, (e) Iaacob, that holy man.


(a) See for this change, in the former Staffe at the let|ter, (e)


(b) a sign of the Cove|nant made betwixt Iehouah Abra|ham See for this in the former Staffe, at (e)


(c) Given to the Male-seede, because HE is chiefe in Generation. Every Naturall Artist knows that. Secondly, Man was not made for the Wo|man, but the Woman for Man. Obiection. Seeing Baptisme supplieth Circumcision, what reason is there that Females should be baptised, seeing they were not Circumcised. Answer, Indeed, Baptisme is the doore or entring Sacrament of the New Te|staments Church, as was that of the Olde. In this they haue admittance, First, because they are ca|pable of Water, but so they were not of Circum|cision. Secondly, Paul teacheth, Galat 3. 27. 28. That (howsoever there was difference betweene Iewe and Gentile, Male and Female, concerning the former, yet) concerning Baptisme, Iewe and Gentile, Male and Female are all one in Christ Ie|sus, whome they apprehend by faith. And heerein (as in other things) it appeareth that the Newe Te|stament is more liberall handed, free hearted, and more glorious than the former. Concerning the signification, looke into the former Staffe, at (e)


(d) Isaac in English, Laughter. So called to put Abraham in mind of his Faith, when beleeving that promise, he laughed: Secondly, to admonish Sarah of her want of faith, when she laughed the promise to scorne. Thirdly, to teach them both, and all the faithfull ioyntly with them: That there is no happy laughter or ioye, but in the Lords promises. HE, the Son of the Promise, borne, as it were, onely by Grace and besides Nature: teaching all, that the blessing commeth by Grace, not by Nature. This Isaac, was the speciall fore-type of Christ Iesus the promised seede, the bringer of Grace to vs: as al|so he was an excellent figure of the state of every mysticall member of Christ. All which, are not of Aegyptian Hagar the bond-woman, (figure of the Lawe) as was mocking persecuting Ismael; but of Sarah the free-woman, figure of the Gospell and of Ierusalem from aboue, who is free with her Children; Reade Galat. 4. 22. to the end of that Chapter


(e) Iaacob, the younger brother of Esau: of them the Lord said to Rebecca their mother (even before they were borne) I haue loved Iacob, and hated E|sau, Rom. 9 13. As God had chosen the one, and Refused the other, so being borne, Esau runne a Reprobate race: hunting, sporting, with neglect of holy Sacrament: for he sold his interest of Ca|naan, the Sacrament of Heaven, to his younger brother, for a messe of Red-pottage: whereof hee tooke his name Edom: As for Iaacob, he liues simp|lie and truly in holy calling, making high account of that Sacrament. And this was cause why Re|becca speciallie loved Iaacob, vsing afterwards the help of a false finger, for getting the blessing to Iaacob, preventing male-content Esau. For which, Esau threatning death, Iaacob was glad to flie to his Vncle Laban, and there to stay. There he was beguiled with Pinck-eyed Leah, but marieth with Rachel or Rahel. One and twentie yeares afer, he returneth home, and studieth the appeasment of Esau.




13. Staffe.
This Iaacob, God cald (a) Israel, because
He wrastling did prevaile with Iehouah.
Twelue sonnes) hight Pa|triarchs) God drawes
From Israel: Whose Progenie alway,
And yet, are Is|raelites term'd to this day.


(a) Iaco wrastling with an Angel, representing the LORD, wiith whome we ought to wra|stle in Prayer, is thenceforth called Israel, in English, Prevailing with God Genes. 32. 28. For all the Fore-elect of God, ar Prevailers with God. God may hoise them vp and down for a time, and giue them a nip in the flesh, but when he hath cast them downe with the Left hand, he will raise them vp with the Right: for that is the hand by which they prevaile. HE was called Iaacob, (not as many haue imagined, of the Hebrewe word, that signifieth to Supplant or de|ceiue, but) of a Nowne that signifieth an HL: for thereof he taketh his Name. Gen. 5. 26. Obie|ction: But Esau sith, Gen. 27. 36. that he was well called Iacob, because he had Deceived him. An|swere, The holy Ghost before gaue the reason of his Name, from his  of Esau by the heele at his Birth-time, the holy Ghost his construction, must be preferred before the private interpretati|on of Esau. Secondly, Esau doth there but proudly mock at Iaacob, wresting his Name to such a sig|nificaton, as he might best play withall in his pee|uish vaine.




14. Staffe.
Their Names were thus: Reuben and Simeon,
Then Levi, Iu|dah, Dan and Naphtali,
Gad, Asher, Is|sachar, Zebulon,
Ioseph and Ben|iamin: This (a) Ioseph enviously
Was of his Bre|thren sold to Aegypt Land,
Where Ioseph was (b) advaunst by God his hand.


(a) Iaacob having by his wife Ra|hel, first Ioseph, then Ben-ia|min: for the resi|due were borne of Leah, Zilpah, Bilhah: Ioseph was of his Father principally affected, through con|ceived Hope of future good in him. Iosaph drea|ming that the Sunne, Moone, and eleven Starres should reverence him, Gen. 37. his Father by that, as by other things, doth readily conclude, that him|selfe and his other Sons should once doe homage to Ioseph. This causeth the ten first, for Ben-iamin was yet very young, to take Ioseph, having him in the Feilds, to sel him away to certaine Merchants, who afterwards bringing him into Aegypt, solde him vnto Potiphar, Prince of ON, Steward vnto Pharaoh. Ioseph thus packed away, his Brethren dipping an vpper partie-coloured coat of Iosephs in blood, they repaire vnto aged Israel, or Iaacob, and do perswade him, that some wilde Beast had torne Ioseph. Olde Israel too forgetfull of Iosephs dreames, doeth giue credit to their wordes, and therefore bursteth into deepe lamentation.


(b) Ioseph placed in Potiphar the Eunuch his house, is for his beautie, lusted after his inordinate eyed Mistres. She, hauing no blush in her fore-heade, wooeth Ioseph to Sinne: but he avoideth her allu|ring presence. Her lust, for that cannot be proper|lie called Loue, it turned into Hate. She therefore pulling his Garment from him, accuseth him to her Husband, for a wanton Hebrewe, and an As|sailer of the Marriage-bed. He believing her, casts Ioseph into Prison. The Kings Butler and Baker be|ing in the same Prison, they dreame dreames. Io|seph thereby telleth the Butler, that within three daies he should be delivered and vse his former of|fice: but the Baker within three daies should die. After this, Pharaoh dreamed, that 7. leane Kine, eate vp 7. fat-ones: that 7. withered eares of corne devoured 7. well liking ones. The King troubled about these dreames, the Butler then remembred Ioseph, and told of him to Pharaoh. The King sends for him: hee interpreteth the dreames saying, that the next 7. yeares should be plentifull, but the 7. after them, should devoure al the plentie that went before them. Vpon this, the King delivereth Io|seph, and putteth his Regall Ring on his hand, Io|soph is next to Pharaoh over all Aegypt, and by speciall Commission gathereth much Corue into Store-houses. during the plentifull times, for the better nourishing of the Body in the 7. penurious yeares.




15. Staffe.
In time of (a)  Dearth, Old (b) Israel and his sonnese
To Aegypt came, from Canaan their due:
Good Ioseph glad|somlie to Father comes,
And bringeth him to Pharaoh his vewe.
Who giues to Is|rael for dwelling place,
The Land (c) Goshen, environ'd with Gods grace.


(a) Iaacob sending his Sons into Ae|gypt to buye Coe; at their second com|ming thither, Ioseph bewray|eth him|selfe to his Brethren: sending word back to his Father by them, that it was Pharaoh his will, and his desire that he would come vp to Aegypt.


(b) Israel, hauing consulted with the Lord, at Beersheba, departeth with his whole Familie into Aegypt. The number of the Persons that came in|to Aegypt, are saide by Moses, Genes. 46. to be, 70. asking into that Number Ioseph and his two sons, Manaesseh and Ephraim. Blessed Steuen in the Actes 7. 14. Numbreth 75. Soules: by which se|cond Number, wee are taught to account some, passed by of Moses. Some writers do borrowe vnto this account, the 4. Mothers of the Patriarches  the two Sonnes of Iudah, who were dead, before this voyage, in Canaan: and so make vp 75. be|sides Iaacob himselfe. A second sort doe, as Moses borrowed three from Iosephs house, for making vp 70. so they, borrowe fiue moe from Iosephs house, vnborne at Moses time of accompt, and these fiue are Sonnes and Nephewes, 1. Chron. 7. 14. 20. to Ephraim and Manasse: by which accompt, they well obserue, that Ioseph seeth his Children vnto the third Generation, Genes 50. 23. Both these o|pinions, if not Iudgements, of others learned set downe, In the third place, I will adde my Coni|cture. Moses hauing accounted the number of 70 he immediatly in the next verse. Genes. 46. 26 ad|deth: All the Soules that came with Iaacob, c. (besides Iaacobs sons wiues) were in the whole, c. The Patriarks wiues so plainly excepted, why may not Steuen borrowe them to the making vp of 75? Question. Moses hath no where affirmed, how ma|ny the Wiues were THEN liuing, how then shuld Steuen accompt them? Answer. Holy Iude maketh mention of Henochs Prophecie, as also of a Strife betweene Michael the Arch-Angell and the Devil, about the body of Mose neither of which is once mentioned before in holy writ. Holy Paul (2. Tim. 38) telleth Timothie, how Iannes and Iambres were the Sorcerers that resisted Moses in Aegypt: yet nei|ther Moses nor any Prophet after, maketh menti|on once of the Number of the Sorcerers, nor of their Names. As they had that, by speciall Revela|tion, so, why may we not think, that Steuen at that Time (if not before) had the knowledge of that Number by like Revelation, specially seeing Then he had a Miracle wrought in his eyes, in that his be holding of Iesus, Acts. 7. 55. after an vnvtterable sote?


(c) Sheepherds being an abhomination to the Aegyptians (some think from Exod. 8. 26. because the Aegyptians worshipped some such Beastes, as the Israelites slewe for Sacrifice: which is a colde suppose, for that should rather make the Sacrificers hatefull, than Sheepheards abhominable: but the holy Ghost, affirmeth that Calling to be abhorred of them. Neither a. e wee ignorant, that in every prophane Land, some Calling (as nowe are Soule-Shepherds) is of base estimate, by reason of which their abhorre (and all professed themselues not on|ly sacrificing Hebrewes, but Sheepherds) the King gaue them a Cuntry, wherein alone they might in|habite.



A COMPVTATION OF
GENESIS.


The age of he World.



130
1 A Dam being aged, 130. yeares, he be|getteth
Sheth.


235
2 Sheth aged 105. years, begetteth Eosh.


325
3 Enosh at 90. yeares, begetteth Kenan.


395
4 Kenan at 70 years, begets Mahalaleel.


460
5 Mahalaleel at 65. years begets Iared.


622
6 Iared at 162. yeares, begets Henoch.


687
7 Henoch the 7. from Adam, (Iude 14.)
at 65. yeares, begets Mathushelah.


874
8 Mathushelah at 187. begets Lamech.


1056
9 Lamech at 182. years, begets Noah.


1536
10 Noah (the 10. from Adam, and the
Lord his Tenth out of the first worlde) at
480. yeares of age, is foretold of the flood.
After 500. years of age, he begetteth Shem
(the elder brother of Iaphe, Genes. 10. 21.)
and in his 600. yeare the flood came.


1656


1658
1 Shem 2. yeares after the flood (being
then but, 100. yeares old, Gen. 1. 10. and
therefore begot in Noahs 502.) begetteth
Arphaxad.


1693
2 Arphaxad at 35 begets Selah.


1723
3 Slah at 30. yeares, begets Heber.


1757
4 Heber (the 7. from Henoch, and from
whome. Abram and his seede tooke the
name of Hebrewes) hee at 34. yeares be|gets
Peleg.


1787
5 Peleg (in whose time the Earth was
divided) at 30. yeares begets Regu, or Reu


1819
6 Regu at 32. yeares begets Serug.


1849
7 Serug at 30. yeares, begets Nahor.


1878
8 Nahor at 29 yeares begets Terah.


2008
9 Terah being 130. yeares olde, (com|pare
Gen. 11. 32. with Chap. 12. 4) begets
Abram.


2083
10 Abram at 75. yeares, receiveth the
promise. The 10. he was in the beginning
of the Newe World, as Noah in the end of
the Old.


2108
Abram at 100. yeares of age, hath Isaac.


2168
11 Isaac at 60. yeares, hath Iacob and
Esau.


2298
12 Iacob at 130. goeth into Aegypt with
his 70. soules: Ioseph then being aged, 39.


2315
Iacob being fed 17. yeares by Ioseph dy|eth,
being aged, 147. He was the 12. of the
Newe Worlde: and left behinde him 12.

Worthies peereles. On his death-bed, hee
fortelleth every of them of future events:
specially, that the Shiloh Christ should
come out of Iudah.


2369
13 Ioseph dieth in Aegypt, being 110.
yeares olde: 54. yeares after his Father.
Before his death hee giueth charge, that
at their remoouall to the Land of Pro|mise,
they shoulde take his bones away
with them. That afterwardes was done:
In the meane time, they embaume his
corpes and chesteth him. And so endeth
Genesis, containing from Adams Creati|on,
vnto Iosephs death, 2369. yeares.


Heere, or within one Chapter of Exodus falleth
out the story of Iob. for forme Poeticall: for Matter
passing divine. Iob laboureth to cleare himselfe of
hypocrisie, but not in the best manner: for the ex|treamitie
of his body and soules anguish, daunteth
his reason, and breaketh his Patience. His Three
Kins folkes charge hypocrisie on his head. The do|ctrine
they deliver, good: but they faile in their per|sonall
application. Their foolishnes should reproue
Manies follie. In the end, Eloquent Elu thrusts
himselfe in, reprooving both paties for follie: but
for the vpshot, Iehouah himselfe sits Vmpire; iusti|fying
Iob for his servant,  condemning his friends
for their false Application. Iob sacrificeth for his
friendes: The Lord is satisfied: Iob enriched: and so
endeth that divine Story: In every Allegation of
Gods Mercies and Iudgments having an eye vnto
Genesis. But because Iob came of Kurah Abra|ham
his latter wife, and not of Sarah (Queene-mo|ther
of the faithfull) I therefore so passe from him,
to Israels Seede.




16. Staffe.
From Israels Hous|hold, sprong a mightie crue:
The (a) Aegypt King, to keepe them vnder hand,
Their Male-children therefore vntowardly slue.
That time was Mo|ses borne in Aegypt Land:
Who after four|ty yeares, by God was sent,
To help poore Is|rael, drownd in Lament.


(a) There arose a new king in Aegypt (here|withall begin|neth the booke of Exodus) who to keep the Israelites vnder the yoke, did com|maund the Hebrews Midwiues (Shipah and Puah) to kill all the sonnes: but they fearing God, would not. After this therefore, hee chargeth that every Male-childe should be cast into the River. At this time, Amram (of the Tribe of Leui) had married with Iochabed (a daughter of a Levite) by whome a Sonne was brought foorth: this beeing about 64. yeares after Ioseph. Shee maketh an Ark of Reed, Slyme and Pitch: who, laying the Childe therein, committed it to the River. His Sister standing a loofe to see what would become of the Child, loe the daughter of Pharaoh (for the Aegyptian Kings were commonly so called) came to bath at the Ri|uer, who espying the Ark took it vp and opened it. The Child weeping, she had compassion on it. His Sister seing that, she steppeth to the Princesse, and demandeth if she shall fetch a Nurse vnto her.
She assents. His Sister bringeth the Mother, to whome the Princesse commendeth it: commaun|ding her to attend it. The Child being growen, she brings him to the Princesse, who calleth him Mo|ses, because she drewe him out of the water.
Moses being much more growen, he leaveth the Court, goeth down to his brethren the Hebrewes: who ing an Aegyptian smiting an Hebrewe, he ariseth and slaieth him. Afterwards seeing two He|brewes striue, hee reubked the wrong doer: The wretch replying, Thinkest thou to kill me as thou didst the Aegyptian. Moses herevpon fled (for feare of Pharaoh) into the Land of Midian: who there was intertained of a Prince, who gaue his daughter Zipporah for wie to Moses. Moses after this, keep|ing sheep by the mount Horeb (called also Sinai) to him there the Lord appeared, speaking out of the middest of a burning Bush: giuing him Com|mission to fetch his people out of Aegypt, where mightelie they groned vnder the yoke of Bondage: ioyning in commission with him, his brother Aaron of more excellent vtterance than Moses. The for|mer King dead, Moses and Aaron come vnto the Hebrewes and do tell them, that I AM THAT I AM, had sent them for their deliverance. Moses and Aaron comming vnto them: oe, al the People were ioyned vnto the Idoles and filthinesses of Ae|gypt (Ezek 20 5. 6. 7. 8. 9) but the Lord hauing a re|spect vnto his owne Name, forsooke them not, but strengthened Moses and Aaron vnto the work: who boldly (as it were opposing the sheep-crooke to the Aegyptian Scepter) do come vnto Pharaoh, tel|ling him, that IEHOVAH commaundeth him to let his ISRAEL depart the Land. The King proud lie replieth, who is IEHOVAH? as also, vpbrai|deth Moses and Aaron with hindring the Peoples worke. Immediatly wherevpon the Bedlem-King, commandeth work at the Peoples hands, and de|nieth them therewithall, necessaries to the worke. Here the People murmue against Moses, as being the very Author of their further slavery.




17. Staffe.
He and Aaron, (brethren of Levies race)
(a) great wonders wrought, before King Pharaoh:
Driving his Sor|cerers from fore their face.
Yet would the wretch. not let poore Israel go.
At last, therefore the Lord doth (b) Moses call,
And tells to him, what after should befall.


(a) Moses being now 80. year old, and Aa|ron 83. Exod. 7. 7 They wrought certaine Miracles before the king. First Aa|ron cast|eth forth his Rod, and loe, it became a Serpent: The Aegyp|tian false Prophets (Iannes and Iambres) do the like with their Rods: but Aarons Rod devoured theirs. Here, Pharaoh his heart was hardened but for out|ward Plague, there was not any now inflicted. The next day after, Pharaoh comming forth to the Ri|ur, (like enough to be Nilus) Aaron there smitet the waters, and they were turned into Bloode, by reason whereof, the Fishe died. The like did the Sorcerers: Pharaoh therefore departeth hard hear|ted. This was the first Plague. Afterwards, Aaron by the command of Moses (and Moses had ever hi commaund from IEHOVAH) smit the Riuers with Frogs, insomuch as they cralled into the Kings houses, and climb into his Chambers. The Enchan|ters did so. He was more hardened. The 2. Plague. Next, the Dust of the Earth was smitten, where|upon followed Lice. Here the Magitians attemp|ted to do the like, but they could not, wherevpon they acknowledge that Aaron wrought by the Fin|ger of God, (secretlie granting, that their own work|ing, was but by the Finger of the Deuill. But the King like a block departeth vnbeleeving. This was the 3. Externall Plague. The next day, Aaron cau|sed swarmes of Flies to infest all Aegypt, (no such thing fell in Goshen) but vpon Pharaohs prayer to Moses, Moses prayed and they departed: but Pha|raohs heart relented not. That was the 4. Plague. The 5. Plague was a Murrian vpon all Aegyptian Cattle. The 6. Plage, was a Scab vpon Man and Beast. The 7. Plague, was the causing of Thunder, Haile, Lightening to the destruction of Beasts and Hearbs in Aegypt: but still (so soone as the Plague ceased) Pharaoh denied passage to Israell. After that, Moses streatching his Rod vpon Aegypt, the East, winde brought in Grashoppers, covering all that Land: That the 8. Plague. The 9. Plague, was a feaefull palpable Darknes, brought over all Aegypt (for Light was then in Goshen) whereupon Pharaoh his heart grewe more obdured.


(b) The Lord having decreed that vpon the next Plague, the Plaguy-King, should not onely Giue leaue, but commaund them to Depart, he therfore (for an everlasting Memoriall of his Peoples deli|verie out of the Land of Bondage) doeth call Mo|ses vnto him, and enformeth him, howe hee should teach the People to performe his will. Note, As this Pestilent King was a liely figure of the Dra|gon, and his Homed-Kings, enthralling the Church of God; so that Aegypt, was a forcible fore-figure of the False Church, Revel. 11. 8. over the which Levi|athan ruleth, and with the which, the Israel of God must haue no spirituall Communion: that is, the Faithfull must not any way communicate with he false worship and false Spirit, wherewith she is in|spired.




18. Staffe.
(a) Go take, saith HE, a yearling Lamb spotles,
A Male, yea through each of your Familie:
Do kill the same with fire do rost the flesh.
The blood on doore-posts smite. Then orderly
With Bread vnlea|uend,  sowre hearbs do eat,
The rosted Lamb, the Sacramentall meat.


(a) The Lord by this, dot lead the People to the blessed seed pro|mised to Adam, Genes. 3. to Abra|ham, Gen. 1 3. by whome all True Beleeuers shuld obtaine the Blessing: First the Iewe, then the Gentile. This Lambe spotles, signified the (Lamb slaine from the beginning of the World) Christ Iesus without spot of Sin: whose blood shed and sprinkled vpon the doore-cheeks of our Conscience, doeth put away the Second Death farre from vs.
As the Lamb of God for the taking away the sin of the World, was Rosted in the burning fiery Ire of God, for taking away our Sinne: so (as the eating of him is by the Tooth of Faith: for Faithlesse Peo|ple are heerein Toothles) the Faithfull must not think to enioy that mysticall Lamb vnto Life, with out eating the sowre hearbs of affliction, a bitter Cup vnto the flesh. Neither must in this spirituall banquet come an leavened, sowre bread (that is, Malitiousnes, wickednes, 1. Cor. 5. 8. hereof every man must purge his owne Heart (as his house) as also the Assemblie (in paine of death) must take heed that no open vncircumcised (that is, knowne wicked) be admitted amongst them: for such Lea|en wil be cause, that their reioycing shall not be good. 1. Cor. 5. 6. 7.




19. Staffe.
That (a) Night an An|gel past through Aegypt Land:
And where blood sprink|led was, he Passed by:
But otherwhere, he slewe with deadly hand,
First borne of Man, and Beast. So that the cry
Causd Pharaoh rise, and (b) giue commandement,
That Israelites forwith away be sent.


(a) The Hebrew people did keep the for|mer in|stituted Feast, omitting no Cere|monie enioy|ned. The same Night, the de|stroying Angell passed through Aegypt, and slewe al the first borne of Man and Beast: but no such thing befell vnto Israell, for which they were ever after to consecrate the first borne of Man  beast vnto the IEHOVAH their Deliuerer. Because the Angell in destroying the Aegyptians, did passe over the Hebrewes (whose doors were smitten with the Lambs blood) therefore that Feast ever after, was called the Passe-ouer: in eating the Lambe, they were saide to eate the Passe-ouer, though indeede they but eate the Signe of the Passe-ouer, or the Memoriall of the Angell his Passing over the He|brewes houses.


(b) An horrible noise being made by the rorings of the vncircumcised, Pharaoh ariseth and giveth Commaundement to Moses and Aaron, that they togither with the People (and all that ever they had) should depart Aegypt. The Lord before this, having made his People gracious in the eyes of the Aegyptians, insomuch as they let the Hebrewes (vp|on former petition, Exod. 11. 23.) enioy ther Iew|els of Silver and Golde: Loe, here the Vncircumci|sed with one consent hasten Israel out of Aegypt, lest their Tarrying longer, should be the death of All. Chron. 12.
Thus the Lords people, who had the Aegypti|ans terrible vnto them, they nowe are to the Ae|gyptians as Pillers of smoke, and as SALOMON, Cant. 6. 3. saith, terrible as an Armie with banners. The Lord put his beautie vpon them, Ezech. 16. And loe, they depart with the Iewels of the Hea|then: and good reason that the Gentils bring their Glory vnto Sarahs Ierusalem and free-borne Chil|dren.





20. Staffe.
Then Moses lea|deth Israell away,
Towards (a) Wildernes, and Canaan their due:
But (b) Pharaoh, his sinne yet could not stay,
And therefore armes himselfe, and doth pursue.
But Israels God, in midst of Seas did drowne,
Proud Pharaoh, and cast his Chariots downe.


(a) when Iaacob came in|to Egypt there were not 80. Per|sons in al but now when Moses carrieth them out of Egypt, they are six hun|dred thousand men, besides women and Children. They depart out of Aegypt, 430. yeares after the Promise made to Abraham (Gen. 12. 3.) That in his seed all Nations shall be blessed. meaning, through Christ that should assume the seede of Abraham, Hebrewes, 2. 16. Abraham was foretolde, Gen. 15. 13. that his seede should be a stranger and hardlie intreated 400. yeares. The first hard intreatie of his Seed (I read of) was Ismael his persecuting of Isaac, (Genes. 21. 9. compared with Gala. 4. 29.) From which time, vntill this departure out of Aegypt to|wards the Land of Rest, I suppose 400. years. From Ismaels Mock, back vnto the Promise, 30. yeares: From the Promise, back vnto Abrahams birth, were 75. yeares, Gen. 12. 4. From Abrahams byrth, back vnto the Flood, 352. yeares. All summed togither, will be found from the Floode vnto the departure out of Aegypt, 857. yeares. The Moneth of their Deliverance, being otherwise the Seaventh, was hencefoorth called (by Iehouah his Commaund, Exod. 12 2.) the First Moneth, as deserving the first place: why then should fantasticall Spirits maryell at Our Celebrating of the First daye of the weeke, (rather than another) seeing in that day our Savi|our Rising from death, clearlie delivered vs, from a more palpable darknes than that of Aegypt, and from the power of a more in mightie Adversary than was Pharaoh especially seeing Paul (a Master buil|der) enioyned that day vnto the Churches, 1. Cor. 16 1. As also the Head of the building, himselfe so|lemnized it, by 5. speciall Appearances and Prea|chings.


(b) Pharaoh pursuing, IEHOVAH, teacheth Mo|ses, howe the people should passe through the Red Sea. The Sea divided it selfe, and stood vpon heaps on either hand. The Israelites passe easily through. Pharaoh with his Chariots, pursueth. The heapes of waters fal downe vpon him, his people and Cha|riots, so that they sunke downe vnder the waues, like a stone. A Iudgment due to persecutors of the True Church. This passing of the Israelites throgh the Sea, was a figure of Baptisme, by the which we are saved, 1. Cor. 1. 2. A Seale of Salvation to the Is|raell of God: that is, to the Faithfull: but a seale of Condemnation vnto the Spirituall Aegyptians, I meane the vnfaithfull, whether within or without the Church visible.





21. Staffe.
For which great work, Moses he sings a Song.
And after prai|sing God, the people he,
To (a)  Sinajs Moun|taine doth conduct a long.
Where for one yeare, their Tents down pitched be.
There in the Mount, God did with Moses talk,
And teach him how, the People thence shuld walk


(a) Called also Ho|reb, the Mount where Iehouah appea|red to Moses, in fierie Bushe. No mar|uell if the Lord bad Mo|ses, Exod. 3. 5. put of his shoes, because of the ground appoin|ted to speciall holy vse: for here IEHOVAH tal|ked after an vn-vtterable familiaritie with Moses, giuing to Moses (for the People vse) the Ten Com|mandement, written in two Columnes or Tables of Stone. Togither with them Laws Morall, the Lord gaue Lawes Ceremoniall for spirituall Exercise: choosing the Tribe of Levi, for Ministers in spiri|uall busines. Levi hauing three sonnes, Gershon, Kohah, Merari, Genes. 46. 11. the Families of them three: they had, each Familie his peculiar charge in the spirituall (or as we call it, Ecclesiasticall) ser|uice: neither was every of these Families (not mar|ked of many writers) capable of the Priest-hoode. The Familie of Gershom (whereof was Aaron) was chosen to the most sacred thinges in that service: The Familie of Kohath in the seconde place, had their peculiar Charge: for otherwise Iehouah (Iea|lous of order in his service) would slay them, Nomb. 4. 15. No maruell then though Corah (of this Tribe, Nomb. 16 1. was slaine, togither with his partakers. The Familie of Merari, was chosen to the third and most inferiour Service, Nomb. 4 29. c. No mar|uell then if Vzah, 1. Chronic. 6. 29. was slaine for touching the Arke, 1. Chon. 13. 10. seeing neither of the two latter Families might Touch it. Neither was HE a meere Priuate man (as many haue ig|norantly taught) but a Leuit. Togither with the Lawes Morall and Ceremoniall, the Lord gaue Iu|diciall Lawes, by whose Exercise, the breaches of the former might be corrected. All these 3. sortes of Lawes, were (for their Outward Face or Le) peculiar vnto Canaan the Land of Promise. DEVT. 4. 5. 12. 13. 14. 27. 28. c. Deut. 13. 5. 9. 10. 11. c. In the first Commaundement of the second Table, Children are commanded to Honour Parents; the Blessing therefore appointed, being: They, the Pa|rents should giue them long life in Canaan, not in the Wildernes, or other places of the Worlde By all which, as I obserue Iehouah his Eye, looking in the guift of all these Lawes, specially to Canaan: so I cannot but mightilie marvel at our ignorant fran|tick Spirits, that vrge Iudiciall Government, Lit|terall government, on the Newe Testaments Chur|ches, Churches of the Gentiles. To these fanaticall Spirits, the Reading of Moses (as vnto the Iewes) is a Covering, 2. Cor. 3. 15. vrging Letter, in steed of Spirit. The Spirit, or inward soule of all them Laws continue in Christ, but the Letter or externall face is done away. This is called (in comparison of the former) Grace and Truth, IOHN 1. 17. Let R. Bro. then, and his giddie headed Opinatours, not any longer teach, that our Princes should Iudaize. Ca|naan was vnder that whipping-Schoole-master, not Ierusalem that is from aboue.




22. Staffe.
The Patterne of the (a) Tabernacle, there
Delivered was: and every holy Law,
By which the Is|raelites their God shuld feare:
As of his Mi|nisters, eke stand in awe.
For Taberna|cles service, God did take,
(b) Levi his Tribe, and of them Priests did make.


(a) Moses being in the Mont 40. daies, and 40. Nights, the Lord here in|structed him con|cerning the form of the Taber|nacle, wherein the Priests and Levites were to Minister, as also, wherein the People should assemble. The Tabernacle was distributed into 3. special Roomes. The vttermost, was called the Court: into it Prince and People came. The inner roome was called Holy, therein the Priests ordinarilie, Sacrificed. The innermost roome, was called, Most Holy: therein the High-Priest entred to sacrifice but Once a year. Nowe for the stuffe it should consist of, wherewith|all be covered, how fashioned, where placed, what Instruments should bee vsed in it, c. allthis was commaunded to Moses, neither might he Adde, de|stract, or Alter any iod thereof: neither did he, for he was faithfull in All his House, Heb. 3. 5.


(b) As the Tribe of Levi, was chosen to service of the Tabernacle, so neither might they meddle therewith in their vnripe yeares: for boyes are vn|fit for holy Ministrie. At 25. yeares they entred in|to the Tabernacle for doing common, inferiour du|ties, as also to see and behold their Elder Brethren howe they slaughtered the Beastes, howe they cut them vp and disposed things. And shall wee admit foolish Boyes, or Foole-Elders into the Church, there to meddle with the worde, before they haue learned Orthoto-mein, To Cut, or Divide, The word aright.
Secondly, the Levites having spent some 5. years that way, then at 30. they begun to serue. At 50. yeares, the time of impotencie, they were not ex|alted into higher roomes; for there was no higher for them, but discharged of the former painefull place; for all this, Compare Nombers 4. 47. with Nomb. 8. 24. 25 26.
The Priests lippes were to preserue knowledge, and the People were to seeke the Lawe at his mouth, Malachi 2. 7. and herewithall, Moses char|ged Levi, Deut. 33. 8. 10. 1. The People bringing Beastes to the doore of the Tabernacle, that they might bee slaughtered for sinne, did thereby pro|fesse, the necessitie of the Death of the Promised Seede, for sinne: as also, 2. by putting their hand on the Beasts heade, they professed that themselues deserved the same death for Sinne. 3. And in as much as they brought the Beastes to be offered vp (not by their owne hand, but by the Priestes, they thereby professed, that it was not in their owne power to sacrifice for the least Sinne, but that it must be offered vp by him, that was figured out vn|der that Priest-hood: namely, by Christ, who was both the Sacrifice and Sacrificer. 4. By the High|Priest, his once a yeare entring into the Holiest place, was more plainly typed foorth the Messiah, who Once should offer vp for altogither, Heb. 7. 27. a Sacrifice and oblation, that neither needed to be offered vp daily (as were the former) nor can|not be offered by any, but by him that is Priest (not according to Levi, on whome Rome holdeth her Priest-hood but) according to the order of Melchi|sedech: but of Christ himselfe that is testified, Heb, 7. 17. namely, that onely to HIM, that Everlasting Priest-hood was committed: a Priest-hoode that needeth no Successor as did Aarons (because they were ever dying) for this Priest continueth for ever with his One sufficient, perfect Sacrifice, Heb. 7. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27.
That Bread and Wine therefore, left by Christ vnto his Church, hath beene improperlie called a Sacrifice, seeing they are but Signes of that Sacri|fice: Signes of that Body and Blood. Nor yet, Na|ked Signes, but Signes exhibitiue: sealing as verily Christ vnto the soules of the Faithfull, as they veri|lie receiue into their mouth, the Bread and wine. Their Mouth no more surely receiveth the Signes, then their Soule the Ting signified.
5. By the Peoples washings and Purifyings, they professed what puritie was required of such as bare the Name of IEHOVAHS Israel. 6 By the Priests Garments, as also other their pure observa|tions: they were taught howe Pure, Spotles, and without Sinne, the exspected Priest, Messiah shuld be. Neither might such, having fallen from IEHO|VAHS service to Idoles, minister before the Alter againe: but onely (after Repentance) were to bee exercised in common Leviticall duties, Ezech. 44. 0. 11. 12. 13. Some hereupon haue taught, that in like Sore, He that should slide from the true Chri|stian worship, vnto the Idolatrous Christian wor|ship, should ever ater that stand vncapable of any ministeriall place in Christs Church. But their ig|norance in This, as in Other things deepely appea|reth, in labouring to make an open Dissimilitude, a Similitude.
1. Them Levites fell away from a ministeriall calling: but some of these Christians did fall but as Private men.
2. The Levites fell from open trueth, to open grosse Idolat, even to the Idols of the Gentiles as for these Christians, they fell divers of them vp|on a doubting of the truth thee they fell vnto, be|ing likewise Professours of Christ,  for the Name of Christ: whereas the Levites fall was  inexcusable (and more too) as if a Christian should become a Iewe, or Turke.
3. The Levites falling, they served before the Idoles: so haue not many of these during their fall.
4. The Levits returning by Repentance, were not debarred all Ministeriall service: but they wold debarre the poore Christians, simplie for ever from all office Ministeriall.
5. If it may please them to ponder the Lord his Word better, before they publish their owne Word to the whole world, they shall finde (as I ob|served in the former Staffe) that all sortes of Levits, (though spotles) were not capable of Priest-hoode, and so, of standing before the Alter: As Gershom Aaron, their Familie was chosen to the Priestes worke: so this sort of Levites, could onely be saide to be debarred the Alter: as for the other, though they never fell, yet they might not medle with that peece of Service. If the Levites of the Families of Kohath and Merari so fel, they notwithstanding are not debarred their former place. Onely, One sorte of Levites Beare that shame, of being debarred their former height of Calling: and they bee such, as in the former Height, did beare a liuely resemblance of Christ. For such as had made so fearfull a Fall, to haue beene restored or lifted vp into that place, that specially typed out Our spotles Priest IESVS; having bene so notablie spotted with open palpa|ble Idolatrie, would haue beene derogatorie vnto Christ figured. If a blemish in one of their bodies made him vncapable of Priesthood, then no mar|uell, if so greiie a fall, put him from that sacred i|guring Seate.
Thus, where divers (whose names I willinglie conceale) haue thought that that Deposition was nothing Ceremonial, and therefore with too open sounde, did smite vp their drum, and display their Banner, they see the very ground of all their hope, cashierde,  quasht with a wet Finger, Obiec. Paul would haue him Varebukeable. Answ. So would I haue every Minister vnrebukeable: but if we shall haue no man that at any time of his life hath com|mitted grosse Sinne (for so you haue taught) for to medle at all with any Church office: Surely, I can not tell how, Rome, Corinthe, Asia Minor, shal ever come to haue Church-Officers. Paul would, and so would I, that every common Professor of Christ should liue vnrebukeable: much more I wish it in the Teacher of the People: but to say that a mat|ter of Rebuke, doth debarre a man simplie from al such office, is as though one should say: Christians ought to liue vnrebukeable: If therefore any com|mit matter of Rebuke, he is no more (notwithstan|ding Repentance) to bee admitted to the place of a Christian: for (to vse your owne reason) Hee must beare his shame: that: is, He must be in a lower place, than before: but he was in the estate of a Christi|an before, therefore nowe (notwithstanding Re|pentance) he may not be restored to the state of a Christian Such an Argument wold beseeme No|uaus or rather Novatianus, who is saide to denye such for ever a place in their Church, as once had falne into sinne. Nay, this is worse than that of Novatianus, for he denied the dignitie of Christian to him, that before had fallen in a Christian place: but this Newe-learning denieth office to him, that never fell in office.
Wiselie fore-sawe the holy Ghost this soare, and therfore hath left a plaster accordingly in the Gos|pell, where hee propoundeth vnto vs Persons Re|bukeable, both before and after their Calling: yet neither it debarred the first from entrie, nor the se|cond from the continuance in their holy Church Function. Matthew and Paul, notablie rebukeable Before; Peter and Barnabas, notablie Rebukeable After their Calling. Mathew a Publicane: Paul an abhominable Bloodsucker. Peter first an Apostate, secondy, togither with Barnabas taken tardye with fowle dissembling. And if in any there shuld of ab|solute necessity haue bene conversation vnrebuke|able, it had bene highly necessary in the Maister Buildrs.
If any of absolute necessitie, should haue beene vnrebukeable as was Christ, then necessarily such should haue bene his Hands, for such were they in their work. Every one will cast their eye back vnto the Master workman, and think themselues happy if they can but attaine to bee so perfect: why then would Christ call into office, such as might after fal and scandalize the holy truth; had it not bin more credit to his cause, that such should first haue prea|ched, as might every way be vnrebukeable? would not people the sooner haue beleved, when they had seene the Faith of Christ so powerful in the Apostle, as hee never once fell after the preaching thereof? Surely, surely, Brethren, as it woulde haue gone hard with a man that should come to his Deaths-bed vnrepentant: if Christ had not left one Presi|dent of graunting Remission of Sinne at the last houre: so, had we not sufficient Presidents, of Iesus his Calling men To, and continuing men IN the Church-office, (ey a more excellent office than a|ny of vs can beare) it would go hard with the poor Church. Except Angels came from Heauen, Itrow she would never be furnished with men. As the Priests were called to figure Christ spot|les, even as the spotles Lamb figured his Sacrifice: so there was required in them Persons, all outward shewe of Puritie. Dauid was a speciall figure of Christ the Warriour: Salomon, of Christ the Chur|ches Spouse: but they and their seede might enioy that Regall roome, notwithstanding they had ble|mishes in their Bodies, and though they weare vn|washen Garments, c. But for the Levites of Aa|rons Family, one blemish would put them by: and herein they fully represented our Sacrifice and Sa|crificer spotles; without which, there had bene no Redemption for sinne. If Church-Officers nowe shadowe Christ his Priesthood, as did the former, hen there were some likelyhood of this: namely, That Persous reprooueable for passed fact, were ever afterwards (notwithstanding Repentance) vt|terlie vncapable of entring into, and still retaining any Ecclesiasticall function. But I trowe, none are so grosse as to affirme, that the Newe Church, or Newe Testaments Church her Ministery, doth so fore-type, fore-figure, or shadowe the Priest ever|lasting, even Iesus, ordained by oath, a Priest fore|uer after the Order of Melchi-sedech: which if, I see not why any shuld any longer, retaine such an Ar|gument of Angellike ministery.





23. Staffe.
The (a) Taberna|cle built, and al things done,
They forewards set, towards old Canaan:
(b) But by the way, they into mischiefs run,
For which the Lord destroyed every man,
Even all (saving Caleb and Ioshua)
Who out of Ae|gypt, vndertook the way.


(a) For begin|ning and perfect|ing the glorious work of the Ta|bernacle the Lord gaue sin|gular guiftes vnto Be|zaleel of Iudahs Tribe, and to Aoliah of the Tribe of Dan. No common guiftes are required in the builders and rearers vp of Churches: for of the Church vniver|sall or Catholick was the Tabernacle a type or fi|gure: yet but, of a Church in the Wildernes; as also in Canaan vnder the warfare of the Church: for onely peaceable Salomon must builde the glorious house of IEHOVAH: Secondly, the Tabernacle being ioyned togither and reared vp, great enoy|lings and consecrations were required and perfor|med, that so IEHOVAH might dwell in it conti|nuallie, Exod 40.
Here endeth EXODVS, or the Book of Going out, that is, out of Aegypt.

The next Book LEVITI (VS, is spent in re|hearsall of the Service of the Levites.
The Book of Nombers, spendeth it self in Num|bring the Remoovals, and pitchings of Israel his Tents: Secondly, in Numbring the People, and di|vers worthy Events in the Wildernes.
The Booke of Deuteronomie, (or second reher|sall of the Law) maketh a Repeat of the things fal|len out since the Peoples comming out of Aegypt: containing summarilie what before was delivered in Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers.


(b) The Israelites ever and anone tempted Ie|hovah in the Wildernes; for the which, the Lord kept them for 40. yeares in the Wildernes leading the people (for he went before them in a Clowde on the Daye, and in a Piller of Fire on the Night) not by the way that Iaacob and his sonnes traveled in the Famine, but round about, in and out, till hee had by warres consumed all that went out of Ae|gypt, excepting CALEB and Ioshuah. This was the fruite of abusing their Leaders, and doubting of the Lord his providence.
Balak (King of Moab: and Moab and Ammon came of LOT his drunken Incest, committed af|ter his departure from Abram his Vnkle, and after the destruction of Sodom, Gomorrha, Zeboim, Admah the Cities of the Plaine) hyred the covetous Pro|phet Balaam to accurse Israel: but the Beast could tell the King, that no Sorcerie could cease on Iaa|cob: yet wicked Iaacobs seede could accurse them|selues by running into many Abhominations, to the kindling of IEHOVAHS wrath. They over|came Sichon King of Amorites, Og, the king of Ba|sa, and the Basan Bulles: but notwithstanding that and farre much more than that, they were ever forgetting God their Deliverer, for the which as I haue said, Iehouah destroyed them.
Aaron dieth by the way, and Moses having cal|led the twelue Tribes of Israel before him, he bles|seth them: After the which, he passeth from Moab plaine, and mounteth the Mount Nebo: from whence overpeering Iordan, he beholdeth the land of Promise, Canaan, from whence their Fore-father Iaacob came in time of deep Dearth. Hauing seene all (IEHOVAH shewing him al) he quietly giueth vp the Ghost, being 120. yeares olde. But Michael the Arch-Angell, after strift with Satan, Iude 9. bu|ried his body, where never man could find it. Deut. 34. 6. And here endeth MOSES his 5. Books.
The 4. latter Books containe 183. yeares, vnto them ad the 2369 yeares of Genesis, and the whole will be 2552. yeares. And so much heere is the Worlds age.




24. Staffe.
The Seede of them, during the 40. yeares,
Borne in the Wil|dernes, they onely came,
With other two (as in Gods writ appeares)
Them God did bring into the Land of Fame.
(a) For Ioshuah, (good Moses being dead)
By Gods appoint|ment doth the people leade.


(a) Moses before his death having imposed hands on Ioshuah as the Lord had comman|ded, loe Ioshuah was full of the Spirit of Wisdome; succeeding Moses in Captainship to Israel. And so beginneth the Book of Ioshuah.
Ioshuah sending Spies to Iericho (the first Citie beyond Iorden) they come to Harlotrie Hostesse Rahab, for lodging. She perceiving they were Israe|lites (for Israel was become famous abroade) shee lodged them with holy Care, beleeving verelv that her Citie and all the Land should be giuen into the hand of Israel: and therfore beggeth  obtaineth graunt of Life for her selfe and her Fathers house.
Officers of Iericho (hauing observed Spies in the Towne) come and search for the Israelites, but Ra|hab having hid them in the top of the house vnder bundles of Hemp, denieth her Ghuests. The Inqui|sitors departed, she (dwelling vpon the Citie walls) letteth them downe through a window by a coard, and so they retyre to Ioshuah.
Ioshuah vnderstanding from IEHOVAH, that it was time to set over Iordan, hee appointeth the Priestes to bear the Arke of the Covenant (in which Arke the booke of Covenent was put) vntill they came to the brinke of the River. They comming thither, and setting foot in the water, The waters parted as did the Red Sea. The Priestes standing within Iorden, all the People passe over. Twelue Men in the meane time (of every Tribe one) take|ing vp (at Ioshuahs commaund) a stone in Iorden, which afterwards in their Camping place, they pit|ched downe for a Memoriall. The Priests no soo|ner set foot on the Land, beyond Iordan, but loe, the waters rolle togither againe: for what rest is in this floodie world, longer than the Priest of Priests setteth foot on the Seas
The Israelites Royall Arrivall once reported, Oh howe the Vncircumcised growe faint-hearted! Their Arrivall being in the first Moneth, they (as was commanded on the 14. daye of that Moneth, (hauing first circumcised all the Males, borne for that 40. years in the Wildernes, in the place called Gilgal) they doe celebrate the Passeouer feast: and the next day after, do eat of the Corne of Canaan: wherevpon, the Manna (a kinde of foode, that for the 40. yeares fell with the morning dewe, like to Coriander seede) it ceased. Extraordinary provi|sion shall accompanie the Woman in the Wilder|nes: but she must not exspect so much in the Land of Rest. They incompasse Iericho six daies togither, seven Priests blowing on 7. Rammes-hornes, every day once: but the 7. daye, they circuit the Citie 7. times, the Priests sounding: and at the seaventh time sounding, the Armie shoutes, vpon which, the walles of Iericho fall downe flat. They sack the Ci|tie (Sauing Rahabs house) Ioshuah giving in charge that no man take any execrable stuffe of Iericho. Achan filtcheth a Babylonish garment, 200. she|kels of silver and a wedge of Golde, whereby hee brought Gods Iudgment on Israel. The execrable Theese found out, He, his sonnes, daughters, oxen, asses, yea All that he had, were stoned and burnt to Ashes in the Valley of Achor: and reason too, for Gold Silver, c. first dedicate vnto false wor|ship, is onely consecrated by beeing dedicated to Gods Tabernacle. The man that filtcheth that for his priuate vse, bringeth Iudgment vpon him. Let such as haue filtched false Church-liuings, marke this.
Some others (my Brethren) haue deemd it simp|lie vnlawfull, that the ministry of the Newe Testa|ment (yea: some, that none of the faithfull) should at any hand make vse of such stuffe: saying, It is exe|crable. Indeed it is so, regarding his former vse, but if nowe it be by the holy Church dedicate to the Saintes vse, it is no more execrable, Iosh. 6. 24. and this way the Harlots wages is made holy, Isa. 23. 23. 24. Let my Brethren considder of this, and not so easilie condemne the true vse of God his Crea|tures, because of former prophanation: for all the Creatures of God are consecrated vnto vs, by the Word and Praier. 1. Tim. 4. 4. 5. and heerein the Gospell is more liberall then was the Law.




25. Staffe.
(a) He hauing brought, them into promist Land,
And (b) seated every Tribe in proper lot:
(c)  Good Ioshuah dies. Then, as we vnderstand,
The Israelites right soone had God forgot:
For which, he ma|ny times did giue them vp,
To drink the draught, of Enemies their cup.


(a) This Ioshuah is called Heb. 4. 8. Iesus, be|cause He (not the Law man Moses) brought Israel in|to Cana|an, the first Rest; a figure of the se|cond Rest, into which our Iesus (not of Ephraim, as he was, but) of Iudah shall bring vs, if so we will stu|die to enter into that rest. Without studying and striving it will not be, for the Gate is straight, and the way narrowe, that leadeth vnto Life, and fewe there be that finde it. Mat. 7. 14.


(b) Ioshuah hauing seated the Tribes in their se|uerall Lots, as God had appointed, (onely Levies Tribe had no such Lot, for the Lord was his special portion, and the other Brethren were to paye vnto them Tenths) Reuben, Gad, and the halfe Tribe of Manassh, Then returne vnto their Lot, which fell out on the other side Iordan. They (as wee must) sought no Rest to themselues, till they see Rest for the Body of Israel.


(c) Ioshuah readie to set foot in the Graue, cal|leth before him the Elders of the People: rehear|sing before them, the wonderfull mercies of God received, for the which, they were all neerely tyed vnto IEHOVAH: But in the end he concludeth, howsoever others were resolved, yet Hee togither with his Houshold, would serue the Lord. Soone after he died, being 110. yeares olde, having ruled 17. yeares: and about 50. yeares after their com|ming from Aegypt. So endeth the book of Ioshuah: the World then aged, 2570. yeares.
Here beginneth the Booke of IVDGES.
Ioshuah dead, the People consult with God, for
the succession in Government. The Lord appoin|teth
the Tribe of Iudah. Of Iudah, Othoniel was
chosen Iudge, who oversawe them for 40. yeares.
To him succeedeth Ehud of Ben-iamins Tribe,
who was not (I think) lame, but left handed, (Iudg.
3. 15. compared with Verse 21.) and therefore ex|ercised
that hand as most ready to drawe his dag|ger
forth. Hee slewe Eglon, Israels Oppressour for
18. yeares. From Othoniels death, to the end of
his Iudge-ship are, 80. yeares.
Heere Shamgar slewe 600. Philistims with an
Oxe-goade and so helped Israel. But after Ehud
his death, Israel forgetteth God their deliverer:
for which IEHOVAH giueth them into the hand
of Iabin a Cananitish King: whose chiefe Captaine
was Sisera a Gentile. He had 900. Chariots of Iron,
and twentie yeares he vexed Israel.
But Israel crying vnto IEHOVAH, hee raised
vp in Israel, the woman Deborah, an excellent Pro|phetesse:
who stirreth vp Barak (of Naphtali) to take
1000. men of Naphtali and Zebulon, for rescuing
Israel out of the hands of Sisera, Iabins Captaine.
The Prophetesse goeth vp with Barak, and they
ioyne with Siseraes hudge Armie by the waters of
Megiddo. Siseraes Armie is discomfited: himselfe
finding a paire of feete better, than two paire of
handes. Comming wearie into Iaels Tent, he slee|ping,
she knocketh a nayle into his Temples, and
and so brought Barak pursuing, to the spectacle. So
had Israel much rest for 40. years: not for 40 years
after this Triumph, but accompting 40. years from
Ehud, vnto Gideon, next Israelitish Iudge.
After Deborahs victorie, the Lord (because of
Sinne, gaue Israel into the hands of Midian; for
whose deliverance, Gedeon of Manasseh, (called al|so
Ierub-baal) was stirred vp, who Iudged his Peo|ple,
40. yeares.
To him succeedeth Abimilech (Ierubbaals yong
sonne) hauing first murdered his brethren: and hee
raigned 3. yeares.
After him Tola, of the Tribe of Issachar, helped
his people 23. yeares.
Next Iair of Manasseh; for 22. yeares.
Then Iephte Spurius of Manasseh, for 6. yeares.
After him, arose Ibsan of Bethlehem-Iudah, 
Iudged 7. yeares.
To him succeeded Elon of Zabulons Tribe, hee
had 40. sonnes, and thirtie Nephewes, that rode on
70. Asse-coltes. He iudged 10. yeares.
Then next, Abdon of Ephraim for 8 yeares.
In his nect followed Sampson of kicking Dans
Tribe: He for 20 yeares was a strong plaguer of
the vncircumcised Philistims, slaying more in his
Death than in his Life. A Nazarite hee was, and a
figure of our Nazaret Annointed, who by his death
on the Crose, overcame Death, and destroyed all
power infernall, to the Faithfull.
After Sampson, arose Eli, of the Tribe of Levi,
and of the Familie of Ithamar the 4. Sonne of Aa|ron,
for Aaron had Nadab and Abihu slaine of
God in the Wildernes, for offering with straunge
fire; as also he had Eleazar and Ithamar for sonns.
This Eli became (as Priest, so) Iudge to his peo|ple,
for 40. yeares. And heere (examining the time
of Iudges durance) the Booke of Iudges will end:
within whose times, falleth the Story of Ruth, the
Moabitish Gentile, married to Boaz, great Grand|father
to David. The Moabites came from LOT.
his incestuous sonne Moab.

1 Othoniel raigned 4. years.
2 Ehud his end of Iudgship
after Othoniel, 80. yeares.
3 From thence to Gedeon,
40. yeares.
4 Gedeon, 40. yeares.
5 Abimelech. 3. yeares.
6 Tol, 23. yeares.
7 Iair, 22. yeares.
8 Iephte, 6. yeares.
9 Ibsan, 7. yeares.
10 Elon 10. yeares.
11 Sampson, 20. y.
12 Eli, 40. yeares.

The yeares of the 12. Israelitish Iudges in one
summe, are 339. yeares.
Obiect. But holy Paul preaching at Antioch,
and making rehearsal of the sacred Story, he there
saith, that the Lord gaue vnto Israel Iudges, about
450. years, Act. 13. 20. so that by the former num|ber,
(339.) Paul should over-compt one hundred
and eleuen yeares.
Ans. Manie (and not vnlearned) haue either
here affirmed the text corrupted: or else they haue
not begunne the number of Iudges from Ioshuahs
last but they haue runne backe beyond Ioshuah,
beyond Moses, beyond Iaacob, even to Isaac. But
if they marke Paul there, they shall easilie see, that
he bringeth in the accompt of Iudges, from the
time that Israel had full possession of their Lots.
In a word, to resolue the doubt: Paul hath an eye
not onely to these 12. Iudges sprong out of Israel,
but also to the vncircumcised Rulers that oppres|sed
them, and into whose handes, the Lord gaue
them, because of their sinnes: for who knoweth not
that if the Lord gaue his people into the hands of
the Vncircumcsed, (and so it is oft said, in the book
of Iudges) then it was God that se the Rulers o|uer
them: Let vs number the yeares of the Op|pressours.

1 Chusan, 8. yeares.
2 Eglon, 18. yeares.
3 Sisera, 20. yeares.
4 Midian, 7. yeares.
5 Ammon 18. yeares.
6 Philistims 40. yeares.

These halfe 12. (being Oppressors) do so
make 111. yeares.
Which one hundred eleuen, put vnto three hun|dred,
thirtie, nyne, doeth giue vp holy Pauls num|ber
of 450. Neither are these 111. yeares falling
Alone, or successiuely to the Iudges, but Togither
or intermixtly with them: And therefore that 339.
yeares are in mixture or confusion 450 yeares, my|stically
reproouing the peoples' confused manners,
Let vs now number from Israels Exit from Aegypt
hitherto.

The whole, 396.
Moses governed 40. yeares.
Ioshuah, 17. yeares.
The Iudgships orderly time
339. yeares.

Nowe followe the Books of SAMVEL.
Eli, last Iudge of that Number, being now Priest
in Israel, vnto him (and for the service of the Lord)
Hannah (the wife of Elkanah) brought her young
sonne Samuel: to which Samuel, the mightie God
appeared, declaring to him, the destruction of Eli,
and his house, because hee stayed not his sonnes
Hophni and Phineas from prophaning the holy
things. Warres being then with the Philistims, Is|rael
went out, and caused the Ark of Gods Cove|nant,
to be fetched from Shiloh into the Host. But
the Philistims caught away the Arke (which after|wards
they sent back againe) and slewe the flaun|ting
Priests, Hophni and Phineas. Newes heereof
comming to Eli, sitting without on a stoole, he in
a pieuish qualme fell downe and broke his Neck
being 98. yeares old. Phineas wife (big with child)
hearing all this, shee sodainlie brought foorth, cal|ling
the Childe, Ichabod, that is, No Glorie, and
so dyed.
Thus the Lord was as good as his word sent be|fore
to Eli, by the man of God, Chap. 2. They that
honour IEHOVAH, them will IEHOVAH ho|nour:
but if they will kick against God, and disho|nour
him, by their vnrepentant Prophanations, IE|HOVAH
will assuredly dishonour them: by take|ing
their Glory from them in the sight of all men.
As they haue lived not glorifying God, so they
shall dye without glory to themselues. Let Rulers
chieflie learne this Lesson.





26. Staffe.
But when they cryde, to God, he (a) Iudges sent,
Who did avenge, them on their Enemie.
(b) At last with Iudg|es, they growe discontent:
And for King Hea|thenlike, they rudely cry.
God giues to them, then Saul of Benjamin:
Whome, after God rejected for his sinne.


(a) As he stirred vp by times, 6. sorte of Oppres|sours, so he mer|cifullie raised vp twelue of their owne people to exer|cise pow|er over them: besides Shamgar, that slue the 600. Philistims with his Goade.


(b) Eli dead, Samuel Iudged Israel passing righ|teouslie. He waxing old, his sonnes Ioel and Abiah governed, whose inequall waies observed, the Peo|ple loathed Iudgship, and desired to haue a King after the fashion of the Gentiles about them. The Lord hearing their murmuring, doth appoint Sa|muel to annoynt Saul (of Beniamins Tribe) a tall fellowe to the Kingship. Saul seeking his Fathers Asses, he found a Kingdome: for comming to en|quire of Samuel concerning his Asses, (as fooles runne to Witches) Samuel annointeth him, after the which, the Spirit (not of Sanctification, but) of Government and Maiestie came vpon him. This Saul afterwards neglecting his charge, concerning the slaughter of Amaleks Cattle, and Agag the King, the Lord therefore taketh from him the for|mer Spirit, and put in him a frantick Spirite: com|manding Samuel to annoynt David, the youngest sonne of Ishai of Bethlehem-Iudah, (the Towne of Boaz and Ruth) vpon whome came the former Maiesticall Spirite. After this, Saul ceaseth not to persecute David (which persecution was cause of penning most of the Book of Psalmes) but David, (though hee had him at vantage) would not hurte him. In the end, consulting with a Witch at En|or (for before hating Samuel (and Samuel nowe was dead) hee tunneth to the Devill to speake with Samuel) Saul, the next daye after was slaine (togi|ther with his Sonnes) in his warres with the Phili|stims, running himselfe desperatlie on his swordes pointe.
Thus the wretched King run from sin to sinne, till sinne slewe him. From a lesser sinne, he runnes to a greater,  from the greater vnto the greatest, till hee meete with his match: that is, with a sinne that overmatcht him and brought him vnder foot. Let Kings beware of sparing any cursed Agag, or a|ny fat Idole Religion (for the bellie is Agags God) lest the Lord leaue them to  sinnes race, the best end whereof is but shame  confusion of face. Seing we are all called to be Kings vnto God. Lee vs spare neither fat sinnes, nor leane sinnes, sinnes lesse or more gainefull and pleasurable, but let vs kill them all: for as the bleating of the Cattle, be|wraied Sauls halting, so will the crying of one sinne vnmortified, bewray our hollowe hearts, and pro|uoke the holy one to Iudgement.
The time of Sauls Raigne, and of Samuel his Iudgship togither, making 40. yeares.





27. Staffe.
(a) Then Samuel did David King annoint,
Who was of Iu|dah (b) gracious, good  true.
(c)  Then Salomon his Sonne, he doth appoint,
Him to succeede: as book of Kings doth shew,
This Salomon for (d) Tabernacles Rite,
Did build a Glo|rious Temple, Gods delite.


(a) Se for this into the An|notation next be|fore.


(b) As Da+uid suc|ceeded Saul, so he raig|ned in all good|nes (ex|cepting the slaughter of Vriah,  the defiling of his wife, Bath|sheba) marrying at length with Bathsheba, by whom (the adulterous Childe dead) he had Salomon; the figure of Iesus, the peaceable Spouse of his church; even as his Father David was the speciall type of IESVS, the slaughterer of his Churches oes.
And here beginneth the Books of KINGS.


(c) David in his old age, caused Zadok the Priest, Nathan the Prophet (he that reproved David for his Adulterie) with his valiant men, to carry his Son Salomon downe on his Mule to Gihon, and there (the Priest annoynting him with oyle taken out of the Tabernacle) to proclaime him King: who did so, crying, God saue King SALOMON. After that, David having exhorted his sonne to fear the Lord, As also, informing him of IEHOVAHS will con|cerning the Temple, he dyed: having raigned sea|uen yeares in Hebron (where hee was the second time annoynted) and 33. yeares in Ierusalem, where he was the third time vncted.


(d) In stead of the Tabernacle formed in the wil|dernes, Salomon by the Lord his appointment, buildeth a Temple, divided into the 1. Court, 2. Ho|lie, and 3. Most Holy, as was the Tabernacle. The Stone was hewen and first made euen, and after|wards were conioyned togither, for the rearing vp of walles: so that it is saide, There was not heard the noise of an hammer in setting of it vp. 1. King. 6. 7. This signified, that the Temple spirituall of our Ie|sus, greater than Salomon, namely, the Church of the Newe Testament, should consist of spirituall stones, namely, Men and weomen, who first shuld be hewed and made smooth, as Iohn Baptist smoo|thed the waye to Christ, by the preaching of Pro|phets: and having once the visible spirituall knobs hewen off, then they should conioyne and knit to|gither into one communion. This was cause that Iohn Baptist would not baptise any, but such as first Confessed Sinne, giving hope of Amendment. And this was it that holy Peter respected, when he said, And yee as liuely stones be made a spirituall house. 1. PETER 2. 5.
Secondly, that hammers, or forcing meanes, are not for ioyning People togither in holy Com|munion and Vnion spirituall, for no Iron sworde can beget Faith, but: that Princes swords and hard meanes are appointed for the smoothing of them, and cutting off their knobs and wicked manners, that so they may bee fitted sooner for Christ.
This Armie is to appeare willingly in holy beau|tie, at the time appointed. Faith is free or volunta|rie, not forced by humaine power.
Thirdly, that Ratling noyse of Accusations, Re|prehensions, is not fitte teaching within Christ his spirituall Temple, the Church. Iohn is to charge  for Generation of Vpers that are without: as  these that are once entred into the Lords house and nrolled by Baptisme in his Booke, to them appertaine sweeter wordes, than Salomon spake in the hearing of his servants: and why? All thin, are hoped to be Christes, and Saintes by Calling.
Obiect. The Prophets cryed often bitterly out of their owne People within that visible Church.
Ans. Confound not the two Testaments, in their Ministery, Lawes, People. If their Maiestrate wold cut the wicked from the Cittie of God, so it was: but if hee would not, neither Priestes nor People could do withall. As for the New Church, she hath power (be the Magistrate never so negligent) as to keepe defiled ones from entring the Lords Cittie, Revel. 21. 12. 27. (for Christ his Church here, is Ie|rusalem from aboue, Galatians 4. 26 c.) so it hath power to preserue puritie within. If therefore any wickednes arise within (there must not bee knock|ing of hammers) our Saviour hath commaunded a Rule whereby to walk. Math. 18. 15. 16 17. name|ly, to vse all peaceable brotherly speaches and be|haviour, for drawing the Trespasser to repentance. If he Repent, hee is woon, and there an end. But if he Repent not, then hee is to be put out of Com|munion, as an Heathen out of the Temple nor eat and drunk withall of vs willingly, no more than the Iewes would with Publicans. Such honour is to all his Saints, Psal. 109. 9. This is called a deliverie vp to Satan, 1. Cor. 5. and not for ever, but vntill the partie Repent, and his obstinate flesh be humbled. In the meane time, if by any meanes wee haue to deale with him, we are commaunded to admonish him as a brother, 2. Thess. 3. 15. For if hee haue not proceeded so far, as directly to reiect Iesus (for the Krim and black cuse is due to such a one, 1. Cor. 16, 22.) we are ever to hope him a brother (not vt|terly dead, but) in a trance, who happilie once may bee recovered, by chyrting the cheeke and vse of strong waters. But as a man in a foming sounde, is not fit for our Table, c so neither a Brother in the hands of the hellish club-fied Surgeon, till he be come to his pristine estate.
Let therefore Invectivers against Brethren, and foolish Excommunicators, here Smite their thigh, and sav, What haue I done See 2. part, Staffe 13.
In this Temple, were two Pillers the one called Iachn (or stablitie) the other called, Boas, or, In strength. To these two, our Saviour casteth his eye, when he saith, Him that overcommt, will I make a Piller in the Temple of my God, c. Revel. 3. 1.
Every thing in this Temple, was Glorious, figu|ring the glorious estate of a Christian: Proportiona|ble and , figuring the poportion and order of Christes Church: Precious, signifying the high valewe of a Christian: and nothing there was, that is not for our rudition.
Salomon having finished the work he dedicates it by Prer to IEHOVAH. The Lord giueth vnto him wisedome beyond all measure of other men. But est he should think hee stood of himselfe, the Lord for a season leaues him to himselfe, who by meanes of strange women fell to grosse Idolatrie, not onely marrying with Pharaohs daughter (a fi|gure of the Gentile Church) but also concubining May. At last the Lor (ho hath promised to Da|uid his Father, that, If SALOMON sinned, he wuld chastice him with the Rodde of Men, but his mercie shul not depart away from him as  did from SAVL; He giveth to Salomn grace to Repent, and not only that, but he appointeth him to be the ho|ly Ghosts Scribe, for three Canonicall bookes. In the first Booke (entitled Proverb) he setteth down positiue Lawes for initiating all People of all ages, sexes, callings: notablie inveying against the Ido|latrous Church, vnder the person of the strange wo+man. Bitten Child, fire dreades: he spoke of expe|rience.
In the second Booke, (entitled, Ecclesiastes, or Preacher) he taketh his Puple into an higher seate, and there letting him see the things vnder the Sun, secretly compared with things aboue the Sunne, he concludeth all belowe to be Vanitie.
In the third Booke, (entitled Song of Songs, or Canticles) he superelateth, or carrieth his Disciple aboue the Sunne to let him see the mysticall Vni|on of Christ  his Church, togither with their Loue|signes and spirituall Amous. To this purpose, his former fleshlie loue, and Loue-tricks was deepelie sanctified: and had he not that way bin overshoes, he had bene nothing so fitte to discouer the over|trance of the Spirit. Oh the wisedome and mercie of God. To these that are called according to his purpose, all things work to the best, Rom. 8. 28. yea, Sinne and All. And he that knowes not this, know|eth nothing yet as he should knowe.
Having finished these three Bookes (three de|grees of Ascension from Sinne: as was Peters tri|ple conession of Loue, for his threefolde deniall) hee afterwardes dieth, having raigned overall Ie|rusalem 40. yeares; leaving his Sonne Rehobm to Raigne after him.





28. Staffe.
In his (a) sonnes daies, for wickednes and sinne,
God rent the Tribes, from Salomon his blood.
Kingdome of Iu|dah, here did first begin,
To which the Tribe, of Ben-iamin fast stood.
The ten Tribes King, (as holy Scriptures tell)
Was after this, term'd King of Israel.


(a) Reh|bom his Son, for|saking the coun|sel of the Aged,  cleaving to the desperat advise of young start vps; (who wil|led that his little Finger should be sorer vpon the People, than was his Fathers oynes) Ten of the Tribes doe Schisme from Rehobom despitefully: who take vnto them I erobo|am the Sonne of Nebat, and creat him their King. From this time the King of the ten Tribes, was cal|led, King of ISRAEL. The other two Tribes that stood to Rehoboam (lawefull, though wicked King) they hencesorth were called Iewes, and their King, King of IVDAH: togither with which Iudah, Ben|iamin stood, on whose hilles (as on shoulders, Deu. 33. 1.) the Temple of IEHOVAH stood. Thus the Sonne of the Right hand. set his shoulders to the Ly|on of Iudah, for supporting Church and Church|woorship. Worthie was Ben-iamin to stand on the Righthand of Iesus our Lyon of Iudah.





29. Staffe.
These ten Tribes Is|raelites, (a) falling from God,
They fell into the hands of Assurs King:
Who led them far away. (a righteous rod)
As for the two Tribes Ievves, from them did spring,
Some holy Kings: But ever and among,
They grieved God, and did his Servants wrong.


(a) They Schism|ing or rendring them|selues from Davids house, Iero to keep them from sa|crificing at Ieru|salem, (neither was it lawfull any where else) hee reareth vp an Idole in D and another in Btel, appoin|ting Tinker-like fellowes for sacrificing Priestes. By this meanes, as they had Schized from the true Church, so now likewise from the true worship to a false. Neiter after this did the Kings of Israel bet|ter, of whome therefore still the holy Ghost saith, He followed Ieroboam e sonne of Nebat, who caused Israel to sinne. This Supreame head of Ido|latrie sprung out of Epraim, and begun his Raigne with Rhoboam of Iudah.
The age of the Olde and New-World here, was 3030. yeares. Of the Newe-worl, 2344 From the Promise. 1917. From Aegypt, 516. From former Iudgeship hitherto, 120. And from the Temples structure, 36. yeares.
Here we must beginne a double accompt, be|cause of this double Regiment, which after that Schisme or Rent, was never vnited or made One.



IVDAH.
1 Rehoboam raigneth
over Iudah and Ben-ia|min,
17. yeares.
2 Abiam, called also
Abiah, Rhoboam his son
he succeeded  raigned
3. years: wicked he was,
as was his Father: but
for Dauid sake, GOD
gaue vnto him a Light,
(that is, a Son) to Raigne
after him. He begun his
Raigne in the 18. yeare
of Ieroboam King of Is|rael.
3 Asa his Son, succe|ded,
better than Father
or Grand-father. He be|gun
his raigne in the 20.
of Ieroboam. Hee tooke
the Sodomits out of the
Land, destroyed Idoles:
deposed his Idolatrous
grand-mother Macha:
in a word, many worthy
things did hee, and the
rather at the worde of
the Lord comming vn|to
him by Azariah, the
Sonne of Obed. Having
warres with Zrah of E|hiopia,

hee cryed vnto
God thus: It is nothing
with thee to helpe with
many or few, therefore
helpe vs oh Lorde our
God, for we rest on thee
and in thy name are we
come against this mul|titude:
Oh Lord, thou
art our GOD, Let not
Man prevaile against
thee. So IEHOVAH
smot the Ethiopians, and
amazed that People: so
that good Asa and his
Armie prevailed, and
took a great bootie.
This King smot an ex|cellent
Covenant with
the Lord: with whome,
ioyned not only his peo|ple
of Iudah and Benia|min,
but also divers stran+gers
out of Ephraim, Ma|nasseh,
and Simeon, Isra|elites.
At which time,
was offered vp vnto IE|HOVAH,
much of the
Ethiopians spoyle. Ha|uing
raigned 41. yeares,
he dyed of the gowt.
4 Iosaphat his son suc|ceedeth:
beginning in
his Fathers last years. A
good man for Church

reformation. In his time
Eliiah (or Eas) prophe|cieth
in Irael: and after
him, prophecied there
Eliseu (or Elsha) his ser|uant:
vpon whome (Eli|iah
rapt vp in a fiery cha|riot)
the Spirite is doub|led:
he working twise so
many miracles as did E|liiah.
Iosaphat being in
affinitie with Aab of
Israel, he accompanieth
Ahab to battell against
Ramot, Notwithstan|ding
the Prophet Mi|chaiah
had before tolde
him and Ahab, the issue:
but comming into the
Field, hee was glad to
flie with shame. Good|men
must looke for no
good, by ioyning with
Idolaters. And yt the
Princes of or time ae
not affraid to run, ryde
sayle by Seas, in the de|fence
of blinde Idola|ters.
Some haue paide
for it, let others harmes
make them beware. He
raigned 25. yeares, and
died.
5 Ioram his Sonne,
(called also IEHORAM)

Raigned togither with
his Father, from his Fa|thers
17 yeares, and so
continued 4. yeares af|ter
his Father He is said
to raigne 8. years, which
time necessarily is coun|ted
from his Fathers 22.
what time he begunne
his more free Raigne,
that 22. being the 5. of
Ioram of Israel. Because
this Foole married wth
Ahabs daughter, there|fore,
father Iehosophat
is once called king of Is|rael.
Hee became a no|table
Idolatrer. Vnto
him commeth a Letter
from Eliiah (were it writ
before his being wrapt
vp, or miraculously af|ter,
I know not) where|in
was red his destinie:
namely, That his Gutts
through horrible paine
shuld fal out of his belly
And so (2. yeares after)
they did; and so he died.
6 Achaziah (his yon|gest
sonne) finished the
Fathers last yeare, and
was slaine.
7 Athaliah his Mo|ther
succeeded (she was

Ahabs Daughter, and
Grandmother to Ioash)
she killeth all the Kings
seed she can catch. But
Iehoiada his wife, stea|leth
away Ioash (Acha|ziah,
or Ohoziah. his
yongest sonne) and kee|peth
him and his nurse,
6. yeares in a Chamber.
In the 7. yeare, Iehoia|dah
the Priest (hauing
published abroade the
life of the Childe, hee
bringeth him before the
Captaines and People:
and in the Temple an|noynteth
Ioash.
8. Ioas (called also
Iehoash) annoined King.
at that instant, Athaliah
the trayterous Queene,
commeth in, cryng: Treason, Treason: but her selfe
was the Trayteresse, and so shee found it: for shee
was haled out and slaine, having vsurped 6 yeares.
During Iehoiadah his life, Ioash walked vprightie:
but the good Priest dead, the Nobles of Iudah com
vp,  with flattering reverence, first causeth a neg|lect
of GOD his House: and then pulleth in their
Groues, Idoles and false worship. God stirreth vp
Prophets to reprooue that, but they stop the eare.
Then the Spirite of IEHOVAH comming vpon
Zechariah (the Son of Iehoiadah) he thus protested
before the People: Thus saith God, Why Transgresse
you the Commaundements of IEHOVAH? Surely,

ye shal not prosper, because ye haue forsaken the Lord
he hath also forsaken you. 2. Cron. 24.
The frantick Idolaters hearing this, doe stone
him in the Court of IEHOVAHS house: even be|tweene
the Temple and the Alter. Mat. 23. 35 By
the time that yeare was out, IEHOVAH stirred
vp the Aramites against Iudah: who came a small
number, but conquered, spoyled, slaughtered as
they would: leaving Ioash behinde them in great
misery. The Arats departed, the Lord stirreth
vp Shimrah an Amonite, and Ieozabad a Moa|bite,
who slewe the King on his bed Hee began his
Raigne at 7. yeares, and Raigned 40. yeares.
And here I would gladly knowe of Sbasian Cae|stalio
and his ignorant followers, what leadeth them
to affirme, That Salomon his bloode ended in A|chaziah
(or Ochaziah) the sonne of Iehosapha? what
should make them write that Ioash was of Iudah,
the sonne of Iosph, the sonne of Ionah, the sonne of
Eliaim, the sonne of Melcha, the sonne of Mena,
the sonne of Mathaa, the sonne of Nathan, King
Salomon his brother? To passe by a Sea of errour,
which this ignorance bringeth into the Genealo|gie
of IESVS, let the Reader search the Scripturs,
2. King. 11. 2. 3 and 2. Chron. 22. 10. 11. 12. and the
next Chapter wholie: and he shall see clearly (as at
Noone-day) that Ioash was Achaziah his sonne, as
we haue written. Nay read 1. Chron. 3. 10. 11. and
there it is thus written: And Salomons sonne was Re|oboam,
whose sonne was Abiah, his Son was Asa,
his sonne Iehosphat, his sonne Ioram, his sonne A|chaziah,
his sonne Ioash, c. what can bee more
plaine. If Castalio and his Opinators knew not how
to reconcile Matthew and Luke their Geneaogies,
(whereof in his place) they should rather haue ac|knowledged

their ignorance, then seeme more
skilful by broaching abhominable errour. But men
that would not seeme ignorant of any point, doe
commonlie stumble (in that height of pride) even
in clearest pointes.
9 Amaziah (Ioash his
Sonne) succeeded: being
aged, 25. yeae: Hee
raigned 29. yeares, ac|compted
from his Fa|thers
38. year, that be|ing
the second yeare of
Ioash, King of Israel, and
he then his fathers Vice
Roy. He slew these that
slewe his Father: but ha|uing
an eye vnto Moses
his Lawe, hee would not
kil the children for their
Fathers fact. He warred
with Ioash (or Iehoash)
King of Israel, but came
to the worse. In Ierusa|lem,
they working trea|son,
hee fled to Iachish.
They send after him, 
there slay him. But hee
was buried with his Fa|thers
at Ierusalem in the
Citie of David. As Iero|boam
of Israel (Iehoash
his Son) begun his raign
in this mans 15, yeares.
So, this man endeth his

Life and Raigne in the
15. yeare of Ieroboam his
Raigne.
10. The States of Iu|dah,
in the next place do
Raigne 11. yeares: even
vntill Ozas his Raigne,
who begunne his Regi|ment
(2. Chro. 26. 1 com|pare
with 2. King. 15. 1.)
in the 27. of Ieroboam of
Israel his Raigne: which
must needs be 11. whole
years after Amaziah his
Father. IVDAHS states
occupy that. Now Ioel
beginneth to prophecy.
11 Ozias, or Vzziah,
called also. Azariah, the
sonne of Amaziah, hee
succeedeth the States
regiment, being aged 16
yeares: beginning his
raigne in the 27. yeare
of Israels Ieroboam He
raignes 52. yeares. This
King had a zeal beyond
knowledge, which led
him to burn incense, vp|on
the Alter of Incense:
which thing only apper|tained
to the Priest. A|zariah
the Priest, accom+panied
with 80. valiant
Sacrificers, withstoode

and reproved him. The
King is thereat wroath.
The Lorde as wroth at
him, he smites his impu|dent
fore-heade with o|pen
Leproe. Then was
he compelled to go out
and because of that dis|ease,
hee dwelled in an
house apart, vntill his
death. In this mans time
Isiah, (or Esay) begun
to Prophecie. He is cal|led
the Evangelical Pro|phet,
because hee fore|tolde
of Christ, and the
state of the new Church
so planly, as if hee had
seene Christ  the ne
Testamentes Church,
with the bodilie eye. He
plainelie ore-sawe the
generall obedience of
Israel to Christian faith,
after the fulnesse of the
Gentiles were come in,
Chap. 59. 20. 21. So Pu
vnderstands that, Rm.
11. 26. Secondly, hee
plainly fore-sawe, that
Israels obedience vnto
Christian Lore, shuld be
vnspeakable glorious, 
their spirituall Light to
be more than had bene

the Gentiles, Cap. 60.
That Paul insinuateth,
Rom. 11. 12. and blessed
Iohn hath in the Spirite
pointed plainelie out
their Churches loie.
Revel 21. Thirdly, I saiah
foresawe, that the Israe|lites
obedience, should
bring life vnto the Gen|tiles
dead (the Primitiue
Churches haue all died)
60. 3 4. 5. c. This Paul
conesseth, Rom. 11. 15.
And holy Iohn acknow|ledgeth.
Revel. 21 24. 
22. 2. This, men wil not
nowe see. If they would
they shuld be humbled
in their blindnes, which
shall raigne (thogh que|stion
be vpon question)
till Israel be called.
12 Iotham his Sonne,
begnn to raigne in the
2. yeare of Pekah of Is|rael,
(which was his Fa|thers
last yeare) and hee
raigned in Ierusl  16.
yeares. Hee built in the
Lords house; in the Ci|ties
wall: in the Moun|taines
and forres. Hee
prevailed againste the
Ammoes,  became

mightie, because hee di|rected
his waye before
Iehovah his God. Now
beguane Micah to pro
phecie against Ierusa|lem
and Samaria.
13 Ahaz (or Achaz)
his Son, succeeded: be|ginning
to raigne in the
17. yeare of Pekah of Is|rael,
and he raigned 16.
yeare, as did his Father.
In his daies, came vppe
Rezin, King of Aram,
whose heade Cittie was
Damscus: and Pekah
the Sonne of Rmaliah,
king of Israel, whose hed
Cittie was Samaria, and
hee of that Cittie head,
Isa. 7. These two smoa|king
Firebrandes eare
Ahaz. Isaiah from the
Lord, laboreth to com|fort
him, but the hypo|criticall
Beast believeth
not, when hee would be
thoght to beleue much.
Maugre his hart, Isaiah
giveth a signe, namely,
the birth of Iesus Christ
on a Virgin, whereof he
was vnwo orthie. Pekah
slewe in one daye, sixe
score thousand of Iudah.

Zickri a mightie man of
Ephraim, slaieth Maaset|ah
the Kings sonne, and
Azrikam the Stewarde
of his house; and Elka|ah
the second after the
King. The Edomites doe
plague him: the Phili|stims
invade him: Tiglah
Pilneeser of Ashur trou|bles
him. All are of his
iack, but he will not for|sake
his grosle Idlatry.
Nowe Isaah  his chil|dren
were signes to Iu|dah
and pointed at of
the Idolaters, Isai 8. 18.
So is Christ  his mem|bers.
Heb. 2. 13.
14 Hezechiah his Son,
(a worthie eformer) be|gun
to Raigne in the 3.
yeare of Hoshea of Isra|el:
which was the last
yeare of his Father. In
his 4 yeare, being then
aged 29) Salmansar,
commeth against Israel
and captiveth Hoshea 
his People. And in the
14 yeare of this King,
Sanach-rib of Ashur,
commeth against IV|DAH.
His chiee Cap|taine
was Rabshakeh, a

notable Rayler. Isai. 36.
The Lord comforeth
Hezechiah by his Pro|phet
Isaiah. Rabshakeh
(hearing of Warres at
home) raiseth siege af|ter
all his scolding: but
by the Angel of IEHO|VAH,
in one night were
slain, one hundred, four|score
and fiue thousand
of the Assyrians. After
that, Salmane sar in his I|dole
Temple at home,
was slaine by his two
sonnes, Adrammalech and Sharezer. He dead, Esar|haddon
his sonne Raigned in his stead.
Hezechiah sick, Isaiah commeth vnto him, and
(after the Kings humiliation before IEHOVAH,)
he giveth to him a Signe of Life for 15. yeares: for
the shadow of the Diall herevpon went backward
ten degrees in the Diall. Berodach Beladan (Babels
King) vnderstanding of the Miracle, hee sent to He|zechiah
presents. Hee letteth the Straungers see al
his Treasure, furniture, c. whereat the Lord is an|grie;
and therefore sendeth Isaiah to tell him, that
his Seed should be carryed away captiue to Babel.
Having raigned 29 yeares, he died.
15 Manasses (or Manasseh) his sonne succeeded
at the age of 12. yeares, and he raigned 55. yeares.
Hee beginning with as deepe Idolatrie, as had A|haz
his Grand-father, God stirreth vp. Assurs King,
(Esar-haddon) who fetters my Youth, and carrieth
him Prisoner to Babel. Hee humbling himselfe in
his Chaines (happie Chaines that humble a man)

the Lord is mercifull vnto him. Assur sending him
home, where in better maner he finished his daies
In his time, Habakkuk prophecieth.
16 Amon his Sonne succeedeth, for two years
His servants slewe him, for which the People slewe
them, and enthronized his sonne Iosiah.
17 Iosiah (or Iosias) next raigneth. Eight years
olde at his Coronation, and hee ruled 31. yeares in
Ierusalem. At 12. yeares of age, he wrought a great
Reformation: performing vpon Bethels Alter, that
which the Prophet had fore-tolde 300. yeares be|fore.
In his 18. yeare he kept a most Royall Passe|over.
Ieremiah in his Raigne begunne to Prophe|cie:
so did Zephaniah. The Lords Trumpet nowe
sounded nothing, but Iudah must to Babel Priso|ner
for 70. yeares. False Prophets sounde a false
peace, and therefoe shame came vppon them.
Huldah the Prophetesse telleth Iosiah, that because
his heart melted at the reading of Moses Originall
he should be taken away ere Iudahs fearefull fall.
Going into Battel against Pharaoh Necho King of
Aegypt, he was slaine at Megiddo.
18 Iehoahaz, or Ioachaz, called also IONN
and Shallm, a younger sonne of Iosiah, hee succee|ded
at the Peoples appointment. He Raigned but
three Moneths: for then Pharah Necho put him
in bondes, and carryed him into Aegypt.
19 Eliakim (called also Iehoiakim and Iakim)
elder brother to Iehoahaz by 2. years, Him did Pha|raoh
Necho make next King. Nowe Iudahs obedi|ence
was like rotten Figges.
From the Schisme of the Tenne Tribes, from
the Two (wherevpon arose, King of Iudah, King of
Israel) vnto this Eliaki his 3. yeare are 370.
yeares.
The World aged, 3400.



ISRAEL.
1 Ieroboam, King of
Israel, (or tenne Tribes)
streatching out his hand
against the Prophet that
denounced Iudgement
against the Alter in Be|thel,
that hand of his wi|thered.
He beseecheth
the prayer of the Pro|phet:
who praieth vnto
God, wherevpon the
hand was healed. At this
time the Prophet plain|ly
saide that, A Childe
should bee borne vnto
the house of David, Io|siah
by name, who vpon
that Alter should sacri|fice
the Idole Priestes.
This was spoken 300.
veas, before Iosiah was
borne. Ieroboam dyeth
an Heade Idolater, ha|uing
raigned 22. yeares.
2 Nadab his Sonne,
was half King in his Fa|thers
two last yeares: for
he begun his Raigne in
the 2. yeare of Asa king
of Iudah.
3 Basa killed N|da,

and raigned over Is|rael
24. yeares. He con|sumes
Ieroboams house.
His raigne beginneth in
Asa, his 2. yeare.
4. Elah his sonne, was
Vice-roy in Baasa his 2.
latter yeates. for he be|gun
his raigne in the 26
yeare of Asa.
5 Zimri slewe his M.
Elah. Against Zimri, ari|seth
Omri. Zimri bunes
himselfe in the Kinges
house, togither with the
house. Omri maketh pla
gye Statutes. Against
him ariseth Tibni, but
Omri prevailed. He raig|neth
(the Rivals time
ioyned to his) 12. yeares.
6 Ahab (an evil slip of
Omri) followeth: begin|ning
his Raigne in Asa,
his 38. yeare. Hee mar|ried
with vncircumcised
Iesabel, Daughter to the
Zidonian King: He bad,
Shee worse: the Devill
put them togither. In
his time, Eliiah the Pro|phet
was famous. He re|prooued
Ahab for rea|ving
Naboth of his Life
and Vineyarde: telling

him plainely, that his
House should come to
nought, and that pain|ted
Isabel was destinat
for Dogs-meat, and so
it felout: for Iehu after|wards
caused her to bee
cast downe from a lot.
They that doe humble
themselues shall be lift
vp, but the proude God
resisteth, and will cast
downe. Hee raigned 22.
yeares.
7 Achziah his Son,
begunne to Raigne in
Ihosphat his 17 yeare.
He Raigned two yeare,
which fell out in his Fa|ther
Ahabs 20. and 21.
yeare.
8 IORAM his bro|ther,
began to Raigne
in his Father Ahabs 21.
and 22. yeares of his
Raigne: which was in
the 18. and 19. of Iosa|phat
of IVDAH, and
in the second yeare of
IORAM Ihosopha his
Sonne, then halfe King
with Iehosophat his Fa|ther.
This man took a|way
the Image of Baal,
which his Father made:

but yet stood an Ido a|ter.
With this fellowe
Iehosphat of Iudah did
go to warre with Moab:
for the King of Moab,
having become tributa|rie
to Ahab, he now (A|hab
dead) rebelled. Now
Elsha, (or Elseus) the
Prophet is famous: and
therefore, before their
going vp, with him he
Kings consulted: who
assureth them of victo|rie.
Having raigned 12.
yeares Ioram died.
9 Iehu is annointed
King. Hee slayeth Ieza|bel
and all Ahabs house:
for Nabaoths bloode,
cryed for bloode, as did
Habels. He maketh Ba|als
Priests beleeue that
hee would sacrifice be|fore
the Idole. All the
Priestes gather for that
supposed sacrifice. They
being once in BAALS
house, he shew them all.
Notwithstanding, (for
this was but a starting
Zeal) he afterwards fell
to palpable Idolatrie: 
all Isrl became so no|tably
wicked, as IEHO|VAH

loathed Israel: in
somuch, as Hazael of A|ram
in Syria smot them
in all the coastes of Is|rael.
Iehu having raig|ned
28 yeares, he dyed,
10 Ioachaz (or Iehoa|chaz)
his sonne succee|ded:
beginning his raign
in the 23. yeare of Ioas
of Iudah. He, following
the waies of Ieroboam,
the Son of Nebat, cau|sed
Israel to sinne: for
which, the Lorde gaue
them into the hands of
Hazael King of Aram,
and into the handes of
Benadab King Hazael
his sonne. Hee raigned
17. yeares, and dyed:

11 Iehoash (or Ioash)
Son of Iehhaz (or Ioa|chaz)
beginneth Gover|ment
in the 15. of his fa|ther,
that being the 37.
of Amaziah of Iudah.
Hee raigned 16. yeares.
Being provoked by A|maziah,
he went against
him, tooke him captiu,
and then went to Ieru|salem,
making much
spoyl. In this mans time,
holy Elisha (after many
miracles wroght) dieth.
12 Ieroboam, his Son
succeeded. Hee begun
his raigne in his Fathers
last year, that being the
15. of Amaziah of Iu|dah.
Hee Raigned 41.
yeares. In his time, the
Prophet Ionah was sent
by the Lord to Niniuie,
the Metrapolitane Cit|tie
of Assria) there to
proclaime Iudgment a|gainst
the Cittie. Hee
imagining small credite

by such a Sermon, doth
by Sea flie another way.
The Lord by a Tempest
ursues him. The Mar|nes
cast out Ionah. A
Whale receiveth him;
who after 3. daies, cast|eth
Ionah vppon Land.
So was the Earth the
third daye to deliver vp
Iesus, Mat. 12. 40. Nei|ther
Earth nor Sea can
hide or drown that true
Ligh, which God hath
appointed to be decla|red
to a People. After
Ionah his being cast vp|on
the shore, the Lord
renueth his Mandat: he
goeth to Niniuie, and
proclaimeth destruction
after 40. daies. They at
the first hearing, belie|ued
that: they thereore
generaly humble them
selues and for that time
are spared.
This King restored the
coast of Israel, from the
entrie of Hamath, vnto
the Sea of the wildernes
according to the worde
of the Lord by IONAH
the Sonne of Amai,
the Prophet, which was

of Gat-Hepher But this
Ierobam followed the
steppes of the first Iero|boam.
In his time, be|gun
likewise Amos and
Hosheah to Prophecie.
13 Israels Kingdom,
thencefooth vnstayed
for 22 yeares full: even
vntill Zachrie. Nowe
Hoshah plainly telleth
Isral, that shee was not
IEHOVAHS wife. Here
was like Priest, like Peo|ple.
14 Zchariah, Ierobo|a
his Sonne, begn to
Raign in the 38. yeare of
Azariah, King of Iudah,
2 King. 15. 8. which was
fulli 22. years after his
Fathers death. A wic|ked
man was hee, and
therefore slaine by Sal|lum
the sonne of Ibesh,
and that in the Peoples
sight. He raigned but 6.
Moneths.
15 Shalum hauing
slaine Zechariah, begun
to raigne in the 39. year
of Aria of Idah. A|gainst
him riseth Mn|he
the sonne of Gadi,
who slew Shallum in Sa|maria.

So that hee raig|ned
but a Moneth.
16 Menahem imme|diatlie
vppon Shallums
death, beginneh his re|giment,
and hee raigned
10. years. But vnto him,
the Citie Trzah (in Isra|el)
woud not open her
gates. He therfore smot
it, and ript vp all their
women with child. Now
God stirred vp Pul, the
Assyrian King, against
Israel, who puld 1000.
Talents of Silver from
Menahem, which Mena|hem
puld from Israel.
17 Pekachiah his son,
begun to raigne in the
50. yeare of Azariah of
Iudah. He raigned two
years: and was slaine by
his Captaine Pekah, in
Samaria.
18 Pekah the Son of
Remaliah, begunne to
raigne fullie in the last
yeare of Azariah of Iu|dah.
Hee raigned in Sa|maria
(Metrapolitane of
Israel) 20. years, In his
time, Tglah Pileser king
of Ashur came vp, and
tooke divers Cities, and

carrved the People a|way
to Ashur. Hoshe,
the son of Elah slayeth
Pekah.
19 The States of Is|rael
now governe for 9.
yeares, thogh vnder Tig|lath
Peeser, who had
before tyme captived
them.
20 Hoshea (called also
Osee) beginnes his raign
in the 12. yeare of Ahaz
of Iudah: and a bad man
he was. Against him Ie|hovah
sende Sabnane|sar
King of Ashur, who
took Hoshea prisoner, 
after 3. yeares besieging
Samaria (which was the
9. yeare of Hoshea his
raigne) hee took it and
carried Israel away to
Ashur and there seated
them; since which time,
Israel hth not beene
heard off. Obadiah well
prophecied: roundly ta|king
vp Edom-Esau, for
laughing at his brothers
Captivitie. The King of
Ashur having carried Is
rael away, hee pceth
in their Roomes (in SA|MARIA
her Citties)

a Colonie of his owne
vncircumcised People.
IEHOVAH sendeth Ly|ons
amongst them, de|vouring.
They signifie
that vnto their king, say|ing
further: That they not
knowing how to worship
the God of Israels Land,
that Cuntries God there|fore
so plagued them. The
King sendeth one of Is|raels
Priests back; who
dwelling in Bethel, did
teach the People. Some
part of IEHOVAHS wor|ship
they received, and
vnto that part, they ad
their forraigne Idole,
home-bred worship.
Salmanesar, their king
dying, his son Esar-Had|don,
brought more of
his Rascals to Samaria,
and them partes, Ezra.
4. 2. Enemies vnto the
good work of God they
were ever. For that, as
also for their Linsy-wol|sie
worship, the Iewes
would haue no medling
with them, Ioh, 4. 9. The
Iewes would be follow|ed
of all haters of Ido|latrie.
But here we leaue Is|rael
vnder the heavie
Lash of IEHOVAH
Captines in vnknowne
partes of the Worlde: a
People vnknowne, how|soever
supposed Ezra,
(or Esdras) in that se|cond
Booke, Chap. 13.
Verse, 39. beginneth a
strange tale of them.
About this time, Na|hum
prophecied Nini|uies
fall.








30. Staffe.
Their Sinne vpheapt, God sendeth them away,
To Babylon in (a) three Captivities.
For (b) seaventie yeares, they bide in Chaldea.
Then (c) against Babel, (d) Mede-Persy doth arise:
And conquering Chaldeahs drunken Roy,
(e) Cyrus sends back Iudeah home with joy.


(a) Ne|buchad. netzar, com|meth against Ierusae|lem, in Iehoia|kim, (or Eliakim) his 3. full yeares, (Dan. 1. 1. 2.) Then go to Ba|bel, Iehoiakim, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, Azariah, togither with others of the bloode Royall. Iudab King becomming an homager to Babylon is retur|ned home This was Nebuchadnezar his first year, Ierem. 25. 1. and a time of Glory to Babel, who now as a Queene sitteth aboue Aegypt, Assur and all Cuntries about. Three years Iehoiakim serveth Ba|bels King, but the next he revolted. Then Nebu|thadnezars Hoste, the second time commeth a|gainst Ierusalem. Iehoiaim is taken,  afterwards cast out vnburied as an Asse, because like an Asse he had cut in peeces IREMIAHS Prophecies. So he had from Aegypts King, his time of making him King, raigned 11. yeares.
20 Iehoiachin (called also Iechonias and Choniah; sonne to Iehoiakim is next King: being 8. years old at his Fathers Coronation (so vnderstand HE, 2. Chron 36. 9. compared with 2. Kings 24. 8.) He raig|ned three Moneths and tenne daies in Ierusalem.
Against him commeth Nebuchadnezars Hoste, (it being the 8. yeare of Babels Monarch) and car|rieth the lewde Boye and many more with him to Babilon. Nowe went Mordechai and Ezechiel into Babels bondage, but their spirit was not bounde. This was the second carrying foorth Cptiue vnto Chaldeahs Monarch.
21 Mattaniah, (called also Zedechiah) his Vn|kle, or Fathers brother properly; called his Sonne, because hee succeeds his Cosin, as a Sonne succee|deth the Father: called also his Brother, according to the vulgar speach of the Iewes, who call any of their blood, Brethren: this Tzdechias succeedeth at the appointment of Nebuchadnezar, and raig|neth 11. years. Then the fourth time commeth vp Nebuchadnezars Hoste against Ierusalem. They sack the Citie and Temple: burne and raze downe all: shed much blood: but Ierusalems Mourners (as Ieremie, Barcuk Abdemelech, the merciful Morian) were freed from the sword: and that Ezechiel had fore-seene, Chap. 9. Tzedechias flying, the Chalde|an Armie overtakes him. They bring him to Ri|lah, in the Land of Hamath, where Babels King condemned him slewe his Sonnes, and put o his eyes: bringing him blinde to Babell, and thus hee never sawe it.


(b) In these 70. yeares raigned, first Nebuchad|etzar: then Euil-merodach his Sonne, who set Ieho|achin out of Prison in the 37. yeare of his Capti|uitie,  exalted him aboue al the Kings that were a|bout his Monarchicall Throne in Babel. And here I shut vp the two Bookes of Kings, and the two Books of Chronicles: Ieremiahs hystoricall parte: as also his Thren, Elegies, or Lamentations, who were dolefullie sung of him after the third deportation.
Vnto Euil-merodach, succeeded Beshazzar his Sonne, called also the Sonne of Nebuchadnetzar, a tearme given commonly to successors, though far remote. This Beast making a great belcing Feast to his Nobles, IEHOVAH sendeth a palme of a hand, writing his destinie vpon the wall before his eyes. The drunkard yet trembled for feare,  shu|tered in every ioynt: and the rather, because none of his flattering Prophets could read it. Daniel be|ing sent for (for in his Grand-fathers daies, greate doubtes and difficulties had beene expounded by Daniel) he readeth the Canonicall writ, and telleth the King, that it signified, howe IEHOVAH had accompted his time, and weighed him in the Bal|lance, had founde him too light, and therefore an end was come to him and his Kingdome. The same Night, Cyrus of Persia, and Darius the Mede) having turned aside the streame of Babels Euphrates) doe rush into the Cittie, and so cause the drunken Bac|chus-frocs to drink of the Lords Cup. Heere were the 70. years finished: an end of the Chaldean Mo|narch, resembled by the golden Head, Dan. 2. 38. the indirect cause that Nebuchadnetzar reared vp the golden Image, as a memoriall of His being the First of that Head: Vnto which Image, the 3. young Nobles not bowing, they therefore were cast into the fiery fornace, but IEHOVAH delivered and exalted them. That pridecaused Nebuchadnetzar (the Great Tree, Dan. 4.) to bee hackt downe: and to be sent to liue as a Bedlem amongst Beastes, till he had learned to Rule better over men. Euil-me|rodach doing good vnto Iudahs People, it seemeth hee went therefore to his graue in peace. But Bel|shazzar being puft vp (as was his great Father) hee therefore finisheth the Golden head, and Winged Lyon, Dan. 7. 4. and Ezech. 17.



(c) Babels destruction prophecied of by Isai. 21. 2. where Elam (that is, the Persians, who sprong from Elam, Shems sonne, Genes. 10. 21.) and Media, (derived from Madai Iaphets sonne, Genes. 10. 2.) these two are commaunded to besiege Babel and smite it.


(d) The Medes and Persians (issued from good Iaphe and Shem) do as two sworne brethren, ioyne hand in hand for destroying Babel, the Captiver of Shem and Hebers People: The Mockers of Hebers Songes, haue nowe their Children dashed against the stones, Psal. 137. It is equall, that they who now mock spirituall Song, shall be let hereafter to sing a Black Sanctus.


(e) The Kings of the East, having sacked the Cittie, and put many of the Vncircumcised to the sword, Cyrus (being eger of warres abroad) consti|tuteth his Vnkle Darius King, and as Monarch of Pers: giving before his departure Commandement for building the Lordes house at Ierusalem. This I saiah foresawe (plainly vsing the Name of Cyrus, Chap. 45. 1) and soreprophecied of, long before Cy|rus was borne. The poore Iewes obtaining this so|daine delivery, they stoode, as it were, questioning with themselues: Are we deliuerd, or do we dreame of deliverance. Psal. 126. 1.
When the fulnes of time, concerning Iehouahs secret Decree is come, then Devil, Vncircumcised, and all shall further the Lords work: some of them for vainc glories sake; some because their Consci|ence is secretly convicted; some for one inister oc|casion, some for another. Onely let the Lords Isra|el in patience, meane time, possesse their soules, alwaies believing, that the Lord sits at the Helme, and therefore the ship steared aright towards the Hauen: howsoever by reason of crosse windes, the Lord sometimes for winning the Winde, doth run
the Barke awklie. Fresh water souldiers, think such Sea-crossing strange, and besides rule: but the better and experienced Pilot knoweth what he doth The greater Crosse, the greater Comfort in the ende. And there an end for that.




31. Staffe.
Cyrus (a) returnes them with full libertie,
To build Gods house: But Enemies arise,
That for a while, do stay That and the Citie.
Then Nehemi, vnto his People hies.
Then Temple and the Cities Walls were reard,
(b) Maugre the hearts of them, before they feard.


a) In Cy|rus his first year (for the 70. were finished) the King hauing caused his Peo|ple, to furnish them with ne|cessaries, they re|turne with sheaues in their bosom, that went forth by weeping Crosse.
And here beginneth EZRA.
In the First Returne Zerub-babel, (Contrary  Confusion) is the Peoples Captaine. Comming to Ierusalem, they lay the foundation, but from the 3. yeare of Cyrus his Commandement, it was hindred. After that falleth out Ahashuerosh his Decree, for Massacring Iewes, but Hester, through her Vnkle Mordechai his stirring vp, turned the Iudgement vpon Haman and his house (Reade here HESTERS storie) and Mordechai is exalted.
Darius Araxast, the third King of Persian Mo|narch, he, Ezra. 6. sensiblie feeling Iehouahs hand against his people, because the Iewes were stayed from the holy worke, He in his second yeare renu|eth Cyrus his Predecessors Commandement. Now beginneth Haggai to reprooue his People, for ha|uing so great minde to the building of their owne houses, in the meane time neglecting the Lordes House. Togither with him the Lord stirred vp Za|chariah for the worke. In the 6. yeare of Artaxast, or Artahshasht, the substantiall partes of the Tem|ple were finished. The next yeare after, Ezra and his holy Host make the Second Returne. In the 20. yeare of the King (Nehcm. 2. 1. And here must be|ginne Nehemiahs Story) Nehemiah Tirshatha, or Butler, commeth to Ierusalem, and reareth vp the Cities walles: and nowe were the Temples appur|tenances finished, which was 46. yeares from the Foundation laid, Iohn, 2. 20. and a Iubile of years, that is, seven seavens, or 49. yeares: whereof Ga|bel certified Daniel, Dan. 9. 25. But Daniel mour|neth for the hinderance, Chap. 10. which was in Cyrus 3 yeare.


(b) Assurs People, (Reade of them, in Hoshea last Israels King) they starting from Samaria, and the Cities thereabout, did all they could to hinder it: but it could not be stopped, beyond Gabriels sea|ven seavens of yeares. The Lordes prefixed time, shall stop the Devill and all his black band: What eedes Israel feare:





32. Staffe.
Vnder Mede Perse, for (a) Nehemiahs time,
Iudea liu'd. Then (b) Alexander Great,
Winnes Persian Crowne, and Raignes a little time.
(c) Foure Kingdomes do arise out of his Seate.
But (d) two of them aboue the other clyme,
And cruellie whip Iudah for the tyme.


(a) It se|meth, that as Nehe|miah might see the end of the Per|sian Mo|narch: so likewise should Ezra see their whole Monarch, head and foote. Nehem. 12. 22. 26. for Da|rius Persa, is the last King, which Canonicall writ recordeth. And the Iewish Hystoriographers doe wrie, that Iadduah, (Nehem. 12. 22.) and Sanballat, Nehem. 4 1. were in Alexander Magnus his time. Of Iadduah (Father of Onias) they write, that hee met Alexander in his Pontificalibz, before whome the King reverenced. Of Sanballa they write, that he presented Manasseh an Apostaticall Priest (that had married with him) to Alexander, who built for his vse a kind of Temple: To whome al such Priests resorted, as (for marrying with the Vncircumcised) were driven from the Temples Alter at Ierusalem. Manasses his Temple built; (as Ioseph Ben-Matthias recordeth) on Mount Garizin, an hil. against Sama|ria, higher than the residue. Well hath One there|fore concluded, that the Persian Monarch may not be streatched aboue 130. yeares, except wee will giue vnto Ezra an vncredible age.


(b) Alexander, the Brasen Bellie (Dan. 2. 39.) the Leopard, Dan. 7. 6. the Westerne Goate, Dan. 8. 5. A|lexander resembled in them Three, hee commeth skipping from Grecia, and pusheth the Ramme of Persia, Dan. 8. 6. destroyeth the Persian Beare, Dan. 8. 5. and succeedeth the Two silvered Armes of the Medes and Persians. Paras so cast downe, Iavan (for of him, Genes. 10. 2. the Grecians came) put on the Monarchs Diademe: Him Iaddua (Ierusalems high Priest) accompanied with the Cittizens in white, doth meete: for which Alexander graunted them great liberties. He raigned 6. yeares Monarch, and then in his prime of strength, having conquered the Easterne world, he suddenly dieth, and his house is quickly after rotten.


(c) Out of that Rotten Head, springeth 4 Hornes or Kingdomes, allotted to 4. Captaines. To Cassan|der, was allotted Macedonia: to Antigonus, Asia-Minor: Syria, to Seleucus Nicator: and Egypt to Pto|lemi Lagi. Dan. 8. 8. and Chap. 11. 4.


(d) The Kings of the North and South, so called Dan. 11. because their Kingdoms so stood coasted from Iudea, they roote out the other Two Corri|vals, and mary togither. Dan. 11. 6. These Two Pow|ers conioyned, are liuely resembled by the Images Two Iron Legges, Dan. 2. 33.
As all haue consented, that the first 3. mettles
of Golde, Silver, Brasse, did represent the Monar|ches
of Golden Chaldea, silverie Persi, brazen Gre|cia:
so vsuallie, they haue vnderstood the Iron Legs
to import the Romane Monarch. The Iewes ope|ning
the eare willingly to that, doe cast this bone
back to Christians. The Iron leggs are the Romane
Monarch: but the Romane Monarch is not yet a|bolished:
Therfore Christ is not yet come: because
Christ the Stone from aboue comming, shall at his
comming abolish the fourth Monarch, aswel as the
former Three, Dan. 2. 34. 45. Nay they go on Tri|umphing
thus: Oh foolish Christians, the Two Legs
must denote Two King domes, vnder whose feet we
must bee trampled, till Messiah come: and as your
selues graunt the Romish kingdome to bee One, so
we beleeue the Turkish kingdome to be the Other
Iron Legge.
Herevnto, over weakly, me thinks, there hath
bene returned this Answer. The Stone Christ hath
rushed vpon Rmes Monarch, in so much, as by that
power of Christ, it still diminisheth some and some,
and wil be abolished quite at his second comming.
The lewe calleth this an Abolishment in Conceipt,
not Reall: and for any thing I can smell, it is too-too
improper.
First, an improper sense, is vnnecessarie, where a
proper is at hand.
Secondly, betweene the Two Legges, and that
One Goverment of the Romanes, there is not pro|portion
or likenes. That, the Iewes well obserue,
though they evill applie them two. As by the Two
Armes were meant, not Oe, but Two Kingdomes,
namely, Madai and Paras, so by rule of likenes, Two
Kingdomes, but both One against Iudea, must here
be meant. That proportionablie holdeth, in giving
the two Legges vnto Aegypt and Syria: which two
Kingdomes, as two Leggs did spring out of the Bra|zen
Belly and Loynes, Iavan or Grecia.
Thirdly, the Stone was to fall on the Images
Toes. That IT did not, regarding the Romanes,
for It rather rushed on that Monarchs Heade, or
prime of Government over Iudea, but that it did,
on the Toes of Syri-Egypt: for Herod, Matthewe 2. 1.
of Anti-pater an Idumean, as hee was appointed
to governe by Romes Cesar, so was hee by Aegypts
Antoni and Cleopatra then in Syria (shee sprung of
Syri-Egypts seed: such commixture Daniel foretold
2. 43. and 11. 6) confirmed to that Regiment over
Iudea. The blessed Stone so tumbled on Gog-Ma|gogs
Toe. See the 1. Staffe of the newe Testament
following.
Fourthly, the vision was for confirmation of the
Iewes faith  patience, vntil Messiah came to case
them: and not so, for Tyme after Messiah: the like
falling out in all Daniels following visions.
Fiftly, we shal see, that this Image is: first, for the
Whole, then for the Partes, in the sequences expoun
ded. For the whole, That vision (Dan. 7.) of the 4.
Beasts is cleare. The three Beasts expounding the
three first Mettles: as for the fourth Beast (wherein
lyeth the doubt) it is set out by notable Periphrases,
but not said (as were the former) to bee like this or
that Beast: for being so changeable in goverment,
even nowe 12. raigning, even nowe 4. even nowe
two: al Terrible and Tramplers of Iudea vnder foot;
it cannot at any hand be properly affirmed of Rome
but wonderfull plainly and properly of that disor|dered
Iron kingdom that came out of Iavans bra|zen
bellie. And of this kingdome, doe the Iewish
Antiquitaries vnderstand it: teaching theewithall,
that Antiochus Epiphanes was that litle horne that
vttered great blasphemie. Let vs not hinder them
in comming forwards to Iesus Messiah.
For the Partes of the Images-vision: First, Daniel
hath a vision, Chap. 8. of a Ram and a Goate. This
overthrowing That: that is, Mede-Perse or Paras o|uerthrowne
by Alexander, the brazen Bellie and
Goate saltant. Secondly, in the eleventh Chapter,
Daniel is told by the Angel of each excellent par|ticular
that concerneth the plaine pointing out of
Mede-Perse, Grecia, and the braunched Hornes or
Governments issuing ont of Alexanders Monarch:
every latter vision more open than the former, and
a plaine expositor of the first




33. Staffe.
These (a) Two hight thus, Aegypt and Syria:
The Iron legges, whereof good Daniel writes:
From Syri rose The (b) Horne blaspheming ay
Which doste the Ievves, and holy worship spites.
But after (c) Seven|tie seavens of years, from Hy,
A (d) Sacred stone puts all these Kingdomes by.


a The two king|domes spring|ing out of Gre|ciaes Mo|narche: whereof sufficient lie is said in the an|notation vpon the former Staffe.


(b) Of Tenne Syria-stampers, vpstarts, an Anti|ochus, more base than any before him. Hee would needes be called Epiphanes that is, Famous: but ma|ny then called him Epimanes, that is, Furious: and Furious hee was against the pleasant Land Iudea. His blasphemies and abrogation of holy thinges, thou maiest see, Dan. 7. 8. c. and Chap. 8. 9. c. This Beast stayed not afflicting Aegypt, as Aegypt pinching at him: but Iudea being in the middle, it alwaies payed for their losses. The nerer they came to Christ, the greater was their Crosse. Of some his abhominable Actions, the Apocriphal Macha|bees maketh true mention. This Begger got on Horse-back ridde a mad gallop, till the Lord cast him downe to his dounghill beginning: Stinking in his death more fowlie than a dunghill. This blas|phemous Home was a special type or figure of the Newe Testaments Antichrist, or Man of Sinne, or Sonne of Perdition, whome God shall destroye by the breath of his mouth: committing his whole ty|rannous body to the devouring fire, Apoc. 19. 20. even as was not onely this speciall Horne, but his whole Kingdome, Dan. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. This blasphe|mous horne ariseth out of one of the four Beastes, that Daniel sawe come out of the Sea: as for the Newe Testaments sonne of Perdition, he springeth out of a Beast, that likewise came out of the Sea: a Beast containing all Daniels Beastes. Revel. 13. 1. 2. And it may be, that our Antichrist was not a Perfect Body, till he had eate vp the former Beast: as one Serpent eating another, doth thereby growe to a Monster. Pray for spirituall eyes, for this Beast hath brewed a spiritual wine, wherewithall all Na|tions haue bene made drunk, as drunk as Beggars, Wil-worshippers. He that will not with Iohn, Rev. 17. go into the Wildernes, and that in the Spirit, hee shall not knowe what the Mysterie meaneth: neither is he worthie. Whether Malachi propheci|ed in the end of the Persian Monarch, or what time vnder this Iron Goverment, I know not but plaine it is, that all things were out of order in his time: as also, that hee was the last Canonicall Prophet of the Olde Testament.


(c) Daniel was tolde by Gabriel, Dan 9 24. 25. 26. That 70. seavens of years were cut out for his People, for the Holy Citie, and for consuming wic|kednes, abolishing Sinne, for making reconciliati|on for iniquitie, to bring in Everlasting Righteous|nes, and to shewe Christ the Holie of Holies, c. Then doth Gabriel devide the number of 70. into three partes: into 7. Seauens, then into 62. Sevens, then into one Seauen.
Vnto the first, namely 7. times seaven yeares,
which is a Iubile of 49. yeares, hee appointeth the
building of Ierusalems walles, and the finishing of
the whole Temples worke, which Nebuchadnezar
had burnt and rased down. Isaiah, 44 28. The time
of which building, was A troublous Time, Daniel,
9. 25.
The 62. seavens, or 434. yeares, aster Ierusalems
building finished, reach vnto the last weeke or 7.
yeares, wherein Messiah shall be slaine.
The last week or 7. yeares, breede much questi|on.
Some translate Daniel thus: In the Midst of the
Weeke, hee shall cease oblation. Others translate it
thus: In the Halfe of the Week, he shal cease oblation.
The word importing Halfe, some vnderstand it of
the first halfe: Some of the latter halfe of the 7.
yeares. These that vnderstand it of the first halfe, do
teach, that Iesus his Baptisme begun the first year
of the Seauen, and that his death ended that halfe:
and so they leaue the other halfe of the Seven vn|to
the Newe Testaments Revelation, where it is
saide, that the two witnesses prophecied 3. yeares
and an halfe, Revel. 11. and the Woman is said to
be so long in the Wildernes, Revel. 12. Neither is
this (for many mysteries that seeme to arise from
hence) to bee reiected as a thing grossie absurde.
These that vnderstand it of the latter halfe, do ful|lie
finish Daniels latter 7. in Messiah his death: af|firming
that the Newe Testaments 42. Moneths:
Tyme, two Tymes, and halfe a time: 1260, daies,
or Three yeares and an halfe, teaching (I say) that
these times haue but allusion to Messiah his prea|ching
and suffering time, and not any mysticall o|ver-plus
of Gabriels latter Seaven.
Betweene these two, I am vnworthie to iudge, nei|ther
dare I yet peremptorilie say, That it is.
But if his Baptisme begunne not that Sabaoth
of yeares, or last Seaven: but if his Baptisme begin
the latter halfe, and in the middle of that Prophe|ticall
weeke, then (thogh his death gaue the death|blowe
to sacrifice corporeall) I must needes thinke
that not his death, but his Resurrection Brought in
Righteousnes everlasting.
Obiect. His death finished Gabriels 70. seavens,
therefore within the same time, was Righteousnes
euerlasting brought in, seeing This, aswell as the O|her,
is ioyned togither, Dan. 9. 24.
Answ. In the Verse 21. togither with Sacrifice
ceasing is ioyned The Temple and Cities desolation,
by the Romaine Armie abhominable, which fell out
40. yeares after Iesus his oblation: therefore, nei|ther
hindreth it, that Perpetuall Righveousnes bee
brought in by Messiah, after the death of Messiah.
Secondly, though He dyed for our Sinne, yet hee rose
againe for our Iustification: Rom. 4. 25. His Resurre|ction
brought in our Righteousnes perpetuall.
Thirdly, if his Baptismes solemnization by the
Father and the Spirit, answered not to the dedica|tion
of the materiall Temple, Ezra. 6. 15. 16. Then
did the Resurrection of his incorruptible Temple,
his body cast down by as malitious Persons as Ne|buchadnetzars
Host, resemble the rearing vp of the
vanishing Temple: for that materiall Temple, figu|red
the spirituall Temple Iesus, who is both the
Temple, the Sacrificer,  the Sacrifice: whose day
of Resurrection became our Sabaoth day, our sea|uenth
day of Rest by allusion to the Iewish Rest|day:
but is indeede the first day of the Weeke, and
the Lords-day, seeing the Newe Adam was to be|gin
where the Olde left off.


(d) The Stone cut from the Mountaine without Mans hand, Dan. 2. is both of Iewe and Gentile vnderstood of the Sauing Christ. That I say Sauing, it is because the Iewes vnderstand Christ or Messi|ah, Dan. 9. 26. not to be the saving Christ, but some Earthly King annoynted: for Christ and Messiah in English is Annoynted: And so vnderstanding that place of some Mere-man annoynted, that should soone after be slaine, they put away that Prophecy. So became Christ a stone of offence to them, how|soever to the beleever he is the precious Stone of the Corner. Further see hereof, Staffe 32. at (d.)
From Iudahs first transport to Babel, vnto Cy|rus
his Commaundement given to build the Citie
and Temple, are 70. yeares.
After the Commandement going forth to the
finishing of the Temple and Citties walles, are 49.
yeares. In precise accompt of whole yeares, from
the first transportation to Babel, vntil the reaedifica|tion
of the Citie, are 119. yeares: but according to
common accompt may wel be termed 120. years.
the time of Noahs preaching.
From the Temples full finishment, vntil Mes|siahs
former worke, making his death the perim|plishment
of Gabriels last 7. are 62. Sevens and one
Seven of years, that is in one summe, are fullie 441.
years. Now take away the full years of Iesus his age
namely, 33. years (and so long raigned David his Fi|gure
in Ierusalem) and from the Iewish materiall
Temple, the Figure reared, vnto Iesus thereby fi|gured,
will be about 408. yeares.
Back from Christ to the promise made to Abra|ham,
1844. yeares.
Back from Christ to the Flood, 2271. yeares.
The age of the World at Iesus his byrth, about
3928. yeares.


FINIS.








THE SECOND
PART OF THE
BIBLES BRIEF,
DRAWNE FIRST
into English Posy,
and then illustrated by
apte Annotations:
togither vvith some
other necessarie
Appendices. By HENOCH CLAPHAM.
PRINTED BY
Robert Walde-graue, Prin|ter
to the Kings Ma|iestie.
1596.
Cum Priuilegio Regio.




TO THE RIGHT
WORSHIPFVLL, AND
one of her Majesties chiefe
Commissioners in causes Ec|clesiasticall,
M. RICHARD
TOP-CLYF Esquier, all true
happines in Christ Iesus.
_HAuing (Right
vvoor shipfull)
receiued such a
Christian help
at your hand,
as lately I did,
in hauing you so ready, to stir vp
her Honourable Counsell (if not
also her Maiesties owne Person)
to commiserate my dungeon E|state:
whereby, as by an * Ebed|melech,Ier. 38.
I obtained (in all good

Conscience) happie deliverance.
I could not but therefore (openly
before all the World) broch from
my breist a Symbole of gratitude.
That I haue done, in this my bold
offer, of the Gospels breviarie,
in which blessed vvrit, is health
convaied to all that worship God
in Spirit and Truth: not in an I|dole
 Falshood. The worthines
of the subiect, may shadow my im|perfect
pen; and your Worships a|miable
construction, shal giue vi|tall
power to my over-saples sen|tences.
And so (beseeching the Al|sufficient,
to remember your dai|lie
zeale, for her Maiestie and the
Common-weales good) I end,
The Lordes vnwoorthie,
HENOCH CLAPHAM.



THE SECOND PART
of the Bibles Briefe.

1. Staffe.
IDVMEAN (a) Herod, King in Iudea,
What time he raignd, our Iaacobs (b) star appears:
(c) Iesus is borne, (d) Immanuel (e) Messiah,
(f) Shiloh (g) the Seede of Woman, in (h) full yeares.
A (i) Virgin brings him forth: even (k) Marie who
Betrothed was to Ioseph (l) all should knowe.


(a) Herod (the Son of Anti|pater) ha|uing cor|rupted Antony of Aegypt with Mo|ny (Flavii Iosephi, lib. 14. Antiquit Cap. 22.) was by Antony and his flaunting Cleopatra (cap. 23.) appointed to Rule as Tetrarch over Iudea. After that (cap. 26.) Herod comming to Rome, he there (having Antho|ny of the one hand, and Cesar Augustus on the o|ther hand) hee was solemnlie led into the Capitol, where their spirituall rites were performed, and the Senats decree proclaimed: and in this first daye of Herods Coronation, the New King was banqueted by Antonius. Much adoe had Herod after, or hee could be setled in Iudea: but adversaies taken a|way, and he shewing himselfe liberall in a great fa|mine, as also remitting the third part of Tribute,  building the mines of the Temple, (during which building, it is written, That it never rayned) togither with Remission of the 4. part of the Tribute, after that, he woone the Peoples heartes, and so occupi|ed the Tetrarchs place, or fourth part of Govern|ment. All this doeth Flavius Iosepus write, a man borne immediatlie vpon Herods end: and one that carefullie (as a Iewe zealous) drewe holy Antiqui|ties, and opposed to the Atheists of his time.


(b) So Balaam tearmed him, Nomb. 24. 17. what time Balaak sent for him to curse Iaacobs people. Zacharias the Priest (Iohn Baptist his Father) having an eye vnto Balaams Prophecie, he (Luke 1. 76. 77. 78. 79.) calleth his sonne Iohn, the Prepaer of the way before this Day-starre, who was to giue Light, both to Iewe and Gentile.


(c) It signifieth a Saviour, Mat. 1. 21. neither is there salvation to be had, in any other Name. Act. 4. 12.


(d) In English, God with vs. This Name Isaiah fore-tolde to vnbeleeving Ahaz, Isai. 7. 14. what time the Beast would not beleeue, that God would be with him against his adversaries: and this Name the Angel remembreth to good Ioseph, Ma. 1. 20. c. what time hee imagined, God had not beene with Marie, and therefore had resolved, secretly to divorce himselfe from her.


(e) In English, Annoynted. So is Christ. he was an|noynted to be the Churches King, Priest, and Pro|phet. To be called Christian, is to be called Annoyn|ted: the tearme therefore agreeth to none that are not Annoynted with the holy Spirite, as was Hee. This Iesus, received the Spirite beyond Measure, Iohn 3. 34. that so he might communicate of his a|boundance, to his believing Members. These that haue beene trulie engrassed into the Vine Christ, Iohn 15. do liue by the sap of his Spirite, and there|fore cannot but bring foorth good fruite, and that In due season. Psal. 1. 3. If a man be incorporated by Faith into this Annoynted-one, hee must (ey, he will) shewe foorth his faith by workes. Iam. 2. 18. Let vs therefore remember, why wee are baptized Christians, or Annoynted-ones.


(f) This Name, Iaacob, in his last Testament, v|seth to his Son Iudah, of whome Iesus was to come. Gen. 49. 10. In English, Sent. Hee was sent of the Father to giue sight and health, and Hee sent the Blind to Siloams poole for sight. Iohn 9. 7. This was the Sent-one, To whome the Diademe appertained, that before was overturned, overturned, overtur|ned. Ezek. 21 27. His Kingdome is spirituall, figu|red out vnder the former, and such is his Diademe and Scepter: but a kingdome euerlasting and vn|able to be shaken. Heb. 12. 28. Few Christians haue yet learned this.


(g) The Womans Seed, Gen. 3. 15. was to break the Serpents heade. Here the Father hath sent his Sonne to assume the seede, not of Angels, but of Abraham. Heb. 2. 16. Here is Abrams seede come, promised, Gen. 12. in whome all Nations should be blessed. The holy Ghost overshadowing Woman, she conceived this holy one. The Anabaptists must knowe, that if IEHOVAH in the beginning, Gen. 1 did with a Word make something of Nothing, and that Good: then much more easie it was, to make Something of Something and that good, though the first something were evil: for easier it is to draw a good Substance from an evil, than to draw a good substance out of Nothing. Though the Womans seed in it selfe, was as her selfe, polluted; yet the ho|ly Ghost, by his ineffable sanctifying power overco|vering her, and she conceiving by him, we matuell not, though the Babe conceived, were sin-les.
Secondly, hee must not passe through her, as winde through a Pype: but of absolute necessitie, take our Nature and flesh vnto him, if so we be sa|ued. It was our flesh that had sinned, and brought in Death everlasting for Sinne: If our flesh there|fore scape this death eternall, it must first by rule of Iustice, make satisfaction for sinne. This it did, He assuming our flesh, sanctifying our flesh, iustify|ing our fleshe, and by strong hand (Maugre hellish power) carrying our flesh into the highest heavens, seating it on the right hand of Glory. This hee had not done for vs, if so hee had assumed some quint|essence or newe found flesh, brought I knowe not from whence, taken either from no Creature, or else from some other Creature than Man.


(h) When the fulnes of time was expired, God sent his Sonne made of a Woman. Gal. 4. 4.


(i) That Isaiah foresawe, Cap. 7. 14.


(k) Though a Virgin, yet betrothed to Ioseph of Idahs Tribe: by vertue of which betrothment ab|solute, shee was true wife to Ioseph: For Absolute, (not Conditionall) betrothment of a lawful couple, is mariage before God: and the same betrothment made knowne to others by themselues, maketh it strict marriage towards Man. That was cause, that vnder the Law, the Man that lay with a betrothed Virgin, did dye the death, as having knowne ano|ther mans wife; but being vnbetrothed, he was not to haue any corporall punishment inflicted vpon him, (so he forced not the Virgin) Deut. 22. 23. 28. compare with Exod. 22. 16. That Marie and Ioseph stoode Married-mates appeareth, first by their li|uing togither, Luke 2. 16. 22. Secondly, by their own accompting themselues Father and Mother o Ie|sus, He by reason of the Marriage ordinance, She by Nature, Luke 2. 48. Thirdly, by the Peoples ac|compting Iesus, Iosephs sonne. Luke 3. 23. Fourthly, by Iesus his subiection to them both, as Father and Mother, Luke, 2. 51. Lastiy, by the holy Ghost his Testimonie, who rehearsing the Story; doth still cal them his Father and Mother. Mat. 1. 9. Luke 2. 41.


(l) Al should knowe this Contract of Ioseph with Marie, because it was foreprophecied, not only that a Virgin (which she was, though a wife, Mat. 1. 25.) should bring forth the blessed seed: but also, that he should spring out of Iudah, and out of Davids lyne. This Mathewe and Luke plainly record, but many will be ignorant. Mathewe recordeth his Genealo|gie from Salomon Davids first Sonne, vntill the de|portation to Babel for the 70. yeares Captivitie: then Mathewe crosseth over to Nathan (the other Sonne of Dauid) his progenie; because Salomons rase ended in Iehoiachin or Chonias carried to Ba|bel: who (after his deliverie by Euil-merodach) did declare Shealtiel or Salathiel (of Nathans house) his heyre: for himselfe died without seede; Ieremiah 22. 28. 29. 30. Iustly therefore is Castalio blamed before in the 29. Staffe, for finishing Salomon in Ahaziab. This draught by Mathewe is called the Legall de|scent, whereby Iesus was borne hevre lawfull to the Crowne. As for Luke, he descendeth not, but ascen|deth from Iesus (not to David by Salomon, but) by Nathan to David, and that vprightly by the Natu|rall Lyne (wherein was no breach through want of issue) and that is called, the Naturall Ascent. The diversitie of Names must not trouble thee, consid|dering thou findes that common in the old Testa|ment, especially at the beginning, in, and after Iu|dahs Captivitie. Nor yet at the tearming of Ne|phewes, Sonnes, or Brethren, whereof I haue spo|ken, Staffe 30. For thy easier conceiving of Mat|thewe and Luke take this Table, where I haue pla|ced both the Evangelists descending to Iesus.

DAVID

Mathewe thus descendeth in his Gospell, Chap. 1. The Legall descent for IOSEPH.
Salomon.
Rehoboam.
Abia.
Asa.
Iehosophat.
Ioram.
Ahaziah, See how hee was of Salomon, 29. Staffe of the Olde Testa|ment, in Iu|dahs (8) Ioash, Amaziah, not worthie Memorie.
Ozias.
Iotham.
Ahaz.
Ezechias.
Manasses.
Amn.
Iosias.
Iakim.
Here was Cho|niah pul|led off as a Signet, Ier. 22. 24. Iechnias seedles, adopteth 
Salathiel.
Pedaiah,
Zorobabel.


Lke thus ascendeth in his Gospel, Chap. 3. The Naturall descent for MARI.
Nathan.
Maaha
Mainan.
Melea.
Eliakim.
Ionan.
Ioseph.
Iuda.
Simeon.
Levi.
Matthat.
Iorim.
Eliezer.
Iose.
Er.
Elmodam
Cosam.
Addi.
Melchi.
Neri.

Zedechias o|mited; because Iechoniah did liue after him a King, being restored to ho|nour at Babel, See the first Staffe 30. at (b)


ZOROBABEL.

MATTHEVVE thus descendeth.Abiud.
Eliakim.
Azor.
Zadok.
Akim.
Eliud.
Eleazar.
Matthan.
Iacob.
Ioseph.

LYKE thus ascendeth. Rhesa.
Ioanna.
Iuda.
Ioseph.
Semei.
Mattathias.
Maath.
Nagge.
Esli.
Naum.
Amo.
Mattathias.
Ioseph.
Ianna.
Melchi.
Levi.
Matthat.
Eli.
Marie.

Nowe was Zo|robabel, (the Sons sonne of Salathi|el, 1. Chron. 3. 19.) made Iehovahs Signet. Haggai, 2 24.
Matthewe and Luke
both accompt from Zo|robabel,
as they did from
David: but Mathew for
observing Generations
by 14. omitteth divers,
contenting himself with
the chiefest. Mathewe,
hee regardeth the Ge|nealogie
of Ioseph, Iesus his Father by
Ordinance, not by Nature: and Luke
he draweth the Petygre of Marie, the
Reall mother of Iesus according to
the flesh: both of David, and so con|sequently
of Iudah.

Blessed IESVS, was every way Heyre vnto the
Crowne. The Sophies of Persia knew that, Mat. 2. 2.
Nathaniel confessed that, Iohn 1. 49. Pilate gaue
him absolute Title of Iudahs King, superscribed in
Hebrue, Greeke, and Latine: neither had he power
to qualifie That, though the Iewes wished him.
Iohn, 19. 19. 20. 21. 22. The People knew That, that
would haue made him King, Iohn 14. 16. neither
could the bloody wretches, alledge any one be|twixt
him and the Crowne, but Romes Cesar. Iohn,
19. 12. 15. Hee that knowes not, that Christ must
needes be of David, is more blinde than was Barti|mens,
Mark. 10. 47. Neither can any bee ignorant
of his being Dauids Son, except they will repugne
his owne testimonie (Mat. 17. 25. 26. 27.) where he
prooues himselfe free from tribute paying: as also
many moe Scriptures, that openly proclaime him
Davids Sonne, and so consequently, Heire Legall
and Naturall to Iudahs Crowne. But as the bles|sed
Word, Iohn 1. assumed our flesh, for the newe
creating our flesh, even to the end that wee might
become Spirituall, for the discerning of spirituall
things: so neither was his Kingdome and Scepter
to be of this world, carnall and outward, as was the
figure in David: but spirituall, inward and heaven|lie;
and thereof it commeth, that the Newe Testa|ments
Church-state is o ofen called, The King|dome
of heauen, Matth. 11. 1,  13. and Ierusalem
from aboue, Galat. 4. Revel. 21.
This doctrine (if it would be learned) the lear|ners
would not keepe Christ vnder Moses, nor his
newe body vnder olde Israel, as though the second
should in nothing excell the former. I must never
leaue vrging this point, till the skales fall from Sauls
eyes.





2. Staffe.
An (a) Angel doth preach this to (b) shepherds: who
Do leaue their flocks, and wend to (c) Bethlehem.
Looke howe the An|gel said, they finde it so.
Babe in a (d) Cratch, did there appeare to them.
With it, (e) Marie Ioseph. Shepherds then
Giue praise to God, and back returne agen.


(a) As an Angell from Hea|ven, did preach the con|ception of Iesus to Ioseph and Ma|rie, so an Angell from Heaven doeth preach his byrth heere to the Sheepherds. Accor|dingly the holy Ghost giveth the title of Angel, to the Newe Testaments Ministery, where he calleth them Angels, that is in English, Sent-ones, or Em|bassadours, or Messengers, sent by God to preach Iesus annoynted to his People. The woorthines of the Title, must feare men from running before the Lord bid: and the Lord never in mercie saith, Goe: but first he furnisheth them with holy giftes, fit for the Embassage. If any come vnto vs without their spirituall furniture, wee may boldly conclude, that God hath not sent them in Mercie, but in Iudge|ment: as though he should haue said vnto them, Go in a vengeance: and so indeede he bid Balaam goe to Balak.


(b) Christ was not published to lazie idle Nobles and Churles of the World; nor yet to the presump|teous Priest, or glavering Prophet, but to well ex|ercised shepherds feeding their flocks. As his king|dome was not world-like, so neither wee world-like men to be acquainted with that first.


(c) Bethleem was the natiue Towne of David, the figure, and of our David figured.


(d) Ioseph and Marie being vnable, as it semeth, to hyre a seemely place in the Inne, they were glad to vse a back-house for their lodging, and there was the King of Kings borne. As the place of his Nativitie was simple, so the bed-stead wherein he couched his sacred corpes, was but a Beasts cratch. Our Earthly vanishing Kinges would take this in dudgeon, and the meanest of vs are vsually more renowmed in our byrth: yet like rude Horses and Mules voide of vnderstanding, we are impatient.


(e) With the blessed Babe ISVS, they finde no greater concourse of People, than Ioseph his suppoed Father, and Marie his Reall mother ac|cording to the flesh: homely solemnizing of Rex Regum: but worldlie Bethlehem was not further from Christ, then when Christ was borne in their litle Towne. The neerer the Church, commonlie the further from God. And indeede, the Sunnes light nothing availeth a blind man in his blindnes. If God first giue eye-sight to the soul (that is, Light vnto the Mind) man may disceme spirituall things. Otherwise, King Herod, Master Priest,  Sir Scribe, shall discerne Christ, or the habitation of Christ, no more than a Mole.





3. Staffe.
(a) Twise twentie daies Ore past, the Babe is brought
Into the Temple: There good (b) Simeon
Did meet with him, who chief was in his thought.
So (c) Anna did behold good Maries Son.
That done, they home, and liue there quietly:
But (d) Marie pon|ders all right seriouslie.


(a) The Wife de|livered, was to be vn|cleane for a Sa|baoth of dayes, but the 8. daye (which was a fi|gure of our Lord his day, the day after the seaventh, and yet the first of our newe creations weeke) the Male-childe was to be circumcised. Thirtie three daies (besides the first 7.) she was to rest in vncleane estate (and thirtie three yeares after Christ his byrth, it was before we were purified from sinne) and then she was to be clean|sed by the Law, bringing vnto the Temple a Lamb, or a payre of young Pigeons or Turtles.


(b) Simeon having a Revelation, that hee should not see Death ere he had seeene the Messiah (Luke, 2.) hee therefore confidently awaiteth the corpo|reall sight of Iesus. Iesus at last he meeteth, in the Armes of his Mother within the Temple. Hee ta|keth him into his Armes, and therewithall before God, hee protesteth his willingnes to leaue corpo|reall life: prophecying therewithal, that Iesus shuld be the Gentiles Light, and the Iewes Glorie.


(c) Anna, of Asers Tribe, Luke, 2. 36. who had lived 7 yeares with an Husband, and had bene 84. yeares Widowesse, shee haunting continually the Temple, found Iesus there at the same time as did Simeon; whome she boldly confessed and profes|sed to all such as looked for Redemption in Ieru|salem.


(d) Marie, she layeth all these extraordinarie ac|cidents to her heart, and thereby gathereth more and more, that the miraculous fruite of her womb, was appointed to some great inaudible work.




4. Staffe.
After from (a) East, do (a)  Sophies make repaire:
They by (b) a starre, came to the house aright,
Who finde the Babe, and Marie (c) onely there:
To (d) Gentiles sure, an heavenly blessed sight.
(e) Myrrhe, Frankensence, and Gold they offer than,
And so depart, each one an happie man.


(aa) The Roma|nistes haue preched vnto the simple People, that these wisemen were 3. Kings of Colin. That they should be 3. the Scriptures teach not, much lesse 12. as some haue written: for the number is indefi|nite. That they should be Kings, is not very likelie; seeing they passing seldome, gaue themselues vnto Star-gazing. That they should be of Colin, is appa|rantly false: for the holy Ghost testifieth, Mat. 2. that they were Magies of the East, whereas Colin was west from Iudea. Persia was Easterne from the Holie Land, and that people were notable Astro|logers or Star-gazers, therefore onely probable to me, that these Magitians must bee Persians. At the word Magitian thou must not stumble, seing it was then a worde vsed in the good part, rather than in the ill: as also a long time after. These Mgoi, I haue called Sophoi, both titles importing Wise.


(b) These Star-gazers, haue their ouercurious speculation sanctified vnto them, for drawing them vnto Christ. Many by indirect means are brought vnto Iesus: not by reason of any promise of blessing promised by God vnto men following curious arts: but by vertue of God his antecedent Election, who therefore regardeth the constancie of his owne De|cree, not of mans Deseruing.


(c) The Sheepheards founde with the blessed Babe, Ioseph and Marie: but these Sophies finde with the Babe Iesus, onely Marie.
Quest. Where was Ioseph?
Answ. It may be, he was playing the Carpen|ter abrode for all their three livings, but sure it is, he was not idlely plodding the streetes, much lesse tipling in the Taverne with our idle swingers. Nei|ther is it vnlike, that Iesus himselfe till 30. yeares age, was much employed in that Carpentrie work, considering the holy Ghost testifieth of him, that He was subiect to his (supposed) Father and (Reall) Mother. Noah plaied the Carpenter, 120. yeares, building for the preservation of his Families bo|dies, and can wee think that Ioseph and IESVS the well nourtered youth, woulde neglect the bodie?
He that provideth not (in some honest Calling) for the sustentation of his Familie, is worse than an In+idel: Nay that which more is, Hee denyeth the Faith of Iesus, (1. Tim. 5. 8.) for the Christian Faith teacheth not a man to bee idle and negliegent, al|though indeede it command a man not to be Care|full about there things, Mat. 6. 25. c. Labour in thy Christian calling, but without Care: for labou|ring in a consecrated Calling, why shouldest thou be carefull, seeing Goldlines hath promise of bodily necessaries: neither will the Lord with-holde any thing that Goodis from these that Walk prightly, Psalm. 84. 11.


(d) The Iewes had first sight of Iesus: the Gen|tiles enioved the second sight: a plaine signe that the Gentiles (Iaphes house) should nowe step into Shems Tent: that the partition was to bee broken downe, and that Iesus would be Sheepherd to both sortes of sheepe.


(e) They having offered Gold vno the King of the world (preaching thereby, homage and fealtie vnto Dauids Lord, and yet Davids sonne) as also having offered Frankencense (in signe hee was the perfumer of our prayers) as also Myrrhe (fittest for his buiall, a signe that his death was our life) hap|pie men they depart.
Herod vnder pretence to woorship Iesus, think|ing to worrye Iesus, had commaunded the Magies to returne and relate vnto him where the Iewes King was borne: but God having otherwise admo|nished them, they preferre IEHOVAHS will be|fore Herods wish.





5. Staffe.
The Dragons (a) Horne, pursues to smite the Child:
But (b) God forewarne, and they to Aegypt flie.
(c) Herod once dead, they Three that stood exild
Returne, but go downe into Galilie.
(d)  At twelue yeares end, Iesus he doth dispute,
In Temples, Court, which caused mickle brute.


(a) The Dragon the De|uill (Rev. 12.) is in|troduced with his Hornes, for dos|sing (ey destroy+ing) this Man|childe Iesus. The first Horne that studied Iesus his destruction, was the Idumean Herod: and that he did, because he heard by the former Sophies, that there was a king borne vnto the Iewes.


(b) The Lord hauing a care of our Lord, as hee first warned the Magies not to returne to Herod, so hee forewarneth Ioseph and Marie of Herods hol|lowe heart, wherevpon they flie into Aegypt Into Aegypt went Abraam the Father of the Faithfull, by reason of a Famine: thither was Ioseph pushed by his Bretheren, to whome Father and Fathers house was glad to repaire for succour: and thither nowe went Maries Ioseph, and a greater than Io|seph. A Horne of Hel pusheth our Lord thither, and but Hornes of the Devill are all that bloodily pur|sue Iesus in his members. They gone into Aegypt, Herod slaughtereth all Male-children, vnder two yeares olde, hoping amongst them, the Vndefiled Man-childe should haue bene murdred. The Mas|sacre was so abhominable, as dead Rahel, the first Iosephs Mother, could not but, after a sort, lament the destruction of her Children. Of a certaine An|cient it is written, that Herod should slaughter his owne young Sons, lest of them, Iudah should haue had a King; wherevpon Augustus then should say, I had rather be one of Herods Hogges, than Sons: for his Hogges he fats, but his Sonnes he sleas.


(c) The Beast dead, Ioseph and Marie with Iesus are called by God out of Aegypt, even as Israel be|fore was called from thence by Moses IEHOVAHS mouth. But they hearing, that his Sonne Archelaus did succeede (like Cock, commonly like Chicken) they turned aside to Nazare in the partes of Ga|lie: wherevpon he tooke the name of Nazarite: and besides that, hee was to vs a more Pure and Powerfull Nazarite, than was Samson his figure.


(d) Ioseph and Marie (what time Iesus was aged 12. yeares) they doe come, as yearely they ever had, to keep the Passe-ouer at Ierusalem. The Feast finished, Ioseph Marie set homewards with their Kins-folks and acquaintance: but after a daies ior|ney, they missing their sonne Iesus, they returne with sorrowful hearts to Ierusalem: who after three daies, do find him amidst the Doctors in the Tem|ple, disputing. His Mother saying vnto him; Sonne, Why hast thou dealt thus with vs? Behold thy Father and I haue sought-thee with heavie hearts: to her he returned this answer: Howe is it that you sought me, knewe ye not that I must go about my Fathers busines? But they vnderstoode not the word that hee spoke vnto them. Then hee went downe with them, and came to Nazaret, and was subiect to them: and his Mother kept all these sayings in her heart. And Iesus increased in wisdome and stature (for indeed they two should growe togither) and in favour with God and men.




6. Staffe.
(a) Bout 30. yeares, he comes to Iordans side,
Whereas (b) Iohn Bap|tist doth baptize our Lord.
Iesus the Christ, then from that blessed tyde,
Gathers (c)  Disci|ples by his blessed word.
Twelue of them, he (d) Apostles nominates,
And (e) Seauentie moe, his will abrode relates.


(a) See Luke 3. 23.


(b) Iohn Baptist (the so of Zacha|riah the Priest, Luke, 1.) allyed by his Mothers side to blessed Marie, (for though the other Tribes might not marry one with another, for avoyding confusion of Lotted in|heritance: yet might Levi (who had no such inhe|itance, and therefore not like possibilitie of con|fusion) marrie with other Tribes. This Iohn begun to preach The Baptisme of Repentance for the remis|sion of Sinnes, in the 15. yeare of Tiberius, Romes Ce|sar, Ponus Pilate being then Governour in Iudea: but afterwards beheaded by Herod for reproving his vnlawfull marriage. This Iohn (having the Spirit of Elias) prepared the People vnto Iesus, by hewing squaring, and smothing their hearts, lest otherwise Iesus should haue smit the Earth with cursing.
Vnto this Iohn came Iesus to be baptised. Iohn refusing as being fitter to be baptised by Iesus: our Saviour tels him it must be so, for fulfilling of righ|teousnes. Iohn baptizeth him in Iordan (through which Iesus or Ioshua safely led Israel) at what time the holy Ghost manifested himselfe vnder the bo|dilie shape of a Doue, lighting vpon Iesus: togither withall, a voice passed from Heaven: saying, Thou art my beloued Sonne, in thee I am well pleased. Here was the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost, con|curring in this Baptismes solemnization. The Sonne presents himselfe for fulfilling Righteousnes. The Holy Ghost sheweth Iesus to bee simple and inno|cent as a Doue: the Father proclaimes him, first his Beloved Sonne: Secondly, In whome hee rested well pleased. Thus was the Dore-sacrament of the newe Testament graced by ELOHIM, that Three-one.
Quest. Why should Iesus be baptized with wa|ter, seeing he was sinles, and that Sacramentall wa|ter teacheth the baptized, first that sinne is put a|way by the blood of Iesus: secondly, that the bap|tized is to die to sinne, and to rise vnto a newe life.
Answ. Circumcision signified the like, yet was he circumcised, as he is here baptized. Yet I easilie graunt, nay, I do boldlie affirme, that hee was nei|ther circumcised nor baptized for the two forme ends: and yet of absolute necessitie, he was both to be circumcised and baptized,  that for this cause: As Circumcision and baptisme were inioyned man because of sinne (seales of sinnes forgiuenesse by blood-shed, even by the blood of the Lambe slaine from the beginning of the world) so, howe should them Sacraments of the Olde and Newe Testa|ment haue bene holy and liuely to the receivers, if so the holy Lambe and Lord of life had not in our nature so sanctified them? Hee for giving Life vnto both them, did therefore vndergoe both in his bo|die. Thereby, Circumcision was made Heauens-doore vnto the old Church Zion; and thereby was Baptisme made Heauens-entrye vnto the Newe Church, Ierusalem from aboue. So the Sacrament was not onely given, to Preach Life to the first A|dam: but also, To be made Life by the second Adam: even as was the whole Lawe, not only given to the olde Man but also to bee performed without blot by the newe Man, from Heaven heavenly. Despi|sers and neglecters of this Seale, haue yet no assu|rance of life in Iesus. Let them marke that.


(c) He gathers no Newe Communion, before himselfe had vndergone the New Communions Sa|crament: for Baptisme was the doore into the new Testaments Church.


(d) Having gathered Schollers (or Disciples) he calleth 12. of them Apostles, (or, Speciall Sent|ones) and alotteth them to preach before him, but not as yet to the Gentiles: The Names of the 12. were thus: Simon Peter, and Andrewe his brother: Iames and Iohn, who were Zebedeus Sonnes: then Philip and Bartholmewe: Thomas and Mathewe the Publicane: Iames, sonne of Alphus, and Lebbeus Thaddeus: Simon the Cananite, and Iudas Isario. These twelue Apostles, doe make answere to the twelue Patriarches of Israel.


(e) These 70. were sent forth with as large and like Commission as were the Apostles: Mark that. Secondly, these 70. answered to Moses seaventie, prophecying Auncients, Nombers, 11. 24. c.
Here is Wisedome, but who marks it?





7. Staffe.
Great (a) wonders, he did worke in every place:
But (b) Dragon still pursues him to the end.
He institutes, A (c) Supper full of (d) grace:
Which to his (e) Church, for ay he did commend.
That done, he wends to pray in (f) Oliuet
(g) Iscariot thithe his foes did fet.


(a) Hee conver|ted wa|ter into Wine, and who but Iesus can turne our bred and wa|ter of af|fliction into a continu|all Feast? He gaue sight to the borne blinde bodie: and who but he, can giue holy light to the borne blinde minde? He cured Leprosie, and many other corporeall disea|ses, incurable by naturall meanes: and who but he can cure our souls maladies, whose cure consisteth onely in metaphysicall (or supernaturall) meanes? To the dead and stinking dead, he gaue corporeall life: and who but he, can giue spirituall life to these that are dead, and stinking deade in their sinnes? Hee cast out devils possessing bodies: and who but Iesus canne cast out the Devils that possesse mens soules?


(b) ELOHIM, foretold Adam and Heuah, that there should bee enmitie betwixt the Serpent and Womans promised seede: as this IESVS was the Head of that holy seede, so the Deuill ceaseth not to stirre vp his Serpentine seede, to pursue this bles|sed Seede vnto the death: but all in vaine, vntill the time came, wherein he himselfe was minded to lay downe his bodie.


(c) The time of his oblation, being within one day, he calleth the 12. togither, and sitting downe on a lowe bed, for so the Iewes did eat having first preached vnto them the necessity of his departure, he first eateth with them the Paschall Lamb: then afterwards he institutes the Newe Testaments sup|per, consisting in Sacramentall Breade and Wine: having finished the old Supper, he institutes a new.
Qust. Was Iudas Iscariot present in both these Suppers?
Answ. In the first hee was. Neither might any soule-maime debar any Circumcised from the old Supper: nor yet any Soul-soare vnseene in the bap|tized, debarre from the newe Supper. Seene and knowne pollutions in the bodies of the Circumci|sed, would debar them the holy Congregation and Supper: so, only seene and knowne sin vnrepented, can debarre such the newe Testaments Assemblie and their holy Supper.
To the question therefore I answer thus: Many learned and worthie deep reverence, haue written, that Iudas was present: but yet I see somthing that keeps me from so thinking. But first let it be gran|ted, that Iudas was there a Communicant, what then? you wil (it may be) with others conclude, Then may wicked ones be admitted to the Lords Supper; I answer, it prooveth not, that Knowne wicked may bee admitted: for Iudas was not an open wicked one, but a secret wicked one, and therefore vnder God his Iudgment, that knowes the heart, and not vnder mans censure, who knowes not the heart.
Obiect. The man Christ knewe him for a Tray|tour, and yet would not debarre him.
First, the Man Christ knewe him not alreadie a Traytor, for as yet he had not betrayed Iesus: and Man must censure Actions, or things that bee Pa|tent, not Latent.
Secondly, Christ as he was man knewe not that hee had such a trayterly thought in his heart, no more then as he was the sonne of man hee knewe the latter day: for every meane wit knoweth, that Thoughtes of men, and personall Future Actions, were communicated vnto his Man-hoode by the God-head, or his divine nature. If Iudas then had beene present, hee was to Man there, considered as man, an hypocrite or vnseene Traytor: and there|fore nothing maketh, for admission of vnrepentant knowne wicked, to the Lords Table.
But as before I saide, I rather think he was not there, for this cause: Blessed Iohn in his 13. Chap. 30. Verse, saith: As soone as he (namely, IVDAS) had received the soppe, he went immediatly out. Now, the Soppe was no part of this Newe Supper, but ap|pertaining to the old Testaments Supper: if there|fore Iscariot went out from them, Immediatly vpon the receipt of the Soppe, (and so saith Iohn) then went he out to go vnto the high Priests, before the Institution of the Newe Supper: and this let the godlie hearted consider.


(d) As the Paschal Lambe, preached vnto them their deliverance in and out of Aegypt, the Land of Boundage, whereof I spoke in his place: so this Bread and wine, sacramentallie preacheth our de|liverance from the power of Sinne and Sathan, by the Body broken, and the Blood shed of IESVS vp|on the Crosse. And as the Sacramentall Lambe was called by IESVS, the Passe-over, Luke 22. 11. though it was but the Signe of the Angels passing-over Israels houses, so he calleth this Sacramentall Bread, and Wine his Body and bloode, though in deede but a Signe of his body and blood; the me|moriall of whose death, we therein are to celebrate vntill his last comming.
That Circumcision was called the Covenant, though but a signe of the Covenant: that the Pas|chal Lambe was called the Passe-over, though it was but a signe of the Passe over: that Baptisme is called our sanctification and cleansing, Ephes. 5. 26. though it be but a signe of our sanctification: that the Bread and wine in that Sacramentall Supper, are called the body and blood of Iesus, thogh they be but the Signes of his body and blood: it is, as to teach vs that they are signes, so that they are not naked or bare signes: but Signes exhibitiue, offering and giving to the faithfull Person, aswell the thing signified, as the outwarde signe and signifier. No marvell then, if they be Sacraments of Grace and divine favour.


(e) As al that entred the Church, entred by Bap|tisme: so all that once wee within the Church, be|ing able to discerne the Lords body were to be fed in this Supper:  that in remembrance that Christ Iesus dyed for them.


(f) Mount Olivet, had betweene it and Ierusa|lem, the Valley of Iehosophat. His ascending the Mount to pray, must teach vs to ascend in our spi|rits when wee praye: for Praier is a conversing with the God of Heaven, seatedaboue all our Earthlie thoughtes.


(g) Iscariot, vpon the receipt of the Soppe, going forth, he went to the high Priestes for betraying of Iesus. They let him haue a band of armed men, who with Lanterne light, go to seeke the Lord of Light: the natural light an istrument of betraying the su|pernaturall light of the Church. The greatest men, not alwaies the wisest men: nor yet the multitude alwaies walking in the waies of life, as nowe here.





8. Staffe.
They come with (a) Clubs, his word doth throw the~ down.
Before (b) high Priests, sweet lesus he is brought:
Before (c) Pilate, then chiefest in the Towne,
Where (d) rascall rout, His death and ending sought:
In fine, he was condemned to the (e) Tree,
Where twixt (f) two theeues, he (g) died right patiently.


(a) They come to take him with Clubs  glaues, that ne|ver vsed to resist with wea+pons. Thus nowe a daies they hale his mem|bers, as though they had to deale with swash-buck|lers, when alas, they haue learned and taught not to smite with the sword, lest they should in Iustice perish with the sword.


(b) Though there should by the Law, haue bene onely One High Priest at one time, yet now so cor|rupt they were, as there were two high Priests: the one having purchased his rome by Simonie, Symon Magus his oyntment.


(c) This Pilate, as Iosephus Ben-Matthias writeth, Lib. 2. de Bello IVD. Cap. 8. was sent from Rome to Ierusalem, by Tiberius Cesar: who on a night, get|teth convayd into Ierusalem, Cesars Images: by rea|son whereof, a great tumult within three daies, a|rose. For the Iewes held it vtterlie vnlawefull to place any such Image in the Citie To the Citizens other people without repaire to the house Cesarea, where Pilate lodged. They request that the Ima|ges might be had away. Hee denieth. They conti|nue vnmoueable 5. daies and so many nights. Af|ter, Pilate commaunding his Souldiers to prepare their swords for slaughtering them Iewes, the Iews willinglie hold downe their necks, as willing to lose life, ere they admitted them prophane Images. Pi|late wondring thereat, without more adoe, packe the Images out of the Citie. Flavius Iosephus, re|members this, but will not once remember Iesus and his People. Hee writing against Appion, the Mock-Iewe, doth say, that for envy: others in their antiquities woulde not remember the Iewes, and their glorious Acts: so of him (I may say) that such a Mock-Christ, disdaineth to remember Iesus and his most woorthie Actes, though liuing within and after Iesus his time. Yet farefall, Iosephus Ben-go|rion, for hee not onely remembreth IESVS for a Man: but afterwardes by Correction addeth: If it be lawfull to call him a Man: affirming withall, That his People put that IESVS to death, not vnderstan|ding the Prophets: as also, That his Disciples great|ly grewe and multiplied.
Before this Pilate was Iesus brought; Pilate in|deede (after examination) being much vnwilling to condemne IESVS: but loving the praise of men more than the praise that is of God, he finally con|demned him.


(d) The rascall rout, coveting rather that Bar|rabas the Murderer should haue life: yea, they cry|ed, out, Let his bloode be vpon vs and our Children. That his blood fell notablie vpon them, hath bene apparant notablie in this, That the Lord hath made them slaues to all Nations, and their Name odious to every People.



(e) The deth on the Crosse or Tree, was the most notable, infamous, and cursed maner of death was then. Necessary it was, that not onely he should dy the death, but most shamefull death: that so death and shame might bee consecrated to his suffering Members.


(f) Both these Theues blaspheming Iesus at first, Mat. 27. 44. soone after, one of them hath his heart and tongue converted, Luke 23 40. His vnfeigned repentance hee testified, first in reproving his fel|lowes continued blasphemie: Secondly, in acknow|ledging God his hand iust against them both, be|cause of former ill: Thirdly, by defending the cause of Iesus for Innocent: when neither his Mother, nor any of his Disciples durst speake.
That his Repentance was liuely, and sprong of Faith, appeareth first, by his believing that Iesus was the King of Heaven: Secondly, by the guift of holv praier, bursting then from his beleeving heart, in these words, Lord remember me, when thou comest in thy Kingdome: to whome Iesus replied. This daye shall thou be with me in Paradise. Mark that the se|cond Adam breakes open the doore into Paradise, from whence olde Adam caused vs to be barred.
Betwixt these two Theeues (the one a sheep, the other a Goat, a figure of the latter Iudgment) Iesus our brazen Serpent was lift vp. The murmuring Is|raelites being stinged in the Wildemes, there was (at the Lords commaund) a brazen Serpent set vp, on which, who so looked, they were cured. That fi|gured our Iesus, on whome, no person by the eye of faith can look, but loe, they are cured of Satan and sinnes sting: let the repentant Theefe witnes that who entred Paradise heavenly the sixt day, as Olde Adam the same daye (and like ynough the same houre) was driven out of the Earthly.
In Matthewe 10. we are willed to be as Serpents: that is, to bee like them in something, not in every thing. Though we be wise as Serpents, yet let vs be without sting, as was Iesus and the Serpent his fi|gure. Nay let vs labour to heal others that are stin|ged: and not sting and bite others, lest we be bitten and consumed of others.


(g) After many mocks, revilings (the adversaries giving him bitternes to drink) he gaue vp the ghost, saying: It is finished. And here was the perimplish|ment of Daniels halfe week of yeares: for now the Vaile of the Temple rent in two, so that the com|mon people might steppe out of the Temples Cour into the Holy-place, and be their owne Priests, in of|fering vppe a rent heart: for nowe Iesus (our high Priest) entred into the Most holy of the Heavens, there to make continuall intercession for vs.
At the renting of the Temples Vaile, the Iewes might haue learned, that then there was an end of Levies ministerie, the Priest according to Melchi|sedeks order, having made a newe and liuing way vnto the Father throgh the vaile of his flesh: a way for every man, that commeth vnto the Father by him: for not in the Name (or power) of any other than Iesus, is Salvation to bee accomplished: for through Iesus (even as wee are members knit vnto him) we are made, not onely Kings over Satan, sin, death; but also Priestes, for lifting vp pure handes, (without wrath and doubting) in all places where|soever. Much of the Epistle vnto the Hebrewes is spent in perswading this: neither yet knowe they Christ rightly, that knowe not this.





9. Staffe.
He dead, (a) they seale, the stone vpon his Tombe,
But (b) Third day, he ariseth powerfullie.
Good (c) Magdalen, early to graue doth come:
Anone, Iesus speaks to her cheerefullie.
(d) Ten times he did appeare in 40. daies,
Then calles the Twelue, and thus to them he saies.


(a) Ioseph of Ara|mathea, having of Pilate obtained Iesus his body, and Nicode|mus hauing brought one hun|dreth pound waight of Myrrhe and Aloes, they take the body, wrap it in lynnen with the odours, and burie him in a new Sepulcher within a Garden, neete to his suffering place. He so buried, the high Priests and Pharisies come to Pilate, who by common agreement ap|pointed certaine Souldiers to watch the Tombe vntill the third day, lest his Disciples should steale him away, and so it should be bruted that Iesus rose the Third day as he had promised. Therewithall they sealed the Cover-stone, as Darius sealed Daniel in the Lyons denne.


(b) The third day (which was the first day of the weeke, he rose from the deade. The 6. day of the weeke (Heathen-like called Fryday) hee departed this mortal life, and so entred into Paradise aboue, forefigured by Paradise belowe: even as Adam on the 6. day, through sinne begunne this mortall life, and therewithall was expulsed the Lowe Paradise, the first figure of Heavens blisse. The 7. daye, (Pa|gan-wise caled Satur-day) the first Adam rested out of Paradise, but our second Adam rested in Para|dise: for as his spirit rested in his Fathers handes, so his body in the Earth did feele no corruption. Act. 2. 31. This thwarts our disputers about Descension into Hell.
Having so finished Moses week, Iesus ariseth on the next day after the 7. which day, as hereto fore in some respect I called the 8. daye: so, in simple proprietie, it is the First day of the week, prophane|ly called Sun-day. As our Lord rose this daye, so (Revel. 1.) it is called therefore the Lords day. As Iesus rose from the power of death, Moses his Law having done what it could, so (like a Samson of Sam|sons) hee caries that Cities gates away on his shoul|ders, and vp he mounteth for our Iustification. No marvell then, if his Rising-day be our Rest-day, and that day we celebrate in meditating of our second Creation and Resurrection, even as the first Sabaoth was appointed to bee spent (had Adam stoode) in meditating the first Creation: and Adam falling, then appointed to further meditation: as first of Creation; secondly of the Fall; thirdly, of Restaura|tion in the promised Seede.
Moses from the beginning of Creation, to the end of Deuteronomte, and then from Ioshuah to the end of the Old Testament, hee and all the Canonicall writers vse to entitle the daies onely thus: the First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fift, Sixt, Seauenth Daye. Throughout the Newe Testament the daies haue no other names: but wee will not be so precise, as to speak like Moses, to speak like Christ, to speak as the wordes of God. Nay, if a man so tearme the daies, he shall be called Puritane, Heretike. Howe will our Im-puritanes be pleased? if so we cal them, Sun-day, Moone-day, c. Hearken to Venerable Be|de: His nomina a Planetis Gentilitas indidit, c. To these 7. daies, Gentilisme did attribute the Pla|nets names, beleeving that they had their Spirit, of the Sunne the body, of the Moone: the blood, of Mars: wit and tongue of Mercuri: of Ioue, tempe|tance: of Venus, lust: of Saturne, slownes.
Let men nowe, either tip their tongue with the holy Ghosts tearmes, or at least not bee offended with such, as disdaine to fashion themselues to the Gentiles.


(c) As Marie had much forgiven, so shee-loved much. Her loue partly appeared, in this her earlie repaire to the Sepulcher. Before her comming, an Angel from Heaven had rowled the sealed stone a|side, Iesus was risen, and the hyred watchmen were gone to the Rulers; who bribed the Soldiers, to the end they should say, that Iesus his Disciples had in the night stole away the body. Shee comming to the Sepulcher (as did Salome and another Marie) the Angel informes them of his Resurrection, com|manding them to returne, and tell the same to Pe|ter and the other disciples. They departed, Iesus first appeares to Marie Magdalene, (Marke, 16. 9. Ioh. 20. 14. c.) with whome he familiarly talketh. A shame to men, that women should loue Iesus more earnestly.
Secondly, he appeared also to the other Marie, and to Salome, called also Ioanna, Luke, 10. as they were going to tel the disciples of the Angels words, Mat. 28. 9. 10.
Thirdly, hee appeared to Peter or Cephas, 1. Cor. 15. 5. That this must be on the same day, may ap|peare by the Angels command before. And that it is not like to fall out, betwixt the two next appea|rances, the length of time here, and the shortnes of time there, makes it most probable.
Fourthly, he appeared to Cleopas, and the other Disciple, as they were going to Emmaus, 60. Fur|longs from Ierusalem, Luke 24. 13. c.
Fiftly, hee appeared to the Eleven (the greater number bearing name of the whole) at night being assembled to holy exercise, Luke 24. who brething on them, said: Recciue the holy Ghost: Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are remitted vnto them: and whose sins soeuer yee retaine, they are retained. At this time, Thomas Didymus was wanting. No blessing got by absence from holy Assemblie. Thus our Lord spent the whol day in Apparitions and Doctrine. No mar|uell then, if the eleven gathered togither the eight day after, or next Lords day.
Sixtly, hee appeared the 8. day after, vnto the Eleuen. Didimus was then present, and therfore he schooleth him. And this was the second time of his appearance vnto the Apostles convened.
Seventhly, he was seene of more than 500. bre|thren at once, 1. Cor. 15. 6.
Eightly, he was seene of Iames alone. 1. Cor. 15. 7.
Ninthly, hee was seene of divers his Apostles at the Sea of Tyberias, Iohn. 21. 1. c. and this appea|rance, Verse 14. is called the third appearance: that is, the thirde time of his appearing to his Apostes convened. At this time IESVS vrged Peter vnto a three-folde Confession, answering to his three-sold deniall.
Tenthly hee appeared vnto his Disciples, what time he led them into Bethani where hee sinallie blessed them to the well executing their Commis|sion. Their Commission was this. Secing all power is given vnto me in Heaven and Earth, Go therefore  teach al Nations, Baptizing them into the Name of the Father and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost. To whome God hath saide, Go forth, teach, convert, gather people into One, To them necessarily he much more saith, Baptize: for Paul comparing This with the Former, he in that respect affirmeth, that he was not sent to baptize; meaning that Baptizing was no charge in comparison of the former. Deeply simple are many in our daies, that make baptizing the greater.




10. Staffe.
Stay in (a) Ieru|salem, till from aboue
You be bapti|zed with the holy spirite:
A (b) clowde then so|dainly did him remoue,
And vp convay him from their carnall sight.
They straight vnto Salem convaid them then,
Where they abode, with other faithfull men.


(a) As the Apo|stles wer appoin|ted, to preach to, and baptize of al Na|tions, so it was absolute|ly neces|sary that they should be furnished (as with other graces, so) with habili|tie to speak and vnderstand the tongues of all Na|tions. For this cause they were to stay at Ierusalem, til they had received power from aboue. Men may haue a generall calling to some work, and yet (by reason of particular indigencie or lack) be vnfit (for some time) to set vpon some part of that work. This notably overthwarteth rash heades, who by vertue of their generall calling, will at any time aggresse any particular.


(b) His 40. dayes being finished, every day, an|swering to a yeare of Moses in the Wildernes, hee was taken vp in a clowde to the highest Heavens: where hee sitteth at the right hand of Maiestie, till his father haue made all his Foes his foot-stoole.
So endeth the 4. Evangelists, Matthewe, Marke, Luke and Iohn.
Though Mathewe and Iohn were Apostles, yet are they also called Evangelists: because (aswell as the other two they penned the History of IESVS, which is not the whole Evangell, but as the Head and Heart of the Evangel. Evangel (a greek word, and in that Tongue, the holy Ghost penned the Newe Testament) it is in English, Glad Tydings. This Glad Message of Salvation, we cal also in Eng|lish, Gospel, drawne from the Saxons worde, God|spel. Magitians haue their Spel, which on nights they set for preserving their moueables, (that may be called, Devil-spel) but this Spel of IESVS, is of such vertue, as it being truly apprehend by faith, it causeth moueables and vnmoueables, Heauen and Earth, yea, All to be ours. This falleth not out by wearing the written Gospell about the neck, as do Romish Idolatrers, but (as I haue said) by beleving it, and resting thereon, as on the Corner-stone of our spirituall building. If Magitians by their Cre|dulitie, or light beliefe, haue Satan to worke with their spell, howe much more shall IEHOVAH work with a Solide Substanall Faith?





Novve follovveth the Booke of the
Apostles Actes.
11. Staffe.
In (a) Iudas roome, they choosed (b) Matthias:
And at the Feast of Pentecost, againe
The Church in one that time (c) collected was,
What time from heaven, God did his spirit rayne
In (d) fiery tongues: so that the 12. from thence,
In divers tongues their mening might comme~ce.


(a) Iudas hauing betraid his Ma|ster (as afore) he watched what would become of Iesus. When he sawe that Ie|sus was condem|ned and must die, then the wretch yrking at his for|mer fact, came and brought his 30. peeces of Silver to the Rulers, and having cast it downe, hee went and hanged himselfe. The circumstances cause me to think, that when he solde his Master, hee hoped that Iesus wold haue convaied himselfe from them (as sometimes hee did from the midst of his Foes) and so by that meanes, he should haue had the mo|ney, Iesus no harme, and the Rulers haue bin moc|ked. Thus Iudas as a Iugler, plaied at Fast Loose, till he had fastned his Master to the Crosse, and his owne neck to the Halter. That hee should sinne a|gainst Christ of meere mallice, and so commit the grand sinne against the holy Ghost. I see not.


(b) The Apostles setting foorth Barsabas and Mitthia, (two that had conversed with Christ from the time of Iohns Baptisme, vnto the Ascention of Iesus) they thus praied: Thou Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men, shew whether of these two thou hast chosen, that hee may take the roome of this Mi|nistration and Apostle-ship, from which Iudas hah gone astray, to go to his owne place. Praier thus fini|shed, they giue forth Lottes, and the office-Lot fell on Matthias: he therefore from thence-forth was by common consent counted with the Eleven A|postles.
Quest. Is it at all handes vnlawfull nowe to vse the Lotte?
Answ. No, the Lot remaineth in holy vse for a|voiding contention, Prov 18. 18. As it was ordai|ned to prevent and take away strife: so, so long as Contention resteth in the World, so long the Lot standeth in vse. Contention either ariseth in Civill or Ecclesiasticall causes. If Civill things cannot be agreed vpon otherwise, than the Lot (euen as an oath) is to put an end to that busines. In an Eccle|siasticall cause, the like occasion calleth for the like vse of sacred Lot as here.
Obiect. The Lot heere was in steede of Iesus his voice from heaven, because man might not choose an Apostle: therefore, where man may make the choise, we are not to trouble God with the Lot.
Reply. I grant both Antecedent and consequent. But there may be (and I haue seene) divers persons presented by the Church to some office Ecclesia|sticall all woorthie men, yet not all presented ne|cessarie then for office to that Church. Againe, two may be presented fit men for Pastors; a great part of the Church rather affects This, another greate part, affects rather That, what in this case is fittest to be done? Some wil say, incline to the greater voice: but I answer (and experience hath found it) that is not safest: Secondly, I see no such warraut for that, as is nowe here for vsing sacred Lotte. The Lot be|ing a divine ordinance, it hath a promise of good ef|fect: namely, of continuing and begetting peace: for every man then must needs say, The Lord hath thus disposed. Prov. 16. 33.
Prophaners of Lottes, finde a contrary effect: namely, a kindling of Contenion and furie, not be|fore begunne. Let Dicers and such vaine people marke that.


(c) Awayting the extraordinarie comming of the holy Ghost.


(d) First, for preparing of reverence, a heavenlie winde filleth the whole house where they had con|vened: then come tongues of fire and sitteth vpon them, wherewithall they were al filled with the ho|ly Ghost, speaking other languages, as the spirite ministred vtterance. Tongues are given, First, for the pulling downe of spirituall Babel: Secondly, for building vp the mysticall Ierusalem. Hee that oc|cupieth his tongue in furthering the false Church, and hindering the True, had better haue no tongue in his heade: such a tongue is set on fire from Hell, not from Heaven.
Nowe were Iewes from all Cuntries come vnto Ierusalem, where Melchi-sedeck had Raigned. No doubt, they had kept a true accompt of Gabriel 70 sevens of yeares, and therefore at this time might the rather hearken what newes of Messia at Zion, from whence the Lawe was to goe. These Iewes strangers, hearing the Apostles speaking the tongs of such cuntries as where they had bene dispersed, some of them stood amazed there at, others moc|ked.





12. Staffe.
In (a) Salem they drew faithfull into (a) One:
(b) Steuen then was caught, and stoned vnto death.
Young (c) Saul conver|ted was to Paul anone:
Who thence inspi|red was with holy (d) breath.
To (e) Iaphets People he was destinate,
The God of Shem his Gospell to relate.


(aa) A true visi|ble and christian Church was first planted in Mel|chi-se|deks Sa|lem, and from Sa|lem and Zion, was the Law to goe forth vnto the Gentiles. Salem, is in English, Peace, Hebr. 7. 2. As the figure of the Newe Testaments Church was called Peace, so it was, because all true peace is within the true visible Church of Ie|sus: Peace dwelleth in her Pallaces. Nether may con|tention be suffred within this Church: for the Church of God hath no such Custome. Neither may Confu|sion stand in this Church; For God is not of Confu|sion, but of Peace. These spirituall stones are all first hewen and squared (whereof I spake in his figure) and so are to convene or gather into One.
The visible Church then I define to be, A com|panie of People athered out of the World) or from amongst worldlings) by the Ministerie of the word, vnto the obedience of Christ their Head. They being first one with worldlings, God stirreth vp Prophets, (whereof in the next Staffe) who by the power of the worde, as by an hammer, breaketh their rude hearts (for any thing Man fore-knowes) wherevpon they willingly adde themselues to the Faithfull, ga|thering, as Eagles, togither for feeding on Iesus crucified. These so gathered, they are to do al their things in Loue, exhorting one another, ministring one to another things necessarie, no one eating the bread of Idlenes; but so labouring, as they may not onely sustaine themselues, but also be able to, mini|ster vnto others.
Looke how the Spirit excelleth the Letter, look howe Christ his Scepter, excelleth Iudahs Scepte Look how farre the Thing figured excelleth his Fi|gure: looke howe more perfect the Substance is than the Shadow; by so much doth the Newe Te|staments Church, exceed that olde Church of Zion. This not observed, it causeth such as haue not scene a true established Church to confound the Faces, Beautie, Persons, Order, of them two: as though Christ wer not more excellent than Moses in these things. Moses is a covering to such.


(b) Steuen, (a glorious Deacon of Ierusalems Church) being taken of the Adversaries, he was by the frantick Bedlems stoned to death. Herevpon, the poor Church was scattered, the disciples flying here and there. Some of the Bretheren (amongst whome was Philip, called before to be a Deacon) do come vnto Samaria, and there convert  bap|tise many. The Apostles, who yet were at Ierusa|lem) heaing that Samaria had received the gospel, they send vnto them Peter and Iohn.


(c) The yonker Saul, consented to the death of Steuen, and much blood abrode he shed. But going downe vnto Damascus, there to torment the Chri|stians, IESVS from Heaven cryed, Saul, Saul, why doest thou persecute me? There withall Sir Pursevant, and the grand Commissioner was smitten downe blind. The Lord enformes of his will. To Damas s he was led: vnto whome, Ananias by Gods Com|mandement came, gaue him his sight, and so was Paul baptized a newe man.


(d) Before he breathed out threatnings against the Church, nowe hee breathed sweet promises in the Church Before he was a zealous Pharise, but now a zealous Christian.
Quest. What was a Pharisie?
Answ. The Pharisie was a passing precise Iew, of what Tribe soever. The Saxons interpret Pha|risie, Sundorhalgan, that is, One that severs himselfe for Holinesse, and indeede such they were.
Besides this strict Mosaicall sect, the Scriptures remember another sect called Saduces. These held there was no Angell, Spirit, Resurrection.
A third sect, the Iewish writers remember, cal|led Esseni, whereof were two sortes. The one sort, never married: the second sort did, but by their spa|ring fellowship carnall, they testified thereby, that they married onely for preserving of chast mindes. Both these sortes of Essni, notwithstanding loved each other, wheresoever they were scattered in Townes and Citties, they ever prepared to enter|taine to harbour any of their sect. Had the one ne|uer seen the other, yet the strange brother was no|thing lesse bolde to enter the house. Reioycinglie they would suffer any death at the handes of the Romanes, as it were therein triumphing over the Vncircumcised. In a worde, of all the Iewes then, these were most honest sober, religious, charitable.


(e) Noah plainly prophecied, that Iaphe (that is, the Gentiles come of Iaphe) should at last dwel in Shems Tent, that is, become Inhabitants of Sa|lem from aboue, (that is, of the Newe Testaments Church) and so it fell out: yea, what time the Pro|digall young son came into the holy Tent, the elder brother (namely, the Iewe generallie) disdained to come in: as neither willing to come in himselfe, nor yet contented that his long wandring brother shuld feede on Iesus. To these Gentiles was Paul chieflie appointed Apostle. If Rome wold haue a Vicar for Christ, me thinks they do wrong (they being of the Gentiles) to giue the Vicarship from Paul to Peter.




13. Staffe.
With Paul, was joy|ned (a) Barnabas by (a) Voice,
(As former twelue, so) They do Churches plant.
Elders and Dea|cons (after Churches (c) Choise)
They do (c) Ordaine, as every one will graunt,
Each keeps his roome, and (d) watches in his place:
The Apostles so commend them to Gods grace


(aa) Paul (after his generall alotment to the Apostle|ship) stai|ed in An|iochia, (Act. 13) where the Dis|ciples first were entitled Christians or Annointed Ones. In that Church (amongst other Prophets) was Barnabas. The holy Spirite bid the Church set him and Paul apart for the worke. Af|ter Fasting and Prayer they did so.


(b) In planting of Churches, they had specially regard to the establishing Ministers in and to eve|ry Church for the government and service of the same. The Church-officers were of two sorts: First, Elders or Governours; the second, Deacons or Servi|ours. To this all accord.
But the Question nowe is: Were there more sotes of Elders than one? moe sortes of Deacons than one? Secondly, wherein were these Elders, and these Deacons exercised.
For the Deacons, all almost easilie graunt, that there were two sorts of Deacons, or Church-Servi|ours: the first of men, Acts. 6. 3. c. 1. Timoth. 3. 8. the second of women, 1 Timoh. 5. 9. c. Rom. 16. 1. That the first had the charge of gathering the be|nevolence of the Saintes (specially every first day of the weeke, 1 Cor. 16. 1) as also, that they especially had the looking to the Loue-Feasts, Act. 6. Iude. 12. almost all haue graunted. That the second atten|ded the sicke and impotent, who can denie? Cor|rupt ages and Antiquities could not wipe that out of mens writings.
For the Elders, there is all the question. The Lord-Bishops partie, chieflie pleadeth for Elders onely exercised in Doctrine and Exhortation, (then they forget the dumbe Ministerie) and yet, (which sufficeth for my Argument) the most of that side, who haue bene learned, haue easily graunted, that in the Primitiue or Apostolike Churches, there were, First, Teaching Elders: Secondly, Elders assi|sting the former in Government: but now (say they) such governing Elders are not necessary, conside|ring we haue in their roomes, Civill Magistrates.
Hereabouts, many haue written great Volums, and multitudes knowe, that I haue written not a litle, let it then here suffice, that the Patterne Chur|ches had In them and To them, two sortes of El|ders or Over-seers: the former sort was speciallie (thogh not only) exercised in Doctrine and Exhor|ation, Rom 7. 8. called Pastors and Doctors, Ephes. 4 11. The second sort, speciallie (though not onely) exercised in Government, Rom. 12. 8. 1. Timoth. 5. 17. Both these sortes Paul speaketh to. Act. 20. except one will thinke that Ephesus Church had many Pa|stors in it. Our Saviour his letters to Asia Minor Churches (Revel. 2. and 3.) saying ever to the An|gel of the Church, and never to the Angels, seemeth to cut that off: but speciallie, a particular Church being called a Flock, it properly cannot admit moe than One Shepherd, and so in English is Pastor. This second sort of Elders, is (togither with the first sort) necessarilie vnderstoode vnder the tearme Bishop. 1. Tim. 3. 1. c. the Greeke word in plaine English, (as no Scholler can denie) being Overseer, for both the one and the other Oversee, Heb. 13. 17.
Obiect. But every such Bishop or Overseer, hath re|quired in him that he be Apt to Teach.
Answ. I haue pondered what every side hath writ, (specially, I laide every such thing before my heart, during my last imprisonment, when I stil loo|ked but for hastie death, and I then resolved to dye in that which is my present resolution. I dare not say, that these Governing Elders the Apostles plan|ted, were vnapt to teach. Ieremiah (31.) and Heb. 8 11. doeth so plainly teach, that Great and litle in the Newe Testaments Church, shall so abound with knowledge, as I dare not say, that the Governing Elders should be vnapt to teach, considering, they are Heads in the Church, and must be able to iudg betwixt Plea and plea, cause and cause: which nei|ther they can do, except they be able to teach the truth in such cases. That they ought to bee apt to each, I beleue: but that there is (of absolute neces|sity) required in them so large guifts for knowledge and vtterance, as in the Pastor, I dare not say.



(cc) The Election belongeth to the Church, or assemblie of Faithfull gathered into one: This Ele|ction, the great Apostles of Iesus, durst not assume to themselues, so much as for the smaller Office, Act. 6. 3. 5. The Ordination (by imposition of hands sacramentall) the Church left vnto the Apostles then present, to whome for that succeedeth Elders, or the chiefe of the Church.


(d) This watching is not only the dutie of such, as are called to speciall place of Over sight, but also, a duie committed to every member, of that mysti|call bodie, Heb. 3 12. 13. This watching is, in cast|ing (not a curious eve, but) an eye of loue, (as first to our owne waies, so after) to the footesteps of our fellowe members: that if there be any slip or hal|ting, wee may help that member, in making more right steps. And this is done, by brotherly procee|ding, according to our Housholders Rule. Mtth. 18 15. 16. 17.
The Rule is this, if the fact be private, admonish that fellow member privatlie as thou maist winne him, not loose him: If he heare thee, that is, If ee repent, Luke 17. 3. there is an end. If he repent not, thou art to take One or Two with thee (no delight should be in publishing a brothers sinne, no, not within the Church) these are to witnesse thy maner of dealing with him, as also his carriage towardes thee. If hee nowe repent, an end: if not, thou must bring it before the Church, not publish it in Gath, or amongst the Vncircumcised, I meane, to these that are not of the Church, for that is not only the way to destroy the credte of a brother, but also to make vile the holy profession: If hee heare not the Church, or mysticall body, whereof hee is a mem|ber, and whereof Christ is Heade, accompt him as an Heathen: that is, barre him the spirituall Tem|ple, and accompt of him, as of a Publicane, that is, do not eate or drink with him, as the Iewes would
not with Publicanes.
This course of proceeding (even to the very ca|sting
out) is onely to this end, to winne the straying
member, and to bring home the wandring sheep.
Quest. If the Sinner denye the private sinne to
mee, or if not to mee dealing alone; vet hee doeth
before my witnesses deny his sinne, what am I now
to do? must I there stay, lest I trouble the Church
with that wherof I haue no witnes, or must I go on.
Answ. If the sinne be pregnant and plaine, (as
Theft, Adultery, Muther, c.) whereof he cannot
possiblie be forgetful, nor thou mistaken, thou must
go on by the rule without stop, till he stop his sinne.
The denyall of the sinne, maketh the man so much
more monstrous, and vnto thee he should remaine
deepe poysoning Leaven: to others, an Hypocrite,
but to thee an open wicked one.
Obiect. But if (I proceeding) he shoud likewise
confidently deny the sinne before the Church, and
the sinne should rest vnconvicted, then I should be
censured for a slaunderer.
Answ. If the danger of such issue, should hinder
thee from proceeding, then likewise the feare of
such issue, should ever keepe thee from admonish|ing
any One, so much as in priuate: for thou admo|nishing
privatlie, he might likewise impudently de|ny
it: or hee might reply thus, Though I haue done
this sinne, yet I will deny it to all men: and except
thou wilt ask me forgiuenes for thus reproouing me,
I will publish abrode that thou hast falsly accused me
of Sinne: then thou (vnable to proue it by witnes) shall
be forced either to y, saying: I neuer reprooued him
of such Sinne: or else thou shalt be censured for a slan|derer.
Because therefore such issue may fal out at
first, aswell as by proceding, it therfore is apparant,
that there is no stoppage with the vnrepentant. Se|condly,
it cannot fall out, that such Sin shall not be
discovered (walking by Rule) in the middest of the
Congregation, Prov. 26. 26. when a case (vnder the
Lawe) could not through witnes-want be found out
in the gates of the Citie, then were they to come
before the Lord and the Priest, and there in the
Temple it should be discovered, Deut. 17. 8. 9. Now
that Temple was a figure not onely of the whole
Catholike, but also of every particular Church: the
Priest a figure of Iesus annoynted, to whome the
Father communicates al knowledge,  by whome
we receiue the knowledge of all necessaries: but in
such a plunge, the knowledge of the wicked is ne|cessary:
therefore by Christ, wee are to exspect the
Revelation thereof. That Christ wil not be inferior
to Moses his Priesthood for Vrim and Thummim, is
evident ynough, if but onely in this promise: Where
two or three are gathered togither in my Name, there
am I in the midst of them, Mat. 18. 20. I therefore
conclude, that Christ the heade, will not haue his
owne holy body so mocked, nor the Hider of his
sinne so to prosper, (Prov. 28.) and that because of
the honour of his own name. If Faith in Gods pro|mise,
Care of his glory, Loue of keeping the Church
pure, do lead vs in this action, the Lord neither can
nor will faile in disclosing the Guiltie.
Obiect. But some Sin is in it owne nature publike,
as Incest, Adulterie, Murder, c and therefore not
to be satisfied for by private Repentance.
Ans. If a woman within the Church bring forth
a Child besides the order of continencie, her sin is
indeed publik, and therfore the vncleane man and
woman both (if both be within the Church) must
satisfie by publick Repentance.
Obiect. In Deuteronomie 13. 6. c. If the secret
friend, should secretly entice vnto Idolatrie, that
friende (notwithstanding the sinne was secreet)
was not to bee concealed: therefore some secreet
sinnes are not at all to be concealed.
Answ. You might rather conclude, Therefore
some secret sinne was once not to be concealed. Mo|ses
must end where Christ begins. Moses enioyned
That then: Christ eniovneth This nowe.
Obiect. Such grosse sinnes cannot bee satisfied
for by publike Repentance, for the death of their
bodies is due.
Answ. Thogh the body deserue death, yet pub|like
Repentance satisfieth the Church. The Ince|stuous
person being humbled in his flesh, that is, in
the vnregenerate part: the Church of Cointh was
by Pauls Commandement, inioyned, first, to for|giue
him: Secondly, to comfort him: Thirdly, to
confirme their loue towards him. Consider here|withall
the Apostles wordes. Galat 6. 1. Brethren if
a man be fallen by occasion into any fault, yee which
are spirituall, hee speaks not to carnall men, restore
such one with the spirit of meeknes, considering thy
selfe, lest thou also be tempted.
Obiect. These Aposolicall Churches had no
Magistrates that bare the corpoeal sword: but we
haue Kings in our Churches: therefore the former
is no president for vs.
Answ. The former is a president, where the cor|poreall
sword is not drawne out That I haue alrea|die
saide, is therefore sufficient for my present Ar|gument,
who delivers but the Rule, whereby the
Apostolicall Churches watched one over another.
The Constitution being changed, and the Case alte|red,
moe heaps of Obiections do arise, than is meet
for lesse than a great volume. For many people, I
knowe no readier way for them to come out of the
Laborinth or Maze, wherein they haue winded
themselues, than by returning backe step by step,
till they come to the doore againe.





14. Staffe.
For Iesus sake, (a) great toyl Paul vnderwent,
For planting faith, where he soever staid.
At last to (b) seauen Hild Rome good Paul was sent
There for (c) two yeares, an harvest good he made,
Within (d)  fift yeare as humaine writings say,
The Lyon, Ne|ro did the Apostle slay.


(a) His multitud of suffe|rings, see 2. Cor. 11. 23. c.


(b) So the holy Ghost de+scribeth Rome, Revel 17 9. and so much their Mantuae Prophet affirmeth of Rome, as also others their owne Hystoriographers. The names of the 7. Hils are thus tearmed, Palatine, Capitoline, Aventine, Exquiline, Celius, Viminal, Quirinal. To this Citie, after he had preached to and froe aboue 30. years, good Paul was sent Prisoner: he having indeed ap|pealed to Cesar: and Cruell Nero then was Cesar and Emperour.


(c) Comming to Rome, PAVL was suffered to dwell by himselfe with a Souldier that kept him. Two full yeares he remained in an house, which for himselfe he had hyred, receiving al that came vnto him, preaching the kingdome of God,  teaching these things which concerne the Lord Iesus Christ with all boldnes of speach, and without let.
And here endeth the Booke of the Apostles Acts.



(d) Hee is saide to die vnder Nero: That being the 36. yeare of Pauls Conversion; and thus it is reckoned.
IESVS died in the 19. of Tiberias.
Paul converted in the 20. yeare, Tiberias raig|ning
23. yeares. To him succeeded Caligula, who
raigned 4. yeares. To Caligula, succeeded Claudius,
(in whose second Iames was slaine by Herod, Acts.
12.) who raigned 14. yeare. To him succeeded Ne|ro,
in whose 14. it is said, Paul was beheaded, that
being the 70. yeare from Iesus his Nativitie.
The Epistles that Paul writ vnto the Churches,
are either such as he writ before his imprisonment
at Rome, or after.
The Epistles he writ before, are: The Epistle to
the Romanes, written from Corinth.
The two Epistes to the Corinthes, written from
Philippe: as also, a third Epistle, (which indeed was
the first) written to the Corinths, (1. Cor. 5. 9.) which
we haue not.
The two Epistles to the Thessalonians, written
from Athens.
The first Epistle to Timothie the Evangelist, writ|ten
from Laodicea.
The Epistle to Titus, written from Nicopolis:
part of which subscription is demed forged: and yet
may well ynough be granted.
The Epistles he writ after hee became Prisoner
at Rome, are these:

The Epistle
To the Galatians.
To the Ephesians.
To the Philippians.
To the Colossians.
To Philemon.
Second to Timothie, though
a strange Title be given to Timothie in the subscrip|tion,
and that of latter time. But if the Title of an
Arch-bishop, or Chiefe Over-seer be granted, consi|dering
he was an Evangelist, it maketh nothing for
Romish Lord-Bishops.

As all these Epistles tend to the advancing and
confirmation of the christian faith: so, for this time,
I will propound some speciall heades of Doctrine,
wherein one Epistle is more copious than another,
or at least, first in order according to the vsuall pla|ces
of the Epistles.
In the Epistle to the Romanes, I obserue: First,
the Apostles concluding all (Iewe and Gentile) vn|der
sinne, taking away all merit by workes: there|withall
delineating or plainly picturing foorth the
difference betwixt the Carnall and Spirituall per|son.
Secondly, I obserue his plaine proving of Isra|els
generall calling and obedience to the Christian
Faith, what time the Fulnes of the Gentiles be come
in. Hereof see, 1. part, at Iudas Ozias. Thirdly, the
doctrine of obedience to Princes and Magistrates,
not so much for feare of the sworde, as for consci|ence
sake. Fourthly, I note the doctrine he delivers
for supporting the weake brethren.
In the first Epistle to the Corinths, I obserue spe|ciallie;
First, the Methode of truly preaching Christ.
Secondly, the danger by having any communion
with an open leavened, or vnrepentant brother: to|gither
with the carriage due towards such. Thirdly,
I note the power is given to the Saintes for iudging
their owne causes civill. Fourthly, the Apostle put|teth
an end to questions touching single life, touch|ing
such married Couples, as whereof one was an
vnbeleever; touching the dutie of such as were cal|led
to the Christian faith, in such or such Vocation.
Fiftly, I note his doctrine concerning the vse of
meates sacrificed first to Idoles. Sixty, the true vse
of spirituall guiftes. Seaventhly, the absolute neces|sitie
of Loue (or Charity) in a Christian. Eightly, the
description of the Schoole of Prophecie. Chap. 14.
Vnto this holy exercise of Prophecie, hee stirreth
vp every particular man (for women Tere may not
speake) as to labour after every spirituall guift, so
specially after Prophecie. Every man that hath a
publick profiting guift, in this exercise it is to bee v|sed,
but every thing in order.
The brother that is able onely, or specially, to
teach in a strange tongue, hee in this holy Congre|gation
is to speak, providing that there be another
to interpret his speach to the Auditorie: This no|tablie
overthwateth such as will not heare a bro|ther
Prophet, thogh he speak no strange language.
They that Prophecie, that is, which divide the
word and apply it to the soule (Verse 24. 25.) are at
the most to be but three, (for one season of Assem|blie)
every one orderly teaching after another: the
Iudgement of whose doctrine and discreet Appli|cation,
appertaineth in the first place to the other
Prophets. The principall of this holy Schoole, I be|leeue
to be the Doctor, even as is the Pastor over o|ther
peculiar exercises.
Fiue peculiar Graces or Guifts are in this School,
to be vsed for aedification. 1. The guift of a Psalme.
2. of Doctrine 3. of Tongues. 4. of Revelation.
5. of Interpretation, All (saving that of Revelation)
is granted generally: yet simply neither can all Re|velation
be debarred: for at sometime may bee re|vealed
(and that vnto the meanest member) that
the whole Congregation hath in former time bene
carried away into some error. If any one such thing
(or any speciall point not revealed to the former
speaking Prophet) be vnto another revealed (Vers.
30.) he is orderly to be heard.
But because that of a Psalme is easilie graunted
of all, I would gladly demand, What is it for a man
there to haue a Psalme Heere a number lay their
hand on their mouth, or else they foolishlie answer,
It is the singing of som Psalme in the Bible: or else,
It is to pen a Psalme, and afterwards to sing it. Alas,
alas no: neither the one nor the other. The Apostle
commendeth to the Church Spirituall guifts, pecu|liar
guifts of the Spirit of Iesus, not fearing in the
first place to prefix the guift of a Psalme, as no
common guift, but at least as vneasie to be attained
as that of Doctrine, of Tongues, Interpretation, c.
Howsoever other Churches, yet Corinth (the Apo|stle
testifieth) was destitute of no guift, Chap. 1. 7.
No marvel then, if this guift be rather commended
to vse amongst them. As onely to pen a Sermon,
and then to reade it, cannot properly be called the
Guift of Preaching or Prophecying: so neither can
the singing of a penned Psalme, be truly called, The
guift of a Psalme: I therefore conclude; even as Do|ctrine
and Exhortation, is by the immediate instinct
of the Spirite, so is this Psalme vttered or soong.
Quest. Who ever heard of any man, that could
so sing the praises of God and his wonderful works
that could deliver his holy meaning in Number
Measure.
Answ. I praise God for it, I haue heard of the
guift, and heard the brother that hath bene so ex|ercised
in the midst of a Christian Congregation.
And lest he should sing but something he had cod
by heart, the brethren thus tryed him. First, 
two brethren had taught from two severall Scrip|tures,
(onely fore knowne to the speakers them|selues)
he was appointed to ground his Psalme, vp|on
that doctrine they first had delivered. He did so
presently, enlarging the doctrine and vse thereof:
and that without vnseemly pawse. Secondly (which
was the next time of Prophecie) he was placed in
the face of the holy Assemblie, and vnto him was
read a certaine Text (agreed vpon by the Church,
but at that instant) and therevpon, without more
adoe, he vttered a Psalme. After that, he was again
Proued, and so of the Brethren Approued. I my self
was an eate and eye-witnes of all this. So much of
the 8. Observation.
Nynthly, Paul confuteth the deniers of the bo|dies
resurrection (as for the supporting of the weak,
I observed it to the Romanes) And lastly, hee com|mandeth
laying aside somewhat for the helping of
the poor, appointing thereto the Lords day, or first
day of the weeke.
In his second to the Corinths, I mark specially, 1.
His care of having the Humbled sinner comforted.
2. His care to haue one Church to contribute to
anothers necessities. 3. His care of suppressing the
insolent contemners of his letters  reprehensions.
In his Epistle to the Galatians, specially I note,
1. The curse of all false Doctrine and Gospels, al|thogh
published by an Angel from heaven. 2. That
Moses yoke of bondage, is not to bee ioyned with
Iesus his Gospell: the former longing to the sons of
Hagar the bond-woman, for whipping them vnto
Christ: the latter longing to the sons of Sarah, the
Free-woman, whose Children are of a newe Citie,
even of Ierusalem from aboue.
In his Epistle to the Ephesians, First, I beholde E|lection
to be before (not only our brth, but also be|fore)
the foundation of the World: and that Electi|on
to be in Christ Iesus onely: which Election be|fore
time, maketh it selfe knowne to vs in time, by
the sanctification of the holy Spirit. 2. I cast mine
eye to the immediate end of Christ his Ascension,
which, as touching his Church, was this: vz. To fill
all things, by giuing gifts vnto men: the end of them
guifts being twofold: First, for converting People,
and bringing them into holy constitution: Second|ly,
for edifying or building them more and more vp
in their newe-byrth, after they be once constituted
in orderly communion. Vnto this two-fold end, he
appointeth two sorts of Teachers: First, Apostles, E|uangelists,
Prophets, for the planting Churches: Se|condly,
Pastors and Teachers to the Churches once
planted: whereof see more in the next Staffe but
two following, in number the 17.
Thirdly, in this Epistle, I obserue his care of en|forming
Husbands and wiues, Parents  children,
Masters and servants, in their mutuall duties.
In his Epistle to the Philippians, specially I pick
out: First, that it is a matter of reioycement, that
Christ bee preached, though some preach of envie,
and with affections impure. 2. That Bandes or im|prisonement
maketh the Gospell more glorious.
3 That the imprisoned Saintes (specially Ministers
of the word,  more speciallie Kopiontes they that
haue traveled Churches planting, and delivering
Canonicall ordinances, are to bee provided for of
their Churches.
In his Epistle to the Colossians, (besides former
mentioned doctrines) I note, that such Religion as
is not in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles
Seene, but rather forbidden in the new Testaments
Canon, (as, worshipping of Angels, Touch not, tast
not, handle not, c.) is but a Wil-worship, carying
onely a shew of wisdome, and herein my Brethren
faile, that wold tie men to such Legal observances.
In his first to the Thessalonians, specially I take
heede: First, to the Thessalonians, true hearing and
receiving the Apostles wordes; who heard and re|ceived
that word, not as the worde of men, but as
the word of God. 2. That to mourne much for the
Saintes departed, is Gentile-like. 3. That Iesus his
comming to Iudgement, will be very sodaine, and
therefore needfull, that the Saintes be watchfull.
In his second to the Thessalonians, onely I nowe
obserue: That there was a general Apostacie from
the Christian faith, plainely foretolde. Which De|parture
should fall out by reason The Man of Sin,
the Antikimenos, or Layer of a contrary Founda|tion,
should arise in the Church (through Chur|ches
not watching,) and so cause the Churches
for to vndergo his Spirituall Badge. Which Beast
(notwithstanding) in time should bee destroyed,
by the bright powerfull appearance of the Go|spell:
he in the meane time prevailing onely over
such, as had not received the loue of the truth, and
therefore iustly giuen over to beleeue lies, that so
they may be damned.
In his 1 Epistle to Timothie, I specially take vp:
First, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, Thankes|giuings
are to be made for all sortes of People. Se|condly,
howe Church-Overseers, and Seruitours are
to be qualified. Thirdly, that the Churchministers
at home (that is, in their owne Assemblie) is to be
provided for. Hee that provideth for his Oxe, and
with-holdeth necessaries from him that watcheth
over his soule, is no better than an Oxe, and vnwor|thie
the Gospell: yet Teachers must measure the
weak, and loose bodily right, if thereby they haue
hope to winne vnto Christ. Fourthly, that one ma|ner
of Rebuke appertaineth not to all the Saintes:
nor yet to receiue an Accusation against an Elder
so easilie, as against others.
In his 2 to Timothie, First, an encouragement
for Timothie against al adversitie. 2. A plaine prog|nosticating
of our covetous sals Prophets, who sell
themselues  their people to the devill for money.
In his Epistle to Titus, I only pick out the end of
the Evangelist Titus his abode in the litle Iland Cre|,
viz. to plant Churches, and in every Church her
Elders. In his Epistle to Philemon, the Apostle sen|deth
Onesimus back to his Maister Philemon, who
before had run away from his Master, therewithall
robbing Philemon of somewhat. The fellowe com|ming
to Paul at Rome (by some secreet draught of
the Spirit) Paul there begets him to the faith,  so
returning him with this Epistle, he laboreth to qua|lifie
good Philemon. Thus endeth Paul his Epistles.
Novve follovveth a litle to be spoken of
the Epistles following.

The Epistles
are these.
The Author to the Hebrewes.
Iames his Epistle.
Peter his two Epistles.
Iohn his three Epistles.
Iude his Epistle.

Who was the Holy Ghost his Pen-man of that
to the Hebrews: the Spirit of God hath concealed,
and therefore flat pride for any man to say, It was
Pauls, It was Marks, c. The chiefest point the ho|ly
Ghost there laboreth for, is: the removall of Mo|ses,
whose Letter was vnto the Hebrewes as a Vaile,
hindering them from seeing vnto the end of the
things abolished by Iesus anoynted our King, Priest
and Prophet 2. He denounceth fearefull Iudgment
against such as fell from Christian communion and
fellowship. 3. Hee stirreth them vp to Hospitalitie,
specially for receiving of Strangers.
Iames his Epistle must needs be written before
any of Pauls, consideritg he died, Acts 12. Besides
my obserues in the former Epistles, I note speci|allie
in him: First, that Prayer must bee offered vp
without wavering. 2. That the Word must not on|l
be heard, but also done. 3. That the Christian
Faith is not to be held in respect of Persons; be they
many, be they fewe; be they noble, be they igno|ble;
seeme they learned, seeme they vnlearned.
4. That a Person with gold-fingers is not therefore
to be seated vpmost at our Table. 5. That Faith
without Workes, is but the Devils faith. 6. That
Elders ar to visit the sick; and if the sick haue some
sinne troubling their conscience, they are with loue
to take notice thereof, and fervently therefore cal
vpon God by Prayer, for that sins remission. These
lders must not want the spirite of Prayer. They
must therein bee driven from reading on a booke.
. That it is a most blessed work to convert a siner.
In Peters first Epistle I note: First, that a Chri|stian
must beware he suffer as a Righteous, not as
an vnrighteous doer. 2. That the Church Elders
are to feede their flock without constraint, not car|rying
themselues like Lords over God his heritage.
In his second Epistle, specially I excerpe: First,
that true Believers are made partakers of the Na|ture
divine. 2. That open Atheists (mocking at
the dissolution of all things b fire from Heaven)
shall arise in the last dayes. 3. That Pauls Epistles
contain some things hard to be vnderstood, which
the vnlearned should pervert.
In Iohn his first Epistle: First, that many Anti|christes
were gone out in his time. 2. That such as
are once borne of God, no more doe sinne: that is,
letteth not sinne Rule (howsoever Dwell) in their
mortall members. 3. That the One God, is distin|guished
into the Father, the Word, and the Holie
Ghost. 4. That there is a certaine sinne not to bee
prayed for.
In his second Epistle: I note, that to him (that
bringeth doctrine contrary to godlines) we are not
to say so much as God speed, much lesse receiue him
to house.
In his third Epistle: First, that it is worthy praise,
to entertaine brethren, and assist them in their voy|ages.
2. That it is no newe thing to be cumbred
with pratling busie bodies, who will neither further
Christs worke themselues, nor willinglie suffer such
as would.
In Iude his Epistle, over and besides I obserue:
First, that the wicked are but as menstruous cloths
in our Feastes of Loue. 2. Lastly, that the man Ie|sus
our Saviour is God, and he onely able to keepe
vs from falling away, as also to present vs faultlesse
before the Father.
Nowe followeth a litle to be said of the Book
of Revelation.
Blessed Iohn (beloved of Iesus) being banished
into the Ile Patmos, and that by all probabilitie by
Domitianus (who succeeded Nero) There, on the
Lords day, Iohn was deeply ravished in the Spirite,
during which time, blessed Iesus commendeth vn|to
him the state of his Church vntill the last. First,
he enioyneth Iohn to write vnto the 7. Churches of
Asia the lesse. Secondly to set down in writing such
visions and their adiuncts, as might continue for the
Faithfuls vse for ever. And indeede, this Booke so
pictureth out the False Churches, (whether Idola|trous
Christian, or Mahumetane) as I cannot mar|uell,
though Satan hath almost driven this Booke
out of vse. The olde Church Zion, had her golden
prophecies for future events: and this was left to
the Newe Testaments Church, as a Loue-letter of
Iesus, whereby she should discerne Times, Persons,
Thinges. But marke this, that the Iewe is never
brought in within this book, as an Adversary. Their
number is sealed, Cap. 7. The same number of Them
stands on Mount Zion with the Lamb, Chap. 14. And
the Gentiles are glad to repaire vnto them for be|ing
healed, Chap. 21. and 22. This brieie for the
present.
That which nowe followeth, hath his groundes
from the former Canonicall writings: Al falling out
within the compasse of time contained in the book
of Revelation or Apocalyps: for the time of that
Booke reacheth to the second comming of Isus.





15. Staffe.
The Apostles haue for help (a) Evangelists.
And so the Chur|ches by them planted be,
Th'Apostles dead, there riseth (b) hellish mysts,
Which with the Light, at no hand could agree:
Sun darks, Starres fall, The Moone doth change her hue,
Heaven rolles away, as They before did shewe.


(a) Evan|gelists in English is, Pub|lishers of glad Ty|dings. In the large sence any bringer of glad newes may be so called: but in this spe|ciall and peculiar sense, these are properly Evange|listes, that wer called by the Apostles to assist them in the planting of Churches. Such were Marke, Luke, Timothie, Titus.


(b) Inventions of men, fetched out of their bot|omlesse brayne (first broched into their brayne by Satan of the lowest Hells) these arose in the Chur|ches, and so darkned the Sun of Righteousnes. Here|upon the Angels of the churches fel out of the hea|uenly places, who before were as Starres in Christ his right hand. The Churches who before tooke their word (which was their Lantern  light) from the mouth of Iesus, even as the Moone taketh her light from the Sunne, they quicklie changed their hue: whervpon the Heauenly Face of the Churches passed away, even as the materiall heavens at last shall scrolelike vanish. Paul charged his Churches to be watchfull of their waies: and blessed Iohn he specially admonisheth the Churches of Asia-Mi|nor. But al of them neglecting their spiritual watch, what are become of them? what is become of the golden Romane People? what is become of Co|nth, of Galatin, Philippi, Colossus, Thessalonia? what are become of Iohns 7. Churches? They vanished like a scrowle, their visibilitie or face vnable to bee founde.
The 7. Churches of Asia (togither with their fel|lowes) had Mahumet quickly seated in their chair. The 7. Churches (Rev. 1.) were seven golden Can|dlesticks, and their Ministers 7. Starres in Iesus his right hand: if these be Apostate (as all knowe they be) what warrant had Rome never to fall awaye. These 7. were in Christs right hand, and yet Apo|state; such a priviledged place (in so open speach) Rome never had: or if she had bene an 8. starre in his hand, vet lo, the Sun lost his Light; the Sonne hath turned his hand vpside dowe.
Paul writing vnto Rome, he saith, To the Saintes at Rome, not To the Church of Rome: to other people he saith, To the Church, or Churches, by which forme of speach, it is to be thought, that there was not at the writing of that Epistle, any established Church at Rome. Obiect. Hee saith, (Chap. vlt.) Salute the Church in their house, Vers. 5. Ans. By the Church (or Congregation faithfull) of that house, he cannot meane a Church established, (for then all the resi|due of the Saints saluted, shuld seeme to be so ma|ny Churches as there were divers housholds, or else that they stood apart from the Church) but there|by he must necessarily meane the Faithfull Assem|blie of that house. Every Established Church, is a companie of Faithfull convened: but every com|pany of Faithfull congregated, is not an established Church. They two are not Convertibles. Neither is it any thing like, that there should then in Rome be an established Church. First, considering that Great Citie, (Revel. 17. 18.) was heade for Idolatrie. Se|condly, had bloody Nero King, called by Paul, the Lyons mouth, 2. Tim. 4. 17. therein (I doubt not) alluding to the Lyons Monarch of Babel, (Dan. 7. 4.) the mouth of the 4. mettelled Image, wherof else|where I haue spoken.
Howe hatd it was long after, for any to professe Christ in Rome (much more to haue an established Church) their owne Records declare. Nay, seeing All forsooke Paul what time he was first exami|ned before the Emperour Nero: (2. Timoth. 4. 16.) I would demaund of such, where was Peter then? did he then apostate from Paul, or was hee Non-resi|dent? Indeed the Romanists say, he was then gone into some other Cuntrie, notwithstanding his Apo|stolicall Sea was at Rome. As such an answer is but absurde, so neither (if Peter had bene there, and had an established Church) could it well be deemed, that both the common persons of that Church, as also every their Ministers should forsake Paul. Be|sides, Peter should haue shewen himselfe no true Pastor by such Non-residencie, as also haue beene guiltie of that Peoples fall. Howe trulie then they haue taught, that Peter first established the Faith of Christ in Rome, as also should for 25. yeares be Romes Bishop: let the wise hearted coniecture by the former Circumstances. Much more let them consider, what feeble footing they haue for Stan|ding alwaies in visible obedience to the true Faith.





16. Staffe.
(a) First order gone, and Dores not being kept,
By (b) Baptisme, heapes of prophane do rush.
With them at length, a (c) Ministry in crept,
That with the Horne, Gods ordinance did push.
So Anti-christ is stept vp to the Throne,
Who by his (d) Lawes would governe every one.


(a) The churches by little and little growing secure and idle in their spirituall watch, they giue vp all their power vnto the Elders: the Elders afterwards they leaue all to the Pastor: The seerall Churchpastors in one Cittie, they fi|nally giue vp their keyes to so me one, and hee was called Metrapolitane: The Metrapolitanes finally gaue vp their power to some one in a Diocesse, and he afterwards was called the Diocesian Bishop. The Diocesian Bishops, they afterwards surrender the keyes to some One in a Province: then was hee cal|led the Provinciall Bishop. The Provinciall Bishop after that, betakes the keies to some one in a king|dome: and hee was called, Primate. The Primates of sundrie Kingdomes, do after appoint the Chur|ches power to foure, which foure stoode for whole Christendome; and they were called Patriarchs, not vnlike the foure Angels, Revel. 7. 1.
The Patriarchs (to make vp the vpshot) they ap|point One to be Christs Vicar over All: and Him they called a Pope. Thus the mystery of iniquitie wrought till it came to the height, and that by litle and litle: by litle and litle accordingly that Body shall come downe.


(b) The vtter laying wast of Christs Vine-yard, was the receiving tag and tag into the Lords Tem|ple. The strict waies of Christianitie lost, then it be|came as plausible a Rligion as grosse Idolatrie. All the Vncircumcised, high and lowe, rich and poore, come into the Temple. As the Man of Sinne was mounted vp into the highest place, so al his retinue come in to attend on their King Abaddon, as bad a one as could be. The Temples doore was open to all: I meane, Baptisme was free for all commers. The Spring and Fountaine that before was shut and sealed vp, (Cant. 4. 12.) nowe it was broken vp, and every one filtcheth away the water.
Obiect. Iudah in the Apostacie, and Israel in the ime of Schisme and Apostacie did Circumcise.
Answ. They did that they had no warrant for. After Abram believed, then was Circumcision gi|uen to him and his Seed, or any stranger to whome he became a nurishing Father, not before. 2. The Apostle calles it, The Seale of Righteousnes by faith. When therefore they were fallen from the Faith of Abraham, they had nothing to doe to touch the Seal. Till they ioyned themselues to the true Faith, such Circumcision was but a meere blanke, as wax without a stamp.
Obiect. God hath promised to be the God of a Believers seede, vnto the thousand Generation, Exodus 20. 6.
Answ. Adde that which followes: Of them that loue me and keepe my Commaundements. A Parents faith makes the Child capable of Baptisme, as the former of Circumcision: but if the Childe and his Children afterwards do Apostate from holy Faith, (in stead Of keeping the Commandements which his Parents or Fore-fathers kept) then such are so farre from having God to be their mercifull Father, as hee is to them a Iealous Iudge, and to all that fol|lowes them in the steppes of vnrighteousnes. 2. If the Child should be baptized, who had some Aun|cestor a true Christian within a thousand Genera|tions, then the Baptizers had neede of all his Peo|ples Genealogies from Noah or Abraham. 3. Such simple Obiectors must learne, that by such a con|clusion, all the whole world should be baptized: for there is none in the world, that are not much with|in a thousand Generations of Noah.


(c) Howe the great horned ministery crept in, is said aboue at (a) Here onely wee are to remember, the slavish horned Ministerie, who are Iack at Com|mandement to the former. They be Cardinals, Suf|fraganes, Deanes, Arch-deacons, Priors, Abbots, Of|ficials, Doctors, Proctors, Parsons, Vicars, Chanons, Pe|ty-Chanons, Quier-men, Exorcistes, Curats, Friers, Monkes, and many more than I can account vnto thee. If thou wilt knowe this confused Chaos, thou must seeke to some Popish Catalogue: for I (in this my labour) haue onely the Bible before me.


(d) Hell being broken loose, and this ministery planted, in the next place Synode vpon Synode, convocation vpon convocation for establishing of such lawes, as who should resist, to them it should not be permitted to buy or sell in their Common|wealth: and who in these daies are able to warre with the Beast? He that with Iohn will not go forth in the spirit, and that into the Wildernes, shall not behold this Harlot, whose stinking skirts doe cover the faces of the worlds multitude: and so drunken they are with her Cup of Customes, Literal preaching, Praying, c. as a man had as good speake to drun|ken Nabal, as to them. The Adders haue laide the one eare to the Earth, and haue stopped the other are with their tayle; heare the holy Charmer they are not minded: nay, with their fingers in their ares they will runne vpon Stephen: Let vs therefore Be|ware of Men.




17. Staffe.
But (a) Prophets God he stirreth vp sometime,
To call the People from such woorship fowle.
The Beast he char|geth such with deadly cryme,
And (b) killes the man, that pulles away a soule.
Right much adoe shall Persons haue to liue,
To whom the Beast doth not his (c) Symbole giue.


(a) The spirituall Heauen vanished like as a scrowle: the My|stical ini|quitie hauing got the vpper|hand: the burning Lampes (Revel. 4) that stood before the Throne of GOD, being thus put out; and blacke Lampes (or false counterfait Guiftes) being foysted in their roome, as fittest to stand before the Black Throne of the Beast moun|ed: It followeth, (except Christ will loose all) that some be called and culled out of Sodome and Egypt, spiritually so called, Revel. 11. 8.
For the calling of the Lords Israel out of this spirituall Aegypt, from vnder the spirituall bondage of Leviathan; our good God stirreth vp Prophets: nay, Christ Iesus ascended the highest heavens, lea|ding (aptivitie Prisoner with him, partly for this ve|ry end, vz. to send Prophets for gathering and plan|ting Churches in these confused times, as did the Apostles and Evangelists of yore; which Prophets are neither Apostles, nor Evangelists, nor Pastors nor Doctors in their own proper and peculiar sense, but a Ministerie distinguished from them. Ephe|sians 4. 11.
That Prophet (distinguished there from the resi|due) I hold of absolute necessitie, to be meant pro|perly of such as God stirreth vp (not to fore-tell of things, like Agabus, but) to gather People vnto the Faith, and to constitute Churches.
First, all the learned haue graunted, that God hath in these last times, stirred vppe divers to pull downe Babel and to build againe the walles of Ie|rusalem. Such M. Calvin in some sence calleth A|postles, and M. Beza nombreth with Evangelists. The doctrine therefore standeth good by the Con|sent of learned, as also by Experience of the worke wrought.
Secondly, the title Prophet (seeing they are not properly Apostles, who had their Calling immedi|atly from Christ: nor Evangelists, who had their Calling immediatly from the Apostles: nor Pastors nor Doctors, who haue their Nomination and Or|dination immediatly from a People already a true visible Church) seeing (I say) they are not properly such, but plainly distinguished from such (and other preaching ministeries besides these 5. there be not in the Newe Testament) it necessarilie therefore followeth, that such Worke-men are properly Pro|phets.
Thirdly, the place of the Apostle, Ephes. 4. pro|ueth all this plainly. Christ (saith the Apostle) ascen|ded, To what end? To fill all things: How? By giving guifts vnto men: What guifts? the guifts fitting A|postles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, Doctors. To what end gaue he such Ministers? for two ends: First, For gathering togither the Saints: Secondly, For the Mi|nisteriall worke, even for the edification of Christs bo|die, once gathered. Howe long hath he appointed Ministers, First, for Gathering People into a body: Se|condly, for Ministring vnto a Body so gathered, or built vp. He hath given such Ministerie, Till wee all meet togither (in the vnitie of Faith and Knowledge of the Sonne of God) vnto a perfect man, c. But yet we are not all So me: therefore still endureth the Guift of Christ for gathering the Saintes. Which guift (considering Apostles and Evangelists ceased) doth onely rest vpon the head of this Prophet. Let not the greatnes of any mans guiftes or fame, bring preiudice vnto this so open truth. Hee that holdeth not chieflie to this place (for vpholding the Do|ctrine against Romanistes) forsakes the surest string of his Bowe.


(b) Men fore-warned are half armed. Iesus his Loue-Letter foretold this, Revel. 11. 7. and 13. 7. In Patience therefore let vs possesse our soules


(c) See Revel. 13. 16. 17. But a fearefull plague must Gods Angell, or Prophet sent of God, de|nounce against such branded People. Revel. 14. 9. 10. 11. The fearefulnes of which torment might feare them from all obedience to the Beast: but if they will serue the Devill in his Rulers, the Devill that setts them on work, shal pay them their black wages.





18. Staffe.
The Gentiles once, got to the height of sinne,
And fulnesse of the (a) Saued come to Light,
The (b) Elder Bro|ther (Ievv) shal straight com in
And mourne for that he had no sooner sight.
Their comming in, shall be the Gentiles Light:
Nor till that time, will Sun againe be bright.


(a) When the Gen|tiles, as a woman big bel|lied, hath brought forth the Flnesse of her spirituall wombe, then shal all Israel be saved. Rom. 11. 25. 26. Hereof read in 1. part, at Iudahs king Ozia, there the 11.


(b) I allude vnto the Parable, Luke, 16. 11. c. By the Elder sonne, I vnderstand the Iewe; by the yonger sonne, the Gentile: the Gentiles sprung spe|cially of Iaphet, the Iews of Shem, and both of them sonnes to Noah: who as a Gyant refreshed with wine, rose from the wine: giving Shem the Privi|ledge in the first place, but plainly telling Iaphet that he should in time obtaine Shems Priviledge.
When the Prodigal Gentile was received home to eat of the fat Bullock, and well liking Sacrifice Iesus, the Iewe stubbornly stood without the spi|rituall Tent, refusing to come iny, they haue re|fused hitherto to come into the spirituall banquet, and to communicate with vs. But the Fulnesse of the Gentiles once accomplished, then shall Israel be called to the Faith of Christ Iesus: who percei|uing that Messiah was slaine before by them; they shall wayle Familie by Familie, with a great La|mentation, Zech. 12. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. Vpon which humiliation, a Fountaine shall bee opened to Da|uids house, for sin and vncleannes. Chap. 13. 1. c. Their Fall brought a blessing to the Gentiles, but their Rising shall bring much glory to such, as will walke in their light Rom. 11. 12. 15.
This their Rising, the Apostles were not igno|rant of, who (the last time that ever they asked a question of Iesus) did demaunde, If so hee would at that time Restore the Kingdome to Israel, ACT. 1. I well knowe that some (otherwise godly and lear|ned) haue blamed the Apostles there, for exspe|cting a worldly Kingdome: but (Tantorum pace) I dare not thinke that the Apostles are blame-wor|thie: nay, I deeme them praise-worthie, who had so speciall care for their owne peoples good.
First, If they dreamed that Israel should haue restored to them a Kingdome not onely spirituall, such a dreame cannot be infringed: nay, reade the Prophets attentiuely, and they insinuate a King|dome not onely spirituall.
Secondly, they saying Wilt thou at this time Re|store the Kingdome to, Israel, what answer doth Iesus returne? doth he reproue them? No: what saith he? Thus he answers, It is not for you to know the times or seasons, which the father hath put in his own power. Hee is so farre from denying the Kingdome they dreamed of, as he doth plainly graunt it. He grants it by answering only to the Tyme, wherein they ex|spected such Restauration: as though hee should say, You are greedy of vnderstanding, WHEN the Kingdome I shall be restored: the Time thereof is in the Fathers hand, neither is it necessarie for you to know: looke you to your own present busines, c. This I take to be open  plain ynough: specially, if we remem|ber that in the next place before, Hee had taught them the things that concerned his kingdome, imme|diatly wherevpon, they demaunde onely the Tyme of Israels Restauration, and onely hee answereth to the Tyme, as graunting their meaning of the King|dome. If they had now erred in Iudgement, I can|not think, but hee would not haue ascended before he had reformed it: considering the holy Ghost af|terwardes was not sent downe, so much to teache them any Newe thing, as to bring vnto their re|membrance The things he had before taught.
First, God dwelled in Shems Tent, even in the middest of Israels People, and such Gentiles were blessed, as had recourse vnto them.
Secondly, God hath inhabited amidst the Gentiles, and such Iewes haue bene happy as haue had recourse to them.
Thirdly, God will againe dwel amidst the Iews; and blessed shall such Gentiles be, as gather them|selues vnto them. Thus the Lord concludeth both vnder Sinne, that on both hee may haue mercy: and that neither may swell in any thing of their owne; he hath shut vp all in vnbeliefe, that so hee may haue mercie vpon all: The first shall be last, and the last shall bee first. Oh the deepnes of the riches, both of the wisdome and knowledge of God! howe vnsearchable are his Iudgments, and his waies past finding out.





19. Staffe.
Iewes called once, and all the nomber ron,
Rushing from Heaven, shall (a) fire on the world.
The (b) Good (living) in Clowds shall meet the Son:
But wicked rowt, shall in the fire be whorld.
Then (c) Iudgment comes, and there an end of all.
To God for grace, it resteth that we (d) call.


(a) After the My|sticall Body of Iesus, (consi|sting of Iewe and Gentile) shall be accom|plished, downe shal fyre fal on the World. Prophane Prophets tell of Atlas, his sustaining the Earth on his shoulders: but sure I am, that the Ele|cted Iewe, and Elected Gentile, are the Pillers of the whole world. So soone as these Elected are remo|ued, so soone the world falleth and perisheth.


(b) The Faithfull that then shall be living, (1. Thess. 4. 17.) shall in a moment be changed, (1. Cor. 5. 51. 52.) and togither with the Faithfull before deceased, shall bee lifted vp on high to meet Iesus in the Clowdes. Thus the Faithfull shall bee ree from the power of that devouring fire, what time the Infidels and false counterfait Christians, shall frye in the flame: that fire being the gate vnto the ever-burning fire of Hell.


(c) IESVS (the Iudge) mounting his pure white Throne, encompassed with Thousands of glorious Angels, before him shall come all the Kindreds of the Earth, and every Soule ioyned vnto his Bodie, must abide by his Iudgment. First, he will separate his Sheepe from stinking Goates, (the cloake of Hy|pocrisie nowe comes off) and having culled his E|lect from the Reprobate, he shall bid the Chosen of his Father, Enter into the kingdom prepared for them wherevpon, they shall mount vppon his glorious Trone, and sit downe with IESVS their Heade. Rvel. 3. 21.
Christ having seated in vnspeakable glory his My|sticall Body, hee then turneth to the Goates on his left hand, bidding them, Depart accursed into ever|laesting fyre, prepared for the Devill and his Angels. Matth. 25. 41. This voice as it passeth from Christ the Head, so shall it be subscribed vnto, by the voice of his Mysticall members: and therfore Paul plain|ly affirmeth, that The Saintes shall Iudge the World and the Angels, 1. Cor. 6. 2. 3. Let the Devill and his Angels, ey, all his Coapatners praunce it heere while they may: let them here abuse the Faithfull, (Saintes by calling) by robbing them, smiting them, murdering them, yet withall let them knowe, that after they haue had Their Day, IESVS  his mem|bers shal haue Their Day, what time the Devill and his Goatish Corporation shall from their mouthes receiue Iudgment, irrevocable Iudgment, by being adiudged to Hell-fyre for ever.
All this considered, howe had wee neede to be sober and watchfull in Prayer; that so, when others shall crye like fooles, Cover vs oh Hilles and Moun|taines, we may then boldly lift vp our heades in the Testimonie of a good Conscience, knowing that, that day shall be the day of our Redemption, the day of our full deliverance from all evill.
After this glorious day, all Creatures (vnder de|gree of reason, Rom. 8. 21. 22.) do after a sort grone, because then they shall bee freed from their pre|sent corruption, which seazed vpon them through our sinne. How much more should we groane and hunger after this Great day of the Lord, what time all teaes shall be wiped from our eyes: Nay, if we haue the first fruites of the Spirite (Rom. 8. 23.) wee will and do sigh after this Day.
Oh my God, thou knowes (even Thou knowes) that my Soule leapeth for Ioy at the recordating that Day. Oh sweete Iesus, thou knowes that I am in some comfortable measure (sweet Lord, increase that mesure) willing, yea, desirous to be conformed and made like vnto thee by sufferings, and that be|cause of the glory laide vp for thy members, which in that day shall be revealed. Oh sweet Comforter, thou Holy Spirite, Spirit of Illumination and Sancti|fication, thou testifies vnto my Spirie (Rom. 8. 16.) that in Christ Iesus, and by vertue of his once suf|ficient suffering, I am reconciled vnto the Father: and thou sweete Spirit opens my mouth with bold|nes to Call, yea, cry vpon God as vpon a mercifull Father, (Galat. 4. 6.) and that with full assurance of obtaining every thing is necessary for Soule and Bo|dy. Mercifull Father, so beholde me continually in thy Sonne (my Saviour) Christ Iesus, as through him continually, I may receiue an ever-flowing Fountaine of Light and Holines, vntill I bee made perfect in my all sufficient Head Christ Iesus. And herevnto (sweete Father) make me continually to bee watchfull, because I am vncertaine at what houre thou wilt come, vnto Iudgement vniversall or particular. And herevnto (Oh my God) stirre vp all thy Elect, (Iewe and Gentile) namely, to be so|ber and watching in Prayer, that so, come thou at the first, second, or third houre, we all may be found well employed in our severall sanctified Callings, Amen: for the glory of thy owne great Name, So be it. Come quickly, sweete Iesus, Amen.


(d) Because wee haue no promise of obtaining any good thing at IEHOVAHS hand, without cal|ling vpon his Name, by true, liuely, and effectuall Prayer, therefore I haue afterwards set apart a di|rectorie vnto Prayer: by whose Introduction and Forme, all Novices in faith may be the easier allu|red to so holy an exercise: an exercise neglected of this brutish Idolatrous age, wherein either People vse it not at all; or else (by the suggestion of a false Spirite) they in the roome thereof doe substitute a false kinde of Invocation, consisting in Vaine Repe|titions and ignorant Babling, thinking (like Idola|trers) that their corporeall speaches shall merite. Leaving that small Tractate to his peculiar place, I here (through the assistance of my good God) do put an end to the Synopsis of holy Hystory. What is (in an competent sort) beseeming the worthi|nes of the Subiect, for that giue thou praise vnto him, that giveth knowledge from aboue liberallie, without dashing the Receiver in the teeth. What any way is vnbeseming the Argument, that shal be mine own, and yet, by Gods grace, no sooner of me seene then disclaimed as an alyane and bastardly fruite. And so beseeching my good God to pardon all my wants, and to giue to the Reader holy Iudg|ment, I here end.

PSAL. 119. 130.
The Entrance into thy wordes (oh Lord) sheweth
Light, giving vnderstanding to the simple.



FINIS.



The vvhole of that vvhich hath bene taught
may be resolved thus.
All the Doctrine of the Bible divi|deth
it self, into the doctrine of 
Generation.
Degeneration
Regeneration

The doctrine of Ge|neration
doth divide it
self into the Creation 
Of Creaturs besides Man
Of Man himselfe.

The doctrine of Dege|neration
or mis-creati|on,
divideth it selfe into 
1. The fal of a most ex|cellent
Creature be|fore
Man.
2. The fall of Man, togi|ther
with inferiour
Creatures.

The doctrine of Rege|neration,
or Recreati|on,
divideth it selfe into

1. The Restauration of
Man.
2. The Restauration of
inferior Creatures.

The worke of Creation, craving the Father to
Doe it.
The work of Mis-creation, craving the Sonne to
Recover it.
The worke of Recreation, craving the Spirit to
Confirme it.
Thus that One
God, distingui|shed
into 
Father
Sonne
holy Ghost
 In One work is after
a threfold sort occu|pied:
but man doth
not mark this.
To the Tri-vne God be all Glory.




A PREFACE TO
Prayer, by way of
Dialogue.
Qu. _HAue you penned the
subsequent Forme of
praier, to the end that
any other shuld think
they had well prayed,
in having read or said the same over?
Ans. No: Saying over wordes is no
more Praying, than reading over wordes
is Preaching. As the Guift of Preaching is
an immediate vtterance of the Lord his
will conceived in the heart by the spirite
of Iesus: so is the Guift of Prayer an im|mediat
vtterance (Vocall or Mentall) of
things presently conceived in the heart,
by the Spirit of Iesus. For this cause doth
Paul tell the Galatians 4. 6. that whome
God adopteth in Christ, to them he gi|ueth
the sprit of Christ: even to this end,
that he may stirre vp the Heart of the a|dopted
to crye, Abba, Father: that is, To
call vehemently vpon God, as vpon a merci|full
Father, not a Tyrant or Iudge. And be|cause
none can truly pray, that haue not
this Spirite, as also, because no Requests

(Vocall or Mentall) is true Prayer, that is
not conceived and suggested by the spi|rit
of God, therefore Paul, Rom. 8. 26.
plainly (putting himselfe in the number)
aith, Wee knovve not hovve to Pray as vve
ought, but the Spirite it selfe maketh request
for vs: that is, The Spirit of Iesvvs putteth in|to
the mouth of our spirite vvhat to praye.
To prescribe therefore and enjoyne Set|vvordes,
is to strip the Spirit of his office,
and the way to quench our Spirit.
Obiect. Every one hath not knovvledge
to pray, therfore set formes do help such.
Ans. True: and so doe the written set
Scriptures help such: but yet it followeth
not, that that is praier it selfe: The helpe
to Praier  Preaching, is not our Prayer
and preaching it selfe: the first is a Cause,
the second the Effect: no Cause and his
Effect are the same: every halfe-pennie
Sophister knowes that. Secondly, where
you say, Euery one hath not knowledge to
pray, thereto I answer: every one that is
adopted (as afore) hath the spirit of Ie|sus:
every one that hath that spirit, hath a
speaking (not a dumbe) spirite, a spirite of
knowledge and holy Light.
Obiect. But every one (who is to be ho|ped
to haue Gods spirite) cannot vtter
words orderly as were to be wished.

Ans. That is besides the Question: the
Question is this: Can every one of God his
children (meaning of aged Persons) pray
rightly? I haue saide, they can. Nowe, for
praying so orderly as were to be wished,
I graunt, that young ones in Christ Iesus
cannot pray so fully and methodically, as
these that haue spent som years in Christ
his Schoole. Children cannot speake as
do Elder persons: yet Children (aswell as
Elder persons) can cry vnto the Parents
vpon the feling of some Want: even so can
the youngest Babe in Christ. That, the
blessed Apostle teacheth, (Rom. 8. 15.)
when he saith, that the Adopted do cry: as
also (Verse, 26. 27.) when hee affirmeth,
that the Spirit teacheth vs to pray vvith
grones vnvtterable, the meaning of which
grones is well knowne to God: for hee is
not ignorant of the meaning of his own
spirit. And most grosse headed are such,
as think that any words please God, but
what hee himselfe first breathes into our
hearts by his spirit: for he only accepteth
the fruites of his owne spirit, the fruits of
his Sonnes spirit: which first fruites are
the sanctifier of our whole lumpe. Other|wise
to think is flat Idolatrie, and dero|gaorie
to the spirite of our onely Sacri|ficer
IESVS.

Quest. Do you then simply condemne
all such as vse the wordes of our Saviour,
as they are set downe?
Ans. No: S. Peter (1. 4. 11.) saith, If
any man speake, let him speake as the vvords
of God. Better wordes than our Saviour,
than the Apostles, than the Prophetes
haue vsed, we cannot vse: nay, wee must
learne to speake as they before vs haue
spoken, as in other speach, so specially in
Prayer, which is, An holy speach vvith
God. Whosoever shal vse all or any of our
Saviors words according to knowledge,
and that by the instinct of God his spirit,
which Spirit teacheth the soule, what is
most fit  necessary for the time, to him I
say, Go in peace. But if any for customes
sake, and of a foolish superstitious affecti|on
to the words, shall vse them, or any o|ther
forme of speach in the Scriptures, of
such I say, They are no better than Idola|ters,
Magial inchautaters, neither knowe
they what prayer meaneth. Two sorts of
People offende against our Saviour his
forme of Prayer: the one sort are such, as
through a Romish custome do value all
their other prayers deade and vnprofita|ble,
if so they do not annex it: the other
sort are such, as think it vtterly vnlawfull
(because the same is repeated) for to vse

them wordes for Prayer. If our Saviour
(Marke 14. 39.) did at his second time of
praying, vse the same vvords he had before
vsed, then why should the same in any
Faithfull their vse, be offensiue to vs? But
as our Savior there vsing the same words
did it, because his case was one and the
same vnchanged, so let vs learne then, to
vse the same words, when our case is the
same: otherwise, we shal make holy Words,
but prophane Idoles.
Concluding therefore, that Prayer is
a povvring out of our soules-feeling accor|ding
to the present motion of God his spirite:
as also, that Neither olde vvords nor newe
vvordes are acceptable to God, otherwise
then they are sent vp to God the Father, in
the name of Iesus, and that by the immedi|ate
vvorke of the spirite: I now come vn|to
our Saviour his Exemplar of Prayer,
(Math. 6.) consisting 1. of a Preface, in
these wordes: O our Father vvhich art in
Heuen. 2. of a Supplicatio~ in these words:
Hallovved be thy name, thy Kingdom come,
thy vvil be done in Earth as it is in Heauen:
Giue vs this day our daily bread, and for|giue
vs our debts, as vvee also forgiue our
detters: And lead vs not into tentation, but
deliuer vs from euill. 3. It consisteth of a
Reason, why Prayer is offered vp onely to

God, in these words: For thine is the king|dome,
and the povver,  the glory, for euer.
4. Of Faiths Signet or Seale in this word,
Amen, or So it is.


The first part of the Preface. O our Father,
OH, dul heart, vn|towarde
Soule,
why art thou so lumpish and so
heavie? trust in God thy delive|rer:
cast out, yea breath strong|lie
out, what God his spirit hath
conceived in thee,  my heart.
Sweete Father, when thou by
thy powerful word had created
all Creatures for Man his vse,
then thou created Man and Wo|man
to vse them. Man thou didst
make of the earth, woman thou
took from Mans side, by draw|ing
from thence a Rib, whereof

thou builded Her, that she vnto
him might be an Helper. And so
(having put thy Image in them)
thou placed them in Eden, yea,
in the garden of Eden, the beau|tie
of the whol earth, vnto them
thou gaue two Commaunde|ments:
the first, That they should
dresse the garden: the second, That
they should not eate of the tree entit|led,
The Tree of Knowledge of good
and euill, and so they should liue,
whereof thou gaue them an o|ther
Tree, sacramentally called,
The tree of Life: but if they diso|beyed,
then in the Daye of such
disobedience, They should die. But
thy commandeme~ts were soone
broken: for Satan (adversary to
thy glory  Mans wel-fare) did
even in the same daye possesse
the Dragon (the subtillest beast
of the fielde) and speaking with
the Beasts mouth, Woman negle|cted

her Calling, and with an
idle eare stood harkening vnto
the Serpentes voice, by whose
subteltie, she was soone drawne
to break the other commande|ment;
and then by Her was man
also caryed into Transgression.
Sinne so seazing on their Bodies
substance, the body became Cor|ruptible,
and Corruption effe|cted
the period of death. Sinne
seazing (not on the Substance,
but) on the Faculties or powers of
the Soule, thereby it came to
passe, that their souls were Pow|erfull
in the waies of perpetuall
death, but vnable to all Good.
Sweete Father, as their Crea|tion
was the Creation of the
Matter whereof all Mankinde
is come; so, this fearfull Fall was
not onely to them Two, but to
Me and all Mankinde: conside|ring
wee were then enclosed in
`
their loynes. A fountain of gall,
can send forth no sweet waters:
nor could wee bee borne Holy,
that were conceived in Sin. As
is the Roote, even such are the
branches, nay, our Actuall sinnes
do testifie, that that Original sin
was convayed vnto vs in our
Nature: by reason wherof, I and
All Mankinde haue beene justly
vnder thy Curse. Oh that wee
should fall from thee our Crea|tor,
from thee our Father, that of
base earth did make vs glorious
creatures stamping in our souls
thy Image, whereof justly wee
were deprived: carrying vpon
vs (in steade thereof) the Blacke
vnholy Image of Satan.
But thou Our sweete Father,
didst thou vtterly leaue Man|kind
to be damned with Satan?
Oh, no. Thou soughtest vp our
fore-parents (Adam Heuah)

and Catechized them: freely,
promising vnto them, that of
womans Seed one should come,
by whome the seed of man and
woman shuld overcome Satan.
When the fulnesse of time was
expired, thou accordingly didst
send thy Sonne made of a vvoman,
who in our Nature triumphed
over Sinne, Death, Hell, Sathan,
and so finaly sitteth at the right
hand of Majestie, making con|tinuall
intercession for all such
of Man-kinde, as do come vnto
thee (oh Father) by him: in and
by whome, Salvation onely is
come vnto Iewe and Gentile.
Thus, when of a Father, we had
justly made thee our Foe, it plea|sed
thee, sweete Father, to ap|point
a Mediator betwixt thee
and vs, that so by him, thou and
wee might bee reconciled and
made one. Oh Mercie of mer|cies,

oh thou fountaine of mer|cie,
howe are wee bounde vnto
thee our Father, our Father by
Creation, our Father by Redemp|tion:
in Mercie, twise a Father:
but wee in Obedience, not once
worthy the name of Children.
But so it hath pleased thee, to
call out a companie of Man|kinde
(and amongst them Me,
most vnwoorthie) to whome it
hath pleased thee to Seale thy
Loue vnto their hearts by thy
Spirit, thy sanctifying Spirit.
This testimony of thy Spirit
vnto our Spirits, causeth vs to
open our mouthes boldly vnto
thee, as children to a father, not
doubting but thou wilt giue to
vs whatsoever is good and ne|cessarie
for body and soule.
Earthly Fathers (though wic|ked)
will commonly giue good
thinges vnto their Children,

howe much more thou,


The second part of the Preface. Which art in Heaven.
VVHo art in
Heaven,
and therefore art Heavenly in
thy Guifts, and excellent in all
thy workes: Who also, as thou
art in Heaven, (as a King in his
royall Throne) so hast thou all
power in Heauen and Earth to
serue at a beck. Many Earthly
Fathers, thogh they be vvilling,
yet are they vnable to help their
Children: but thou art as Able,
as vvilling, and therfore Can and
vvill cause all things (even sinne
and al) to turne vnto the best of
such, as are called according to
thy purpose, to be to thee Sons
and Daughters adopted. I be|leeue
Lord, Lord help my vnbe|liefe:
increase my faith,  teach
me truly howe to pray: yea, let

all thy Sonnes and Daughters,
see thy Fatherly face, thy Hea|uenly
face,  that thou neither
Can nor vvil forsake such as do
trust in thy power, and are con|tented
to lay themselues down
vnder the sheilter of thy wings.


The first Petition of the supplication Hallowed be thy Name.
MErciful father;
thy Name is
mightie and excellent amongst
the very Heathen, but who doe
Sanctifie thy Name? The Heavens
and firmament, yea, all the visi|ble
creatures do make knowne
thy name of Power, thy name of
vvisedome, thy name Eternal, thy
names Provident, Bountiful, c.
Every Barbarian (oh Father) by
the little Light of Nature left in
the soul vndestroied, is brought
to acknowledge that there is a
God, who is the Cause of al Cau|ses,

and giveth Being vnto al cre|tures:
but do they herewithall
Hallow thy name, so graven in the
fore-heades of all Creatures vi|sible?
Alas, no: All this sight san|ctifieth
neither eye, heart, nor
hand: thy Lawe is onely a perfit
teacher, giving holy light to the
spirituall blind, and thy vvord is
that Trueth, wherewith man is
first made holy, that so hee may
Hallowe thy Name, thy Nam
plainely written vpon the for|mer
creatures, but more plainly
characterized within thy holy
Church, and that in the vvorde
Sacraments. Therein (oh Lord)
thou hast evidently to Eare and
Eye, propounded Iesus crucified,
Iesus the onely Redeemer, the
only Mediator, in and by whose
blood, thou rests satisfied for al
these, that come vnto thee in
his Name.

Oh mercifull Father, howe
largely haue we Vn-hallowed thy
Name, both in the common Cre|tures,
in the vvord, and in the Sa|craments:
we haue looked vpon
the Heavens, the Earth, Sunne,
Moone, Starres, Trees, Grasse,
Flowers, Beasts, Birdes, Fishes:
but haue we therein spirituallie
discerned thy Power, vvisedome,
providence, kindnes? Nay, we haue
cloathed and fedde our bodies
with divers of thy woonderfull
workes, but haue we there with|all
hallowed thy Name in the
same? yea, we haue medled with
thy Word and Sacraments, but
with what blinde eyes, and dull
hearts? Oh Lord, shame  con|fusion
belongs vnto vs, not on|ly
for not Hallowing thy Name,
but also, for Vn-hallowing and
prophaning of thy Creatures,
Word, Sacraments, and so con|sequently

vnsanctified thy Name
in the same. Oh Lord, by our
rude behavior, we haue labou|red
to obscure thy Name, to bu|ry
it in darknes, by not discer|ning,
and orderly hallowing it.
Yea, that which more is, wee
haue oft remembred thy Name,
but then wee haue taken it in
vaine, then wee haue vnjustlie
sworn by the same, c. as thogh
we had conspired with Sathan,
either to bury thy Name in ob|livion,
or else, by speaking of it
to pollute it, and make it con|temptible.
Sweet Father, in Christ Iesus,
we by the motion of thine own
Spirit, do therefore beg of thee
the Grace, whereby we may be
fitted hereafter to hallowe thy
Name, to sanctifie thy Name, in
beholding the common Crea|tures,
in hearing thy worde, in

receiving thy Sacramentes. To
which end Lord,


The second Petition. Let thy Kingdome come.
LEt thy kingdome come,
even the Spirituall
government of thy Son and our
Saviour Iesus, oh let it Come and
bee seated in the heartes of thy
People. Hitherto Sathan hath
had too great power over our
body, insomuch as our tonges,
handes, feete, eares, eyes, haue
done service vnto Satan, by be|ing
subject to Sinne. Our soules
(oh Lord) in the faculties and
powers therof, haue bene large|ly
serviceable to Sin. Wee haue
Minded earthly things: our Me|mories
haue bene receptacles of
vanitie: our Affections haue bene
eger after thinges cursed by the
Law: insomuch, as in our whole
man, Satan (prince of darknes)

hath had a Kingdome, and occu|pied
an hellish vnholy Kingdome.
Sweet Father, loose the bands
of Satan, destroy his power by
thy spirit: and so let thy King|dome
(that consisteth in Righte|ousnes
and Holines) oh let it Come;
and as a stronger man, let thy
Spirite cast out the Tyrannie of
Sinne, that howsoever it dwell,
yet it may never raigne in our
mortall members. Sweete Fa|ther,
thou hast begunne a good
work in vs, and shall Satan over|turne
it? shall Sinne supplant it?
Alas, alas, except thou vpholde
vs, wee shall deceiue our owne
soules: Satan, the World, and our
Flesh are at league: therefore, as
thou hast hitherto caused vs to
put our trust in thee, so conti|nue
thou our Governour, and
cause vs to stoup vnto the suge|red
motions of thine own spirit

And for the better building
vp of our inwarde man, and the
repairing of thine owne Image
in vs, mercifully giue vnto vs
faithfull Ministers of thy word:
that so we may receiue the bles|sing
of Illumination, and San|ctification,
that accompanieth
thine owne ordinance. And for
making roome to thine owne
Ordina~ce, vouchsafe to remoue
from all thy People, such as
haue run out, without thy bid|ding.
Remoue hyrelings, dumb
dogs, and all such cursed plants
as thy right hand never plan|ted:
that so an open way being
made for thine owne Servants,
the Scepter of Iesus may be lif|ted
vp in the midst of thy Peo|ple:
that they seeing the Ban|ner
of thy Sonne displaied, they
may bring their sons  daugh|ters
from farre, and so giue vp

their names to liue Subjects in
the kingdome of thy son Christ.
And inasmuch as thou hast
commanded Kings, Queenes,
Magistrates, to bee Nource-fa|thers
and Nource-mothers vn|to
thy Church, Lord we humb|lie
intreate thee, not onely to
giue such vnto vs, and others
thy poore people, but also, do
thou put the remembrance of
that dutie in their heades: that
they may not dare (like lewde
Nources) to mingle with thy
Wine and Milke, their owne li|quor
and leaven, but that they
may compt it their Glory, (as
Elders) to cast their Crownes
downe before thy Throne spiri|tuall,
wherevpon thou sittes in
the middest of thy Church. Let
them knowe, that thou hast ap|pointed
the~ to lick vp the dust
before the feete of thy Church,

yea, to remoue the smallest lets
to godlines, so farre (let them
knowe) they ought to bee from
casting their owne inventions,
(as stumbling blocks) before
the feete of thy people. These of
them that will bee brought to
honour thee, do thou honour
them: but if with horne  side,
they wil dedicate themselues to
push thy Sonnes Spowsesse, then
mercifull Father, do cut their
hornes shorter, and breake off
their power: that so they may
learne, how the kingdome that
serues not thee shall perish. And
because, mercifull Father, this
spirituall kingdome of thine in
vs will here never be perfected:
we therefore intreat thee to ha|sten
the comming of thy Son,
(our blessed Saviour) vnto that
finall doome: that so having
gathered his kingdome of Iewe

and Gentile into one, hee may
deliver vp the same into thine
hand; and so thou maist be al in
all. In the meane time (oh Lord)
let thy spirit so guide and leade
vs in thy truth, as by vs


The third Petition. Thy will be done in Earth as it is
in Heaven.
THy vvill may be done
in Earth, as it is in He|uen,
by the blessed Angels. Oh
Lord, They could keepe their
place, but Satan and wee would
needes forsake our place. They
therefore haue continued hap|pie
doers of thy will, where Sa|tan
and Man-kind haue sought
their own will: Satan therefore
for ever alotted vnto the bur|ning
pit, whither likewise whol
Man-kind had packed, had not
thy Sonne stept in and made at|tonement
for me and al such as

apprehe~d him by a liuely Faith:
which is the Guift, even the flo|wer
that buddeth out of our a|doption.
Considering all the benefits
we haue received from thee, oh
Lord, why should not wee in the
Earth do thy will, aswell as doe
the blessed Angels in Heaven?
They were created once, so were
we: yea, wee haue bene created
twise, so were not they: by so
much the more are wee bounde
to do thy will, even thy will by
forsaking our own will: yet this
will of ours, wee are most prest
to preferre before thy will. Oh
false heart, crooked heart, wilt
thou never be duly subject vnto
that pure and only holy will of
thy Creator, of thy Redemer.
As the Angels do in the hea|uenlie
places continuallie be|holde
thy face,  Father, so hast

thou called vs in the Earth, to
liue before thee as in Heaven:
and therefore hast thou called
vs out of the worlde, out of the
kingdome of darknes, and that
to be Citizens with thy Saintes
in the Earth: who, howsoever
they are in the worlde, yet are
not of the worlde: howsoever
they walke their pilgrimage in
the Earth, yet their conversati|on
is in Heaven, their conversa|tion
is heavenly. As thou addes
vnto thy Sonnes Church, such
souls as are appointed to be sa|ued,
so ( mercifull Father) it is
not sufficient for vs to be in thy
Church, except thou lead vs do|ing
thy will in the Church. It is
not sufficient that wee be Citti|zens
of thy spiritual Ierusalem,
except we liue according to the
Citties Lawes and ordinances.
Thou having (Lord) given vs to

knowe this, giue vs power like|wise
to do it: even to do thy Wil
as diligently, faithfully, earnest|ly
as doe the heavenly spirites,
whome thou hast appointed to
minister vnto the heires of Sal|uation:
whome thou hast ap|pointed
for to watch over the
Church,  over every the faith|full.
Giue vnto thy Ministers
grace, to do thy Wil in preach|ing
thy blessed Wil in season and
out of season: not measuring
what man wold heare, but what
thou hast commanded them to
speake. Giue vnto thy people
such Pastors, as may powerfully
Exhort; such Teachers as may tru|lie
deliver the Doctrine of faith:
such Elders, as may diligentlie
Governe: such Deacons, as may
faithfully Distribute the contri|bution
of the Saintes: such Wi|dowes,
as may with Mercifull Af|fections

attend the sicke and im|potent:
that so the Ministers of
thy Church, performing duti|fully
thy will, the Communion
of thy People (as it is called the
Kingdome of heauen, so) it may be
beautifull as Heaven.
Vnto Princes, Magistrates, Peo|ple,
giue grace of subjection to
thy wil, that all of them seeking
thy glory, not their owne wil, it
so may come to passe, that thy
will may be preferred by Al, in
every their several callings: that
Parents and Children, Maisters
 Servants, so studying the do|ing
of thy will, there may be an
heavenly concent and harmony
of obedience towardes thee in
the Earth, as is vnto thee by all
the blessed spirits in Heaven.
And inasmuch as (oh merci|full
Father) after we haue pray|ed
for the glorifying of thy gret

Name, in the establishing of thy
Kingdome and doing thy Will: in
asmuch as after that we are en|joyned
to praye for the things
which necessarily and immedi|atlie
concerne our selues, wee
humblie intreat thee to


The fourth Petition. Giue vnto vs this day our
Daily Bread.
GIue vnto vs our daily
Bread. Breade (oh
Lord) is more than we deserue,
why should wee then be discon|tented
with bread? Nay (as this
years affliction testifieth to our
face) we haue heretofore so pro+phaned
our bodily nuriture, as
fullie we haue merited an whole
deprivation of Breade, much
more of other Creatures. Our
intemperat devouring thy crea|tures
in foode and cloathing:
our shutting heart and hand, in

not administring to the needie:
our hungring more for Bodilie
than Spirituall givings: all of
them put togither, howe haue
they deserved that thou shoul|dest
deny every of thy creatures
to our bodyes: but thou that
sought vs vp, what time we fled
from thee: thou that gaue thine
owne Sonne to be made sin for
vs, what time we had solde our
selues to sinne; how much more
with Christ shalt thou giue vnto
vs al things necessary the body;
and the rather, seeing through
and by him thou hast made vs
heires togither with him.
As he therefore hath offered
vp a sufficient Sacrifice for vs,
and thou thereby rests satisfied
with vs, so we therfore are bold
(in the testimonie of thy Spirit)
to desire that vnto vs thou wold
giue Our Bread. In thy hand it is

to blesse and to curse, with thy
fatherly hand, therefore reach
forth to vs, that which through
him is Ours: and that is Ours,
which any way may tend vnto
our vnfaigned good.
And because we (through the
corruption of nature) are not e|uery
day a like fit rightly to vse
thy Creatures, wee humbly in|treat
thee, to giue vnto vs that
portion of Breade, (and other
things necessary as bred) which
thou thinks necessary for That
Daie. Foode, rayment, health,
libertie, worldly credit, c. As
thou perceiues vs fit or vnfit to
vse them, even so administer the
same vnto vs. Giue vs not po|uertie,
nor riches, feede vs with
externall things convenient for
vs: left wee being full do denie
thee; or lest we being poor shuld
reach forth our hand vnto ini|quitie.

Having much or litle, do
thou (sweet Father) so sanctifie
our hearts, as ever it may bee
seene, that thy hand reacheth
forth and blesseth these tempo|raries
vnto vs.


The fift Petition.  And forgiue vs our Debts, for vvee
also forgiue our Debters.
OH Lord,  we haue vn|hallowed
thy Name; we
haue resisted the Kingdome of thy
Sonne, we haue not done Thy ho|lie
vvill; wee haue taken Bread
and other temporaries without
begging them at thy hands; by
reason whereof, wee are deeply
run into thy Debt: yea, so deep|ly
are wee become indebted, as
wee are never able to satisfie for
al our Trespasses, much more vn|able
to paye the vttermost far|thing.
How then shall we haue
our Debt-score wyped out?

Sweet Father, thou hast promi|sed
(that at what time soever a
sinner doeth repent him from
the bottome of his heart) thou
wilt wype all his trespasses out
of thy remembrance. Giue vn|to
vs therefore humbled souls,
repentant harts, bleeding harts,
that so every our iniquities may
be crossed out of thy book, and
blotted foorth of thy remem|brance.
This Remission, and blotting
out, oh Lord, it cannot fall out
by any vertue in our selues, but
by vertue of that humiliation
of Iesus, who by thee was bro|ken
for our sins, and by whose
stripes we Onely are healed: yet
(oh Father) in as much as for
whome thy Son was so broken,
vnto them thou likewise giues
contrite and broken spirits, by
vertue of which contrition, (as

by a seale) they ever rest assured
of thy free favour in Christ Ie|sus
towards them, we therefore
humblie beg a continuance of
Contrition, and all other the
comfortable fruits of thy Sons
spirite; by vertue whereof, wee
may (in all hurlie-burlies of the
world) be possessed with Peace,
even with that peace whose bot+tome
no Creature can sounde,
 yet the peace wherwith thou
possesses thy childrens soules.
With more boldnes we cry,
Forgiue vs our debts for we (oh Fa|ther)
do also forgiue our debters. If
wee had not forgiven to others
their trespasses, whereby they
became indebted to vs, then
(oh Lord) howe durst wee open
our mouthes and beg forgiue|nes
of sinnes, whereby we haue
bene indebted to thee? No (oh
Lord) the mercilesse shall finde

Iudgment without mercie.
Because wee carrie mercifull
hearts towardes our brethren,
do we therefore merite mercie
at thy hands? No; when we haue
done the best wee can, even yet
we are vnprofitable servants. Is
this mercie in vs a Signe, that
thou hast beene and still will be
mercifull vnto vs? oh yes: such
powring foorth of our Soules|loue
vnto others, it is because
thou first hast shed forth thy Vi|all
of mercie in our soules. Tru|lie
mercifull we shuld never be,
had not thou given the Cause
thereof, by being first mercifull
to vs. Finding therefore in our
souls that holy Effect of thy spi|rit,
Lord wee are bolde to open
our lippes, and to exspect faith|fullie
the continuall Remission
of sins past, present,  to come,
whether committed against thee

or our Neighbour, in thought,
word, and worke.
As (because of our vncessant
sinning) wee therefore do inces|santlie
craue the remission of
our sinnes, so we adde,


The sixt Petition. And leade vs not into temptation,
but loose vs from Euill.
AND leade vs not,
(sweet Father) into
temptation, but do thou still loose vs
from Evill. Many are the Temp|tations
and trials wherewithall
(necessarily for manifesting thy
wisedome and power, as also,
Mans foolishnes and weaknes)
thou art to exercise vpon vs in
this life: but (deer Father) how|soever
wee haue deserved, not
onely to be Led into Tentation,
but also to be Left to our owne
selues, in the time of such tenta|tion,
yet for the Glory of thy

Sons name, by the which we are
called vpon, do thou mercifully
Loose vs from the power of the
tentation. Howsoever wee are
mpted, yet giue vs an happie
ssue out of our temptations: let
vs not (with the Reprobate) fall
finallie into evill.
Satan, the world, our fleshe,
(oh Lord) they are ever labou|ring
to hurry vs to hel: as strong
wle rs, they continually lay
battery vnto our spiritual walls;
Satan and the Worlde without
vs, our owne deceiueable Flesh
within vs: Enemies without,
Enemies within, therefore ne|uer
able to holde out, except
thou (by thy spirit) do leade vs,
do deliver vs, do loose vs and set
our hearts at libertie, that so we
may run the way of thy Com|mandements.

This our Praier wee offer vp
onely to thee.


The first part of the Reason. For thine is the Kingdome.
FOr thine is the ki
dome, whether 
regard the Kingdome of the
Worlde, or the kingdome of the
true Church. In, and over the
world, thou raignes as a King,
brydling Devils and men, com|manding
all creatures to oshy
hoste, to whome the very mb
creatures are forced to be sub|ject:
so that nothing which hath
Being in Heaven or Earth, but
vnto thee the Kingly Creator
and Preserver, it standeth a sub|ject,
even to thy regiment and
order, decreed vpon (before all
worlds) in the high Parliament
house of Heaven. But in thy
Church, thy Throne of Govern|ment
is exalted,  vpon it thou

sittes gloriouslie encompassed,
with the shining Lampes of thy
Spirit, whereby thy subjects are
directed. This our prayer wee
offer vp onely to thee, because
thine is


The second part of the Reason. The Power.
THE Power: euen
al Power in hea|uen
and in earth. Only thou art
able to giue Power vnto vs for
Hallowing thy Name: onely thou
art able to plant the Kingdome of
holines  righteousnes: only thou
art able to giue vs Power of Do|ing
thy vvil: onely thou art able
to giue Bread, and to giue pow|er
vnto Bread and other tempo|raries,
for nourishing the body:
onely thou art able of thine ab|solute
Power to Forgiue our sinns:
onely thou art able to Leade vs
safely through tentations, and to de|liuer

vs from Euill: only thou art
our King, and wee subjects pro|fessed
to thy Kingdom; for whose
vse thou hast and ever will ma|nifest
thy Power.
This our prayer, wee offer vp
onely to thee, because, as thine is
Kingdome, so also is Power


The third part of the reason. And Glory.
AND Glory. We
offer not vp our
Prayers vnto Angels, Saintes, or
any other Creatures, because
that were to glorifie the Crea|tures,
with that glory which on|lie
is due to the Creator: but as
it is onely in thee to blesse and
to curse, to giue or hold backe,
to saue by much or litle, c. so
onely do we glorifie thy Name,
by commending vnto thee (our
merciful Father) our souls con|dition.



The fourth part of the Reason. For ever.
NEither is King|dome,
Power, and
Glory thine for a Day, Moneth,
yeare, but for Age after age, even
For ever and ever. Creatures haue
sparkles of thy kingdome, spar|kels
of thy power and glory; and
therefore, all their kingdome,
power and glory limited; yea, all
of it hath an end; and it shall be
drawn back to thy selfe, special|lie
what time thy Son shall deli|uer
vp the kingdome into thine
hands,  thou shalt be Al in Al.
To thee therfore be al kingdom,
power and glory for ever.


The Seale of Faith. Amen.
SO it is: even so it is,
maugre devils  men.
Thy Seale remaineth sure: for
thine owne knowes thee, and
thou art known and believed of
them, Amen.





BEcause Psalmes, Hymnes and Spiri|tuall
Songues, haue much affinitie
with Praier, therfore I haue thoght
it not amisse, in the next place to adde
two such Sonets: alwaies remembred,
that nothing I haue or ever shal write, be
joyned in vse with the Canonicall Scrip|tures
in the publike service of my God.
Such joyning of our patcheries (for no
better name I will giue them, in compa|rison
of the holy Canon) I call nothing
but a sawcie Ioyning our Posts, by IEHO|VAHS
Posts. Ezek. 43. 8.


A Soules Lamentation.

DVll Soule, dull soule, affections hard as Steele,
Vntoward Soule for praising of thy God:
His works and gifts how canst thou see  feel
And still in way of forlorne persons plod?
Awake my Soule, go tune thy Instrument,
And sing thou out thy heavie has Lament.



Thy Minde in ADAM rightly vnderstood,
But ADAMS Fall hath thee with darknes clad:
Thy will in ADAM first Affected good,
And Power to do right things (oh) then thou had.
But Minde perverted, Will affected wrong.
Then onely Power to ill, to man did long.


Hereby it comes, thy minde is Dull to right,
Thy will Affecteh: things displeasing God:
Hereby it comes thou Doest with all thy might,
Lewd things, full Mriting IEHOVAHS Rod.
Nothing is right that in thy Natures pent
Then tune thy passions, and sing forth Lamn.


Lament with me, who feele Sinnes fyer-brand,
And straine your soules till teares descend amaine:
I see Sinne doth surmount the Ocean sand,
I see Sinne doth our purest actions staine:
Do all I can, I see all is too ill,
Oh faithles Minde, oh fowle vntoward Will.


I muse saith one, that any damnd should be,
Sith God his handy-work is all Mankind:
But more I muse (when I this sinne do see)
That any one Salvation should find:
All hauing falne, why should not all there lye,
And as they merite damned be and dye.


Oh mercy endles of our highest Lord,
Th sent his Sonne for ransoming all such,
As who with Faith do mix the written word:
And with his Crosse do finally not grutch!
But ingrate Heart, that hast that mercie seald,
And yet more thankfulnes hast not reveald.



Base heart, more base than Diapasons string,
That sounds belowe, as savouring nought but clay:
Once rowse thy selfe, and higher notes do sing,
With free affects do sing Hallelu-iah.
But (oh alas) Sinne still in place doth throng.
Accursed sinne it thwarts me in my Song.


Thy Christ hath loved thee and suited thee;
Yet (oh my Soule) how hast thou grieu'd his Sprit
Alas, alas, long hath he woed me,
But in his waies I haue had small delite.
Howe many guifts vnto me hath he sent,
But retchles I. Oh sing (my Soule) Lament.


With trickling teares, let cheeks bedewed be,
And prostrate fall on Earth thou earthly lump:
What goodnes in thy nature doest thou see?
Oh wretched man and stupid senceles stump.
A masse of clay, howe dare it rush on ill?
Vntoward Soule, blind Mind, and crooked will.


Feares thou not him, that is Consuming fire?
Feares thou not him, that ponders every sprite?
Feares thou not him, who will account require?
With ill darst thou his goodnes daily quite;
Rent Heart, teare Soule, do all thy powers straine,
So solace shall ensue thy present paine.


This Life is but a vale of miserie,
This Life is but a pilgrimage of paine:
Even nowe a Floure, cut downe then by and by,
No certaine place, till corps in Earth remaine.
Pack hence foule Pride, and loue of earthly toyes:
What is it that deade Cesar nowe enioyes?



Vntuned heart, tune thy affections right,
And sing thy sinne with he avie warbling note,
Witnes thereto, call every Day and Night:
Nor cease thou to put off old ADAMS Coate.
No sooner see a tatter of thy Sinne,
But dreary-wise thine Elegic beginne.


Thine Elegie beginne with dewed cheeke,
And drawe a base Larg note beseeming it,
For sinnes Remission from aboue, do seeke:
For soules discharge imploy thou all thy wit.
And till (thou soule) in highest heavens be pent,
Do not leaue off (poore Soule) to sing Lamen.



A Soules solace.

YE Children which do serue the Lord,
Your joyfull hearts with me affoord,
For high extolling IEHOVAH.
From out the Hels, he vs redeemd,
what time his loue we nought esteemd,
The Dragon so did loose his pray.
Sing forth (my heart) his worthie praise,
To whome thy strength is due alwaies.
For Sin hath got his bleeding wound.
Though Sinne be vexing thee among,
By Christ his crosse yet art thou strong:
His crosse hath Sin and Satan bound.



Exult my Soule, sing forth his loue,
Thy Flesh in Christ is got aboue:
Thy flesh in highest hevens doth raign.
Thy flesh, Iesus hath glorifide,
On God his right hand It doth bide,
Let Satan rage and roare amaine.
Out of the Heavens Satan is throwne,
Lift he his hed, Christ knocks him down,
Christ in thy Nature doth this deed.
Old Adam lost our natures strength:
Newe Adam it redeemd at length,
Even Christ who sanctified our seed.


Oh thou my soule, and all within,
Praise thou thy God that pardons sin,
Praise him that seales to thee all good.
Cast forth thy Gauntlet gainst hels dore
Thou in thy God strength more  more:
Satan is conqucred by Christs blood.
Povvers belowe, Povvers aboue,
Can never alter God his Loue,
Rejoyce all Faithfull then with me.
Tune heart-strings for this harm one,
Sing forth cause of Soules melodie:
No other cause of loye I see.


If worldly man joy in his pelfe,
For loue of which, he damnes himselfe:
How shuld we joy in heav'nly wealth?
Their substance dureth but a while.

The theefe can easlie them begyle:
But substance ours, is free from stelth.
The Lyon strong of Iudahs blood,
He is Lord-keeper of our good,
He is our Treasurer onely he.
Let wicked ones feele smart of scant,
The thing is Good, wee cannot want:
Therefore Children rejoyce with me.


When fire shall all this World consume,
And Ayre shall filled be with fume:
Rapt vp shall be the faithfull sort.
When wicked flesh and bones shall fry,
We shall be changed by and by,
And so vnto our Christ resort.
From glorious throne he shall vs cleare,
When Satanas shall roare for feare,
And damned be with wicked men,
Ye litle ones, therefore rejoyce,
And with me vtter forth your voice,
Saying, To God be praise, Amen.


EPHES. 5.
18 And be not drunk vvith Wine, vvhere|in
is excesse, but be filled vvith the spirit.
19 Speaking vnto your selues in Psalmes,
and Hymnes, and spirituall songes, sing|ing
and making melodie to the Lood in
your hearts.





The Epilogue.
THVS (beloved young
ones, whome God make
ful aged in Christ Iesus) I haue
for your vses, sodainly scribled
vp this Breviarie of the Bible.
If any shall heereby emulate,
and so put forth a better work
it shall not grieue but glad
me: who desires not onely to
do good my selfe, but also to
occasionate your good by o|thers.
What herein is further
to be wisned, that (if God giue
mee once againe to aggresse
the Argument) I may liue

with more leasure to absolue.
In the mean time, vse the litle
thou hast, not so much for
pratling, (which is this ages
present profession) as for pra|ctising
the faith, and thou (in
being faithful in thy litle) shal
in time be made the owner of
much. As many of you as
hold the faith of IESVS in in|corruption,
vouchsafe to re|member
me in your prayers,
and the Lord bee with your
spirits for ever, Amen.



Scholasticis.
QVod hic nimis raptim scrip|si,
no Animosioribus,
sed Neophytorum animulis con|scripsi.
Haec atem si vos (Scho|lastici)
oculis Lynceis percussuri,
Quid? Ne Aristarchica virgu|la,
hoc vel illud vos temer note|tis.
Oblatr ant citius multa, qui
nesciunt plurima: nec quis, quam
qui Polyphemo coecior, magis fu|tilis
et audax. O tempus,  mores!
tempus quidem Graculo garruli|us,
loquax vt Eccho: insipidum
autem, ac omnibus praeeuntibus
saeculis insulsius. In ista Biblio|rum
Synopsi, multa necessari pri|s
inter se sunt conferenda: po|stea

quidem, intentione criori
dijudicanda. Error si quis vase|rit
(ac ego quis qui non errem?)
non vt ille tegendus ad fidei ca|nonicae
obliterationem, sed per
Charitatis normam matur dete|gendus
velim. Fidei analogian si
per totum foeliciter servaui (quod
quidem  Deo Patre saepius ipse
petij) hoc est quod volui  opto.
Legatis, imo vero perleg atis, sed
semper Spiritus sanctus vobis ad|it,
qu vo secundum Theologiae
gnomon, dijudicetis. Amen.
Possumus multi calomos vetare
Possumus pauci calamis praeire,
Possumus nulli maculis carere,
dixit HENOCHVS
CLAPHAMVS Anglus,
testis Isu.





ERRATA.
Page 13. Line 17. for hath, read had. pag. 14. l. 20.
for future, read future. pag. 18. l. 30. for ect Elo
read fect. Elohim, pag. 9. l. 11. for rom, read from
pag. 40. l. 6 for Aegyptians (som, read Aegyptians, som
pag. 49. l. 24. for Chron. read Exod. pag. 511 l. 28. for
1. Cor. 1. 2. read 1. Cor. 10. 1. 2. pag. 55. l. 14 Orthoto|mein,
read Ortho-tomein, pag. 61. l. 14. for Aholiah,
read Aholiab, pag. 69. l. 16. for 4. read 40. pag. 73. l. 36
for making, read make, pag. 77. l. 2. for Kem, read
Kerem, pa. 91. l. 27. 8. 9. 30. 3. for Cbdih wel pro|phecied:
roundly taking vp Edm-sau for laghing
at his brothers captivitie Reade, Obadh might
nowe wel prophecie, roundly taking vp Edom Esau
for laughing at his brothers Captivitie. But trans|port
these words to page 96. line 29. placing them
betwixe Mattaniah and (b). Pag 95. l. 8. for against,
read gainst, and l. 12. for years, read yeare pag. 120
l. 28. for first Staffe 30. read first part, Staffe 30. pag.
59. lin. 22. for Prov. 28. read Prov. 28. 13.







