




THE SYN, AGAINST THE HOLY GHOSTE:
Made manifest from those grounds of Faith, which haue bene taught  received by the Faithfull in Eng|la~d,  that for those 40. y. togither vnder the prosperovs raigne of my Soveraigne Lady  Quene ELISHABET.
Which may serue for a rayning in of the heady,  yet for a spur to slouth|full Spirits:
By HENOCH CLAPHAM.
 Eccles. 7.
18. Be not just ouer-much, nor make thy self much wyse: wherefore sholdst thow seeke to be de|solate?
19. Be not wicked ouer-much, nor be thow foo|lish: why sholdst thow dy in thy vn-tyme?
 At AMSTERDAM: 1598.



To his faithfull Brethren (a poore Remnant of the ever visible Catholike and Apostolicke Church) Abraham Crottendine, Iohn Ioope, Hugh Armourer, Christopher Sym|kins, Thomas Farrat, Abraham Wakefeild c. Grace Mercie and peace be multiplied from God the father / through the Mediation of Ie. Chr. his Son, by the instillation of his adopting spirit into theyr spirits, Amen.
REformists in England caried of erst with true zeale for reparing the walls of Ierushalem, the praise of the whole earth: they in the heat of their la|bour ouer-caried in som speach (as, Such  such ecclesiasticall functions, ordinatios, administrations c. they are merely Antichristian, badges of the beast) others theyr zealous hearers herevpon (and in the fore-front of such, Mr. Rob. Brovve) taking such asser|tions for sound Theologicall arioms, do conclude thus: Then not only that, but all flo|ving from that, it must also be meerly Antichristian: for a bitter fountaine can send foth no svvet vvates, as is the roote such is the braunches. Wherevpon fearing the iudgment de|nounced against the Beast his people Revel. 14. 9. 10. 11. they seperate not only from vi|sible euell, but also from visible good  as all Anti-christian. Having thus confusedlie seperated from Confusion it remaines they begin all anewe, wherevnto Minister must be no ministers vntill they have a newe Ordination from such separists, allead|ging all former election, and ordination to be meerly Antichristian from the abuse of such scriptures, Math. 7. 16. 2 Cor. 14. 15. 16. vvith 2 Thess. 2. 3. c. wherevpon (which Donatus diest not attempt, nor yet Rob. Br.) Iamen (abusing Nomb. 8. 10. thereto) must Iay on hands, and so contrarie to the Ghospell his Canon Heb. 7. 7. they wold without all contradiction have the Greater to be blessed of the Iesser: for theyr publi|ke gathering togither vnto this action it causeth them not cease being lay men, no mo|ve then theyr hands publikely baptising or administring the Io. his Supper doth cau|se them therin to be anie more then lay-people. Others go on furder saing, Is it possible to receive laufull baptisme, a laufull foundation of faith from the Ministers and apostaci of Anti-christ, alleadging therevnto the former scriptures: and so seke out newe baptis|me, newe foundation of faith, reiecting frely and voluntarily the former: so  I feare that horible syn, which I make the argument of the sequell.
Yow haue learned I hope, that the Aduersarie 2 Thes. 2. 4. is not only adverse vnto manie good things, but also to the very foundation of the Ghospell. The word there is Anti-eimenos which is adverse foundationed. Nor can that Head or Body be such, that is not an holder or cliuer to another foundation then that Iesus Christ layd. When Iohn hath taught Euery man to haue syn in him, then, that he vvhich synneth is of the Devell, we do not thereon inferre. Therefore euery man of the devell: because we expound synneth or committeth syn by Syn raigninge essentiallie in the committer, as in the Devel who synneth from the beginning: so, neither though euerie sowle is in som|things against Christ, do we therefore say, Euerie sowle is Anti-christian: but only that sowle in whose membtrs syn domineers: nor onlie that, but also is one in the founda|tion of faith opposit to Christ: for Antichrist is Ciuil or spirituall, and it is the spiritu|all whereof all the controversie is: who is Keimenos (foundationed) Anti, asmuch as ok , full-but to Christ his foundation: and therefore not for separable Acci|dents called the Man of syn: which in english valueth. A lump of syn, or essence of syn. The not being Cathechized in this one poore begining of Christ, it hath caused Many eachers to lay false grounds, wheren others buildinge, there is no end of wandring. Som onninge not onlie into Mr Br. first course, but also further and worse then that further: yea so far, as diuerse I feare haue committed the horible syn against the holy Ghost, Heb. 6. and 10. That I labour to proue in the sequell, which I incommend vn|to your Brotherhood for a igne to the Catholike Church of my soules syncerity: as al|so for a meanes to keepe you waking and watchfull to the holy way god hath placed yow in. So much for that: now to the Argument.






Propo|sition.

All such as voluntarily forsake the grounds  true beginings of Christ  therewithall the fellow|ship spiritual they haue with the people of god the|rein, all such do syn that fearfull  horrible syn a|gainst the holy Ghost, which is spoken of in the E|pistle to the Hebrues, Chap. 6.  10.

FOr the manifestation hereof let vs he|are the scriptures speak. In Heb. 6. tis thus: Leauing the doctrine of the begining of Christ, let vs be lead on to perfecti|on, not laying againe the Foundation of Repentance from dead works  of faith towards God, of the doctrine of Washings  Imposition of hands,  of the Resurrection from the dead  of Eternall IudgementFor it is impossible that they which we|re once lightned  haue tasted of the heauenly guifte,  were made partakers of the ho. gh. and haue tasted of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to com, If they fall away shold be renued againe by Because vvith Esa they may vvith tears seek repe~tan|ce but not fynd it: Heb 12. 17. Repentance: seing they crucify agai|o themselues the Son of God  make a Mock of him: Falling away from the former light, they for that are said to crucifie againe Christ and to deride him after a sort with those which bidde him saue himself if he will saue others. And indeed what do such Apostate schismaticall spirits lesse, when they put Christ to begin theyr new-birth againe as of yore, and that from the very foundation. In the 10. chap. the substan|ce of this doctrine is called Faith (vers 22.) because the whole lump is seasoned by the first fruites Faith: and (in ver. 23.) called Hope, because it ministred Hope of salvation. And he|rein (ver. 24. 25.) they had Fellowship with the faithfull. In which terme Fellowship is plainly implied Charity sa~ctified in the body mysticall of Iesus: for as that Bodie is the 2 Cor. 6. 16. 1 Pet 2. 4. 5. Temple of the ho. gh. so in the same fellowship is Loue and all actions of Loue only sanctified to saluation. This causeth Luke to say, Act. 2. 47. The Lord added vnto the Church (he speaks onlie of the visible church) fro~ day to day such as should be saued. And hereto accordeth the types Cyprian  large pro|ueth this in hs B. of Prelates  plicity. Noahs , the Howse wherein the Paschal lamb was slaine, Rahabs howse, out of which places whosoever were found when the LOrd came to iudgment, loe, without all mercie they perished as straungers to the common wealth of Israel. And this is it the Spirit teacheth in those words: Not for saking the fellow|ship that we haue among our selues (as the maner of som is) but let vs exhort one another  that somuch the more, because we

se the day draweth nere: for if we syn voluntarily (vnderstan|ding the former doble syn spoken of) after we haue receiued the knowledge of the truth there remaineth No Inter|cession, as anone. no more Sacrifice for synnes, but a fearfull expectation of iudgment  violent fyre which shall devoure the aduersarie. The collection of the who|le is this: Those that once haue bene illuminate and tasted of God his good word so far, as they haue bene interessed with the ground and principles of the Gospell, therewithall enioy|ing fellowship with Noah and his few sowles in the Arke (notwithsta~ding som vncleane creatures within) if now they voluntarily reiect the word of Noah they once beleiued, and so willinglie leap out of the churches bosom, it is impossible to vs ward but they drowne, vnable to be recouered by our prayers or theyr vnseasonable repentance. Yea only we can expect the convayance of such soules to be 1 Pet. 3. 19 20. pent till last iudg|ment, in the prison infernall where now the sowles are who mocked Christ his spirit preaching of old in Noah for 120. y. togither.
Blessed 1 Ioh. . Iohn hauinge taught that Christ Iesus is our sole reconciliation: that the same death effecteth in vs loue to|wards God and our brother, anone he teacheth that we ha|ue assura~ce of synnes remissio~ in our sowles and in our breth|ren, by being stirred vp by his spirit to pray in faith (called Ch. 5. 14. parrhesia) a trust leaning on a promise: but therewithall he in|timates a certaine kynd of syn, for the which a brother hath no promise to pray: Ver. 16. There is a syn to death, I say not that he shold ask (forgivenes) for that. And what is this but what is taught to the Hebrues, There remaineth no sacrifice for such. 1 Tim. 2. 1. c. Prayers, supplications, intercessions we are com|maunded to offer vp for all sorts of people (for that Ps. 51. 17. Dauid foresawe to be ghospels sacrifice: and thus saith A glorious auntient of the Ghospell: Iustin Mar+tyr vvith Trypho~ the Iuc. supplications  thanksgiuings are the sole perfect sacrifices pleasing God  that Christian hearts haue learned only to offer them) but for those that syn this syn to death, I say not (saith Iohn) thow art to pray for that.* greek is, teleiaj mo|aj. Som haue taught this syn to be finall desperatio~: the~ Iohns speach might implie prayer for a penitent person dead, but no prayer for him we se to dy impenitent: and this Rome liketh well. Others graunt the syn seable in this life (and so both the former scriptures imply) and hereof two iudgments: the bet|ter sort adde vnto all is said vnto the Hebrues, a willing ma|litious persecuting the knovven truth, because it is the truth. This I can hardlie beleiue to be in anie but the deuell himself.

But if it can be I say it doth not simplie cause this syn to be but more to be: for such a syn we shall not be able to proue in manie ages, whereas the holy writ affirmeth that in the lat|ter days (begon in thapostles tyme) Math. 24. 24. 1 Tim. 4 1. c. 2 Ep. 3. 1. c. Iude 4. c. Reuel. 8. 10. 11.  9 1. c. manie shold depart from the faith, hauing seared consciences, teaching doctri|nes of deuels with Iannes and Iambres, ordeyned of old to des|truction etc. and therefore this syn no such Rar'auis black swa~ as manie haue made it thorough too much pitie, which hath brought with it much detriment vnto the lords city. The wor|ser sort (the Brownists: though I knoe not that he was euer so stupid) hath babled, that euerie syn which brought the bo|dy vnder Death by Moses his lawe, that is this syn Iohn speaketh of. A collection of bloody crueltie, rather beseming Bull the hang-man, then anie that wold be demed disciples to Iesus. But such was the old condemned heresie of Nouaria|nus. Our sauiours practise with the Ioh. 8. woman taken in the act of adulterie, it argued another spirit: and so did the cen|sure of excommunication practised by Corinth against the in|cestuous fornicator: which being for humbling the flesh (the|refore before not humbled) and recouering the spirit yet stee|ping vnder the ashes of senslesnes must needs (togither with the pronunciation) admit prayer for him, as for a brother not vtterlie but almost gone in a spirituall trance. But because they wold scorne to be thought to learne anie thing of Clapham (though secretlie somtimes the greatest of them are forced to leane towards me) let them learne of S. Paul two excom|munications: the first (whereof 1 Cor. 5) existing for a season viz, Till the flesh be humbled: the second enduring to death, chap. 16. 22. called in Syriak phrase Mareethan is interposd for sound sa|ke. Maran-atha: in English The Lord commeth, And this is of like value with the He|brues Cherem or creature accursed, Iosh. 7. 11. 13. And this is the syn the Author to the hebrues teacheth, as also Iohn, terming it a syn to death (because excommunicate to the na|rall death) for whome he will not say, pray: for whome (to the hebrues) the church cannot sacrifice: for whome S. Paul appointeeth the denunciation, The Lord commeth: whereto S. Iude (borowinge Iude. 1. Henorhs prophetie) addeth, Behold the Lord commeth to iudgment: because such synners are euer to heare of Iudgment, no more of the Ghospell which they willinglie haue torne vp by the rootes, and despitefullie reiected. And so (and no otherwise I thinke.) those scriptures can of vs be reconciled.
When thapostle speaketh of an Heretike gone from the truth

(For of an Heretike neuer possessed therewith he ca~not spea|ke) he co~maundeth vs to Tit. 3. 10. 11. Reiect him after o~ce or tvvise admo|nition, adding a reason. Knovving that he that is such is xestraptaj:  it i his mynd . tur|ned ouer,  sinneth (on autokatakritos) being damned of him self. Will an Heretike tell vs he damnes himself? Noe: how the~ do we knoe he is damned of himself? no otherwise but becau|se he is obstinate in som principle co~trarie to that of the Gos|pell he once beleiued. So in this generall willinge apostacie from the rudiments of Christ, such will not (vpon our dealing with them) acknowledge they syn against Conscience (nor do I thinke theyr Conscience in the present state doth euer con|demne them) but comparinge it with the former waking es|tate, this present state is accompted, condemned: yea for euer to be dispared of: nor maruell we that such as from heart and mouth voluntarily vomited vp faith and fellowship, they shold be vnto vs a people dispaired of, more then an arme or legge of the bodie droppinge downe rotten rype of itself, is de|priued of all physik as Ministringe no hope of recouerie. And therefor this syn not committed of Peter, The story vvritten by Gribal du y. 1548. pub|lished by Hen. Panta|leon. nor yet of Frances Spiera Lawyer of Citadella. For howsoever with the mouth (thorough feare of man) they denyed Christ and true faith, yet the heart neuer gaue consent fully to the mouth: much les|se did they voluntarily shake of both faith and fellowship Rom. 10. 10. With the heart man beleiueth vnto Righteousnes  vvith the mouth man confesseth vnto saluation. After the heart hath once retained the sauing foundation of faith, and the mouth hath once by confession thereof brought the bodie vnder Isa. 49. 22. the standerd of the Church, marching there in equipage with yon ge and olde of the saued of the Gentiles, what one reason ha|ve we to expect Re-repentance of such, Re-regeneration of such after once they voluntarilie haue cast and cashierd themselues from the faith and fellowship of Iesus? A man may liue lac|king an arme, or legge, or hande: but let him loose his head or heart, lyfe is gone, and no more so good as a mayined man. Iude therefore denominates such Trees tvvise dead (once be|fore theyr spirituall birth: then now by a willinge break-neck downefall twofold, from faith and fellowship wherein they had bene planted) yea, he calls them trees pulled vp by theMth. 15. 13 rootes (accordinge to that of our sauiour, Euery plant my hea|uenly father hath not planted it shalbe pulled vp by the rootes as if thereby we shold thinke (at least feare) that they are not destinate to a lyfe-plot in the vyne Iesus: but so shred of from head a~d body Ioh. 15. 6. Heb 6. 8. . 4. 2. they are to expect in the next place to be burned

n fyre, hauing the ernest thereof before hand, seated . And such was Alexander the Coppersmith his syn (it se|meth it was he) who by Paul reiected in the first ep. to Ti|mothi, against him in the second ep. he thus imprecates: The Lord revvard him according to his vvorks. After which sort Ieremie imprecateth ch. 18. 21. and so doth Dauid diuerse ty|mes. Vnder the Maran-atha the heretick Cerinthus it semeth lay,  in his Eccles. ist. book. 4. ch. 14. an therefore S. Iohn comming into the Bath where he found him, he retired saying: Let vs avvay least the Bath tumble dovvne. So it is said he retired also vnbathed, Epiphani|us in ker. 30. fyn|dinge Hebion in the Bath. In like state it semeth Marcion stood, who metinge Polycarpus the Angel of , and sayinge, Acknovvledg thovv vs: vnto him the holy Pastor replies, I acknovvledg I knoe the for the first begotten of Sa|tan. But what need more testimonie that such are to be im|precated against, rather then precated for, when we see PeterAct. . vpon euidence of Simon Magus his euell imprecate thus: Thy mony perish vvith the: which in english valueth, Thovv  thy mony goe togither into destruction. Obiection. He saw him eternally reprobate. Ansvver. Tis false: for he willeth Si|mon to pray (for himself wold not) if so it vvere possible that the thought of his heart might be forgiuen. But Simon desirin|ge the Apostles to pray for him, the ho. Gh. shutteth vp the hystorie without one tittle sounding they did so. Yea the eccle|siasticall histories do mention that vpon Simons persistance in euell, attempting afterwards in  to flie from the Ca|pitol, Peter shold fall downe and imprecate against the sedu|cer, vntill he fell downe and broke his neck. What shold I say, doth not our sauiour say of such, that not the old vrleane spirit alone, but Math. 12. 45. accompanied with 7. worse. he reenters such, and therefore vtterly vnlike to be againe dispossessed? I conclude therefore, that Such as giue theyr fre-vvill to Satan for being torne vp from the foundation of Christian faith  fel|lovvship therein, they commit that fearfull  horible syn against the ho Gh. Heb. 6. and 10. Hearken to the rest.


Assump|tion.

But all such of our English people as once vvere in teressed vvith the substance of faith receiued in Eng|land,  synce that haue forsooke that ground of Be|leif togither vvith all spirituall fellovvship therein, Euen all such haue forsaken the true beginnings of Christ  fellovvship they had vvith the people of God therein:


Conclusion.

Therefore all such haue synned that fearfull  horrible syn against the Ho. Gh. heb. 6.  10.

IF the Assumption be true, no question is to be made of the Conclusion, it growing naturallie from the Antecedent: but the Assumption is true in the iudgme~t of all learned Pro|testants (English, Scottish, Dutch, French etc.) therefore vnto all such the Conclusion must be true: for they all do teach and professe the learned in England to deliuer a true founda|tion of faith: and therefore by the voyce of such, all such our English Apostates and Sthismatikes haue synned that fear|full and horible syn. That the foraigne churches haue depar|ted from Engla~d (som in the maner of gathering the Church and all of them in the forme of disciplines exercise vttered in Math. 18. 15. 16. 17. etc.) yet they all profes one and the same foundation and substance of the Ghospell: charitablie hopin|ge (as they ought, say malicious Donatist what he can) that notwithstanding men in ignorance and infirmitie (but woe to him that sinnes against light reuealed) do build stubble, stra|we, Cor. 3. 11. 12. c. This scripture held fast, it ouerturne all o  ons And this founda tion I can proue euer o haue pre|vailed against Hel|gates,  so consequent|ly the Churh uervisible. tymber: yet kepinge the foundation in a moritified estate, such shalbe saued in theyr owne persons (with the losse of theyr tras labour) saued as priuate poore Christians, obtayning no glorie for such ministerie: yet as by the fyre, hardly saued though saued. And towching this sence, I haue Ambrose manie in Theodorets tyme: as also Caluin, Seb. Munster, He|mingius, Beza and others: nor can the scripture (comparing it with that goes before) be vnderstood of anie thinge but di|uersities of doctrine, good and bad.
The beginnings of faith wherein the Hebrues had bene ca|techised, are syx: Repentance, Faith, Baptismes, Imposition of hands, Resurrection, Eternall iudgment. Under Repenta~|ce is contained mortification and Uiuification, according to that: fly euel do good: called Repentance from dead works. Under Faith is comprehended not only a generall consent vnto the history of god his word and works, but also Coloss. 2. 2  Tim. 1. 15. Rom. 5. 1. a par|ticular plerophorie or full assurance of our reconcilation with God, who through Christ Iesus God and Man (and there|fore fit to interceed betwene God and Man) is pacified to|wards vs for syn: as also through the vaile of his flesh (Gen. 3. 15. Galat. 4. 4. Heb. 2. 16.  0. 0. the seede of woman: our first fruites without which our lump could not be sanctified) he hath made a new and liuing way into the Holy of holyes, the hiest heauens, sitting there at the

right hand of Maiesty, till all his enemies be made his foo|te stoole. Under Baptismes is intimate purifications vn|der the lawe, and water-washing sacramentally vnder the Ghospell: sealing vnto old and yong so baptised, the purifi|cation of theyr sowles from syn, Heb. 9. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19. Reu. 7. 14. only by the price of Iesus his blood, wherein the garments of the saints are made whi|te: Nomb. 8. 10. compa|red vvith Nehem. 10. 29  so in al generall ac|tions, the Elders of the Tribes are alone v|sed, much more in this Se our Con|clusion 6. through which blood we alone conquer and triumph ouer all hellish powres. Under Imposition of hands is in|sinuate Reu. 12. 11. the laying propheticall and sacramentall hands on the heads of men before the Law (so did Iaakob with Ephraim and Manasseh) on Animals and men vnder the lawe (so did Moses with Ioshua: and the Elders of the trybes on the Le|uits: and the Leuits on Animals sacrificed) on the heads of diuerse vnder the Ghospell: as our sauiour blessing infants (like mough before baptised) brought by beleiuers vnto him: his imposing hands (as did also the Apostles) in giuing the visible guiftes of the spirit: vsed of Presbyters in creating ad enstalling persons into ministeriall functions: somtymes to the Gatheringe Ministerie, but euer on Ministrie tyed to som certaine congregation: signifyinge and sealing hereby vnto such sowles beleiuinge, Szegedi Fenner c. no lesse the~ the presence of God with them in such theyr Christian callinge. This Mr Caluin con|sideringe, he therefore truly calls it Institut b. 4. c. 19. sect. 28. such a sacrament as hath a faithfull siigne of spirituall grace. And for a sacrament in no larger sence, Against Parmenian the Donatist q. 2. ch. 12. Augustine (hauing spoke of Baptisme) saith thus: Either of them is a sacrame~t  by sure consecratio~ both of them is giue~ to ma~: that, vvhe~ he is baptised: this whe~ he is ordai|ned: therefore in the Catholicall church it is held vnlaufull to re|iterate the~. Yet neither of the~ nomber it elswhere with the few a~d easie sacraments of the new testament, because (as before) it hath bene common vnto all the ages of the Church: yet this must be no reason why not to teach and repute it for a glori|ous sacrament: wherewithall a blessing from the Heb. 7. 7. Greater is convaid vnto the Lesser. Under Resurrection is contained, Eph. 2. 1. 5. . 5. 14. Rev. 20. 6. first our rising here from spirituall death vnto the life of Christ in his body the Church: secondlie our resurrection after the bodies naturall death, and that vnto eternall lyfe: for the resurrection of the wicked is but a rising to the second Death. The last is, eternall iudgment: first, to the eternall glorie of the faithfull (contrary to cursed They hold the glorie but for 1000 yeares. Chiliasts) secondly to the eternall confusion and never dyinge worme of the vn|faithfull: contrarie to the blynd pitifull colection of vvho hold all (Deuell  all) shal|be finally saued. Orige|nists. And those are the doctrines he calleth the (Themelion)

foundation, as also begining of Christ. Which must be the ra|ther obserued, because som put no difference betwene the foun|dation of faith (which here made the hebrues a true visible people of God, and other accidentall doctrines which tende but to the perfection of the same foundation: the contrarie vnto which foundation can onlie in proprietie of scripture he termed 2 Thess. 2 4. 1 Ioh. 2. 18. 19. Reu. 1. 11. Anti-keimenon, Anti-christian, opposit to founda|tion, opposit to Christ. The not retaining of which distinc|tion hath caused too manie libells be dispersed, and railings against such as Gather truly (though weakly) with Christ:  and himself teacheth, that he who gathers with him, that works not against him.
But are euery of those seuerall heads the knowledge and beleif of them, of absolute necessitie vnto saluation? (For in|fants of the faithfull theyr Gen. 17. 10 11. Leuit. 2. 12. Rom. 11. 1. Act. 2. 39  16. 31. ac|cording to Gen. 17. 27. lump is to be considered in theyr first fruites) I answer: it is impossible for any sowle to com anie way to true lyfe, but by passing thorough him who is the Way Truth and Lyfe. Nor can one goe into the sheepfold but by the Dore and the Porter. Nor can this be don but by Repentance and Faith. Besides, faith is exercised in beleiuing the promise of Resurrection and eternall iudgment: and quiet it ca~not be till the promises be sealed in Baptisme, the dore sa|crament into the Church. Which caused the Eunuch vpon a litle information to cry, vvhat lets I may not be baptized? As also when Peters hearers cryed out, vvhat shall vve do to be sa|ved? him to make this answer, amend your liues  be bap|tized: and no sooner they confessed faith in Iesus, but straight way they were baptised. Yet this I suffix: Faith apprehen|ding the word of promise, it trulie iustifieth with God and his Church before the Seale com: seing the seale is not the Begetter but Rom. 4. 10. 11. Col. 2. 11. 12. Mark. 16. 16 Confirmer of that faith whereby we appre|hend righteousnes in Christ Iesus: and so holy writ teacheth both of Circumcision and Baptisme. I conclude then, the two first and last of the 6. principles to be absolutely neccessa|ry vnto salvation. As for Baptisme it is required vnto salva|tion conditionally, that is, if it may before death be had: nor ought it be deferred within the Church beyonde the 8. day (called the Lord his day, the day of Convention) and in con|uerting without the Church, beleiuers for them and theyres ought presently to be baptised with the Eunuch, Paul, laylour, and Lydia. As for imposition it is also symply necessarie t such as to whome it suiteth, for the end where to it serueth: that is, not to seale saluation, but to assure the sowle of GOD

his helping hand in the work whereto the partie is alotted. Not symplie necessarie in the This Mi|nistry not held the Ro manist is but badly ansvvered. Gathering and propheticall ministery: and therefore we se before, and vnder and after the lawe (within and without the True visible church) di|uerse stirred vp to call people vnto God and his Christ, who neuer had anie hand of man so put vpon them. But it is sym|ply necessary to a ministerie designed to a particular Church: and therefore the Tabernacle ministerie (Priests and Leuits) and the new testaments ministrie (Presbyters and Deacons) they neuer were installed without it.
The principles then that are of absolute necessitie vnto saluation, may therefore be deduced into two heads: the first knowledg of the true Christ: for otherwise our Math. 24 23. 24. 28. Iob. 39. 30. 3. 32. 33. Galat. 3. 1. Sauiour tel|leth vs we shall haue manie kyndes of CHrists preached by pseudo-prophets, to whose factions we are not to goe forth: but only to repaire for our fedinge where his spirituall eyed Eagles do gather to his carcase or body slayne in word and sacraments: as Paul afterwards described him crucified vn|to the Galatians. The second poynt is, the true apprehensi|on of Christ whome knowledge propoundeth: and this is on|lie by Rom. 10. 14. 15. Gal. 3. 2. Faith, a guifte of the spirit within, but wrought by externall ministerie of preaching, euen the preaching of faith (And so Rom. 8. 32. hauinge giuen vnto vs his Son, how shall he not with him giue vnto vs all things also?) Which apprehendinge faith is vnto others (liue the beleiuer no longer after, then the good theif on the crosse) manifested by the fruit of the lips: and in liuing longer it vtters it self conformable in som good measu|re to doe the commaundements of him who hath frelie saued him: otherwise, Iames termes it a Deuels faith, a dead faith a meere delusion. For the exellentie of true faith, it Synecdo|hicallie is put for the whole doctrine of the Ghospell (Iude. 3. Gal. 3. 2. 1 Tim. 4. 1.  alibj) nor maruell, because all obedien|ce without it, is but a Crab-fish crallinge backward, and a Pharisaicall painted sepulcre: for without this faith it is im|possible to please God. It is to all our actions Leuit. 2.  as salt vnder the lawe was to all sacrifices, the erie sauourer and purifiez: and this Peter maketh the cause of no difference betwene Iue and Gentile, the purification of the heart by faith, Act. 15. 9: which faith not mingled with the word when the Israelites heard it, was cause of theyr downefall in the desert, Heb. 4. 1. 2. When therefore an Auntient considered that the Iust li|es by faith etc. He speaketh thus pathetically: Chrysos|tom in  ho|mely offai hope,  Alldged by Centueie Faith is the originall of righteousnes, the head of holynes, the begining of

deuotion, the foundation of religion,this excludeth doubts, holdeth sure things, sealeth vp the promises. He that holds this is happy: forsaking it he is miserable. Yea saith another before him: Cyprian . 3. to Qui|, ch. 4. To the beleiuer all things are possible. And how shall it be otherwise, when first it vniteth vs with Christ, and the~ from him by the conduit of faith, all holines and diuyne gi|uings are (as out of a treasurie) deriued vnto vs. Where the|refore the Law proclamd, Do and liue: the Ghospell before, in and synce the Lawe frely crieth: Beleiue and liue. Obiecti|on. But we are vrged to works also in the newe church. An|swer. But not to merit thereby (Iam. . . for he that shall keep the whole lawe and but faile in one poynt is guiltie of all) then what merit-monger can hold vp hand and cry, vuguilty my Lord? If he be iudged by God and the contrie he wilbe found guiltie) but such works are Certificates from the spirit of Christ vnto his Church, that so such a one may be acknow|ledged a member of the Catholicall bodie and communicate with the Church her spirituall treasure: and therefore to the faithfull no Cawse but a Signe or Index of iustificatio~: which causeth one to say: Fulgentius to Monimus b. 1 GOD crowneth the righteousnes in his Sayints which he gaue vnto them Gratis, kept Gratis perfected Gratis. Wherevnto a successor addeth: Anshelm, of the mea|sute of the crosse. If a Man shold serue God a thowsand yeares  that most feruently, he shold not me|rit (ex condigno) of condignity to be half a day in the kingdom of heauen. And in another place thus: Galat. c. 2. Works are of grace, but not grace by works: because that (Grace) is first, whereby other things are valued. Therefore no one by any meanes can be iustified by works, but by faith which by grace goeth before. All which substance of faith, with manie golden and coloured sylk appendices of the Lo. his Tabernacles religion, thow|sands in England do teach as truly and learnedly as euer was taught synce the first age after Christ. From a~d by who|se ministerie, diuerse of our people comming ouer hither, did seme verily and with much comfort to haue received the same grounds at least, couetinge with ernest affection to walk with such (and only with such) as were willing to build vpon the same foundation in the syncerity of IEsus (although with infirmity in faith and manners) for they had learned of none to fynd here Angelicall perfection. But synce all this, diuerse (if theyr owne lips have spoken trulie of theyr owne hearts) they have (Ekousios) frankly and voluntarily vn|constrayned outwardly, giuing vp themselves to the spirit of fundamentall Apostacie and Schisme, breaking the former

bonds of obedience and casting the coards far away for Anti christian: ioyning themselves frely, som with Arius and Samosatenus, making theyr Christ a meare creature and bare man. Som ioyning to a Christ that tooke not the seed of wo|man (ouerturning the Ghospell preached first in Paradise) and this because they cannot and will not without a naturall reason beleiue that super-naturall worke: and so they are one with the hereticall body of Valentinus, Manes and Eutiches. Others with Apollinaris do make a mixt confounded Christ. All of them condemned generally of the Catholicall Church aboue a 1000 Y. agoe in sondrie councels. Herewith they beleiue frewill to holynes in the vnregenerate, addinge iustifi|cation before god by works: both poynts ordinarily moreAl those |aresies not only resisted by severall faithfull vvriters, but also Anathe matized in sondry pro|vinciall  generall counsel. grosse then som Papists dare be seene in: in a word flat Pela|gians. Unto the former they adde rebaptisation with Donatus and cut Children of from Baptisme with bloody Herod. Ma|kinge the Maiestrate (with Seruettus) a meere Scar-crowe without the church: with such a rable of inventions raked out of the donghill of all heresies, as if not 7. deuels, but 7. score deuels were entred into them: Therefore appearingly to vs ward they have synned that fearfull  horrible syn agaynst the ho: ghost.
But the Brounist This root of bitterne must be puld vp or it vill defi many. teaching that neyther Clapham nor England teach the Ghospell of Iesus, it fodeth on ignorant sowles with more boldnes to reiect all such faith and fellow|ship for Antichristian. First I say to such Teachers, that it were better for them to have a milstone hoongon their neck, and they with Sherajahs scroule and stone violently throwen into the midst of Euphrates, then such speach scandalous shold be vttered, whereby silly-ones are turned out of the way. Secondly, Doctors of the ghos|pell yet they knoe the ghospell. what will they say is the substance of the ghospell (for in the adiuncts the wisest shall euer be to seeke in som|thing)? I knoe they insinuate to the simple (and this theyr whole practise will witnes to theyr faces) that to teach the former principles without subiectio~ to the outward Church|government of Christ, it is no Ghospell. And wherein exists this? In the ministery of Pastors, Doctors, Elders, Deacons, Widowes with theyr forme of installments etc. I answer: the verie terme Outward (if they were not forgetfull of Lo|gick, that is, of Reasons rule) it wld teach them: That which is outward, yea so outward, as somtymes seperable from his subject, that is not essentiall or of the Ghospells substance: but such is that outward government. This may appeare from

S. Paul who sayth the Ghospell was preached vnto Abra|ham, Galat. 3. 8. as also the ghospell (ver. 17.) was prea|ched to that Patriarch 430. Y. before the lawe, and yet no speach of outwarde church government. Iohn Baptist prea|ched the Ghospell, yet ignorant (as also the Disciples in theyr first sermons) of this outward church government. Nay, our sauiour before tyme of Ascensio~ (Act. 1. 2. 3.) ca~not be thought to haue spoke a word of the Ecclesiasticall functions: so did Peter and others in theyr sermons after his ascension, when I roe they preached Ghospell, and yet no word of those mat|ters. If all the former preachings was the Ghospell (and Form  esse. the forme giues being to a thinge) the~ those fanaticall spirits of ignorance or mallice blaspheame the ghospell. Being driuen from that sconse, they will say: but thexternall church-order reuealed, euery such sowle as will not be adiudged Antichri|stian (that is, against Christ) must be only subiect to the out|ward Church-order prescribed by Christ. I answer: First, theyr concluding of euery sowle Antichristian which in anye thing is contrarie or against Christ, it is a grosse abuse of the word vsed in scripture: For so euery sowle shold be Antichri|stian. Apostle is in english, Messenger: Euangelist, a Good tydings-man: shall we therefore say, Euerie messenger is an Apostle, and euerie one that tels vs good newes is an Euan|gelist?The very vvord Anti|christian) falsely appli|ed, it hath kindled the fyre vvhich Satan vvill neuer suffer to be quen|ched. So|ers of that seed had need repent in sack   In the large sence of the words, we may so say: but comming to examine these termes by the art of Theologie, we say the words are restrayned to such a~d such: so also, brin|ging the word Antichristian to be examined by the Apostles, we shall fynd that such a sowle must be Anti-keimenos oppo|sit in the foundatio~: and so, nothing so large as blynd Zeloist do vrge it. Secondly, I answer: euerie sowle is bound to giue obedie~ce vnto euerie peece of god his will reuealed. Then they adde: But thexternall governme~t hath bene by som of their owne teachers as also by vs bene preached, therefore now none of theyr Parish people visible Christians: nor can the preachers be sayd to preach the ghospell. Answer to the first conclusion. First, if they can prove euerie sowle there to have sufficiently heard that doctrine, and yet to be Contumax (which no rea|sonable sowle can beleiue) then they say somthing. Secondly, the same word is exercised even now in England (when the Sun of Brownisme shines in Netherlande) shall we thinke it begets not faith in som now, aswell as of yore, and must those also be no visible Christians? Thirdly, the Author to the ebrues fynding the people he writ vnto in a maner Dunces

who for the tyme might have bene Doctors, though he fo|res them with the irremissable syn which might steale vpon them through negligence, yet He wold not pronounce them cut of from God. The Apostle teacheth another Rule, Philip.  the second Conclusion. As for that they preach, if it contained not the substance of the Gospell, how haps anie sowle hath bene saued or bene brought into the state of saluation thereby Death begets not lyfe: Mat. .  Iam. .  falshood begets not truth: and so no Brownist could euer by that preaching haue bene interessed with, iustifyinge faith. Faith is got by hearinge: or haue they heard som Angel from heauen: or did the first of them get theyr iustifying faith by readinge? obiection. But there is no promise made of good to such preaching, although God som|tymes extraordinarily do blesse it to good. Answer. Tis fal|se: for it hath bene the only ordinary way of begetting sow|les to god for those 40. y, togither vnder the raigne of our so|ueraigne Queene: nor did euer other Doctrine in any age be|fore beget true faith: and therefore a promise of blessinge i lynked with that ground of faith, be the preacher thereof o|therwise a~d for other causes highly reproueable. Besides that euident effect, Gold is as verily gold in the snowte of a swyne as vpon the fynger of Zorobabel. Augustine teacheth this lar|gely,Against  b. 7. ch 8. the like ple~tiful|ly vnto Cres co the Gra~|maria. tellinge the Donatists, that the 4. Riuers of Paradise (though appointed for watring it, yet) they verilie ron downe into Egipt: so equally mynded was he towards the schisma|tiks his sowle lothed. But all must be no Ghospell with tho|se, which theyr aduersarie preacheth.
But to make the Ground of Brounisme lesse colourable to the allegiants: theyr Suns light hath giuen afalse shyne, and thus it is: First they tell vs, that in raising vp this Church-ministerie lay-men may ordaine by Laying on ha~ds and consecrating the partie to such businesse. That this is but a dreame, I haue all 1 Tim. . 22 Tit. 15. Act. 6. 6.  14. 23. cheirote santes, signi fying ordi|nation by hans: seing scripture ne|uer speaketh of Election by lifting vp hands. rules in scripture a~d consent of all Aun|cients, and all Churches in this age against them. Are they not like to haue a sound platforme of externall church-order that begin in such disorder? Sec they tell vs of a Doctor exer|cised in the Church her peculiar exercises, and that in deliue|ring doctrin, vpo~ whome (in the seco~d place) the Pastor must iump in with his exhortatio~ (distinguishing Doctor a~d Pas|tor only by Doctrine a~d Exhortation which rather ought to be reconciled by 1 Cor. 14. 26.) hauing for this only a poore ser|mon

written on Rom. 12. 3. c. misapplyinge verse. 7. thertof as also the end of verse 8. for cleon is the Male gender (he that is mer|cifull)  so they censure others for lack of Chr. ministry yer they knoe is ministrie Men-widowes: here against I haue the concordance of scripture and the voice of all Chur|ches: who acknowledge no Doctor, peculiarly, distinct) but him of the Schooles: much lesse did euer any dreame of men|widowes in one age or other. Thirdly (taking for graunted, (which is false to me who can proue a visible Church in all a|ges) that all our synagogues were builded by Anti-christ to Idolatrie and therfore symply vnlawfull for a christian the|rein to pray or teach. Besides the first may not be graunted, I iudge theyr doctrine Iuish: and after a sort to be a denyall of Christ com in the flesh, and opposit to those scriptures, Iohn 4. 21. 23. 1 Tim. 2. 8.  4. 4. Coloss. 2. 20. c. Isa. 23. 17. 18 Micah 4. 13. with others: and heare againste hath bene the practise of the Church euer synce such was builded. Fourth|ly, they teach a man after the first excommunication, he is to be held an enemie. And to this end, where Mr Barrowe had in his description of the Church placed that of the Apostle (2. Thess. 3. 15.) after excommunication, they in reprintinge it last yeare (but subtilly giuing it tholde date, as if he had bene of theyr mynd: although both he, Mr Penry, Mr Green|wood wold haue shamed to stand in this and others theyr co~demnations) Against the 9. com|mande|ment. they do place that Apostolicall Canon befo|re ), because they wold quickly ridde their hand of brotherly admonishments: as for all scripture and  the Catholike church it is euer against them. As thei begin theyr discipline so they finish it in Censures vn-ruly: nei|ther beginning nor ending with anie harmonie of scripture or consent of anie church. To omit other inventions of theyrs if now Corah, Dathan and Abiram do seeke for offices by a la|we of theyr owne makinge: trobling the Chatholicall Church with theyr start-vp inventions, though they schismed not from the vniversall body (vvhich they haue) the vniuersall church of Israell is bound in payne of death vpon the insight of theyr insurrection to depart from theyr te~ts, againste who|me alredy a deuouring fire is gone out from Iehouahs pre|sence. So far are they from beinge fitte to sit as Iudges on all others: or fitte to prescribe rules of direction to all Chur|ches. But let them (if they can) afforde vs thinterpreta|tion of any one Riddle in the Ghospell, which they did not synd out by psowing with Samson his heifer in England.
Hearing thus that the grounds of Brownisme will nothing sheilter the Reuolts that vse them, let vs heare what Daut

saith of such as are adverse to the Church: They that hate ZionPsal. 129. 5 c. (the place where god hath put his name There: called by Ezek. ch. vlt. Iehouah-there, because the eternall shold in ha|bit there for euer) they shalbe ashamed  turned backward (as|hamed to returne, they shall apostate) They shalbe as the gras|se on the howse tops (despising fellowship with the lord his poore people in a lowe estate, it may be because of som weeds, they therefore cry: Isa. 65. 50 stand apart, com not nere to me, for I am holier them thow: and so they ount vp alofte, swelling in the bladder of theyr pride, as grasse on the howse tops) which vvithereth before it com forth (these are saith Isaiah a smoke in the lords wrath: they shalbe sodainly destroyed, euen when the mockers, eat and drinke, saying peace vnto his ow|ne sowle: as euery of those hatefull spirits braggeth they ne|uer had such rest in theyr sowles: but woe to those that are at rest in Zion, much more at rest out of Zion) whereof the Mo|vver filleth not his band (the Man of god may hope to reape such for the Lord his barne, but god his iudgment ceazing on the proud Pharises, the ministers hope shalbe frustrate) neither shall the glainer fill his lappe (nor shall anie of the Church that hope good of them, be otherwise then disapoin|ted) they that passe by (Christian pilgrims who here haue no biding city) neither shall say, The blessing of the LOrd von yovv, vve blesse yovv in the name of the Lord: like vnto hat commaundement of Iohn, 2 Ioh. 10. Bid him not God speede , if he bringe another Ghospell (that is, another foundtion of faith) were he saith the Apostle Paul an Angel from heauen, let him be Gal. 1. 8. 9. A nathema, accursed: but those voluntarie Reuolts from the former faith and fellowship, do also teach another Ghospell, therefore to vs ward accursed. Nay som as large conscienced as others strait, do iustifie people of all religions (as did the heretike Eusebiu. b. 5. c. 12. o eccl. hist. Apelles) abusing (as the Deuell did with Iesus) the scripture thereto, saying: Euery spirit that confes|seth Ies. Chr. to be com in the flesh, is of God: and so the De|uill which confessed him to be the Son of Dauid in a truer sence then the Anabaptist doth) he is also of god, and they may (as alredy they haue) enter into communion with him. Such doctrine plainli arguinge perso~s, willinglie selling themselues to all prophanity and Atheisme: as hauing the eyes of Con|science bored out, and the senses made voyd of felinge, by the searing of an hot iron, the iust smoking vengeance of the inui|sible Iehouah.
Question. Those that vnto vs haue synned that voluntary

twofolde syn, are thei not to be received againe into fellowship vpon externall humiliation? ansvver. If they but went bach|ward in the tyme of persecution, Nouatianus for euer refused them: yet seing the word Willingly hath lead vs to another collection, I answer: if such a one who once semed volunta|rily so to haue synned, shall returne with apparant contriti|on, such cannot be denyed but received: not now as hauing oure verily committed the former twofold syn, but deming by such contrition that the sowle so fell and schismed, eyther befo|re there was such solid assurance of the Ghospells foundation as semed, or because there was som outward coaction (hid vnto vs) which lackinge to the perfecting the syn, now the ra|ther such a one is againe recouered. But all the yeares passed, not one person hath for such syn bene humbled, therefore vnto vs ward theyr recouertes the more to be dispaird of. Leuit. 14. 42. If by outward humiliation such scrape of the former leprosie, let them with new morter and stone be repaired: but if after re|paration the plague arise againe, 44. 45. then it is a frettinge lepro|sy, they but scorners of repentance and no more to be received. Socrates eccles. hist. booke. 3. ch. 11. Ekebolius a Christian Sophist fallinge from the church vn|der the bloody raigne of Apostate Iulia~, he after themperours death retorued into the synagogues porch at tyme of Conuen|tion, and there lying prostrate he cries: Tread me vnder foote, for I am the vnsauoury salt. If he sawe himself no better for vnwillinge backsliding, what wil those spirits se a~d acknow|ledge themselues to be if once they haue graunted the heart t repent? meane tyme (as our sauiour saith) we knoe, If salt haue lost his sauionr (it appeareth not by anie reason) vvhe|reMath. 15. 13. vvith it self can (againe) be salted: but indeed, it is thensforth good for nothinge but to be cast out  to be conculcate of men.
Question. What course is to be taken for auoyding this syn, and by what meanes shold one be ouertaken therewith? An|svver. This syn stealeth vpon a sowle two ways: either by too much remisnes and sluggishnes, which causeth the Lord to say, Luke. 21. 36. heb. 3. 12 13. 1 Pet. 4. 7 Watch, be sober, exhort one another: or else coms by aboundance of Gall, vntempered heat, ouerflowinge zeale, an ouerweenige of wit and holynes: and this causeth the spi|rit not only to tell vs before that such wilbe so badly qualifyed (2 Tim. 3: 2. 3. 4) though with face of men and weomens hai|re they will couer all till they sting, but also to will vs Prov. 26. 16 fyn|ding hony to eat but sufficient, lest being ouerfull vve vomit it vp: as also to enioyne vs Rom. 1. . not to presume to vnderstand abo|ue that is meet to vnderstand, but to vnderstand acording to

sobriety. Which not obserued eawseth a man eccl. 7. 18. to be wise  righteous ouermuch, that is, in his owne conceit: and so vn|wares causeth him be desolated of the spirit Pro. 13. 9. and his candle put out. The He brues were in the way towards it through neg|lect of being led forward vnto perfection: and in that pad are swarmes of sowles in England, who after a whiles waking do sit downe as willinge there to stand till mosse groe on theyr heeles, and they as rotten at the Core, as the vulgar Queene Maryes protestant. Once zeale abounded: now Zechariah may againe say, Zech 1. 11 All the world sitteth still and is at rest: and if it wilbe no better, Let them Rest till they Rust: Reuel  11. Let the fil|thy be more filthy,  the vnrighteous be vnrighterous stil. In the second tract were once all those spirits who vrged me to pen this tractate, although som of them synce, by ronning themselues out of breath, are now deadly cold as those who haue quenched theyr spirits. There is an errour on the right hand (as when a Bow bends till it breaks) and an errour on the left ha~d: as when with Salomon his sluggard one cryes. Prou. 24. 33. 34. A litle sleepe, a litle slumber, a litle folding the hands to sleep, so (spirituall) beggery as a truailer  armed man coms vpon him. Pro. 28. 14 Blessed therefore the man that always feareth: seing with feare and trembling he is to worke out his saluation. And yet not so, but he is to Psa. 2. 11. reioyce in his tremblinge.
If I haue well said, wisdom wilbe iustified of her children: if not let the righteous sinite me, it shabe a benefit. The loue of Christian faith and fellowship, oh my God thow knoes it vrged me to write this. Water it therefore O Lord to the sow|les of the Readers. Let them consider what I haue said, and do thow giue them vnderstanding in all things.







The Epilogue to his forsaid brethren and the rest of that congregation.
A Certaine Auncient saith: Vincentius in his . of aer. ch. 7. Newly speaking, speak not new things: because indeed vnto such as once are stablished in the ground of faith, things vttered according to Analogie of faith, they are but sienes of the same stock, as was Sheth be|gotten in the image of his father. But the Ronnagates of Ephraijm (nay, Epraijms worse) they euer cry, We must groe in faith: and this they do, not by growing in, but by flitting from the faith. Let theyr fall cause you with holy feare to re|gard your standing: least also ye fall after the same sort of vn|beleif. Those two yeares last passed, God hath for your sus|tentations only vsed my weak vnworthie ministrie. Of what nature the fodder is, let the sheopherds of the LOrd his Me|ads iudge: 1 or. 14. 32. for the spirits of the prophets must be subiect vnto the prophets: and why shold I with the conuenticle Compa|nions turne aside, as if there were no prophet but my self? I can fynd prophets in all Ages to witnes the substa~ce a~d foun|dation of all I teach vnto yow: and euen for that, both I and yow do owe much praise to the hiest. Ior. 6. 16. Stand in the ways  behold  ask for thold way, vvhich is the good way. If the old way be the good way of god contained in the Bibles Ca|non, then what are the vvays wherin sowles must stand while they enquire for that good way? Is it anie thinge, but the voices of the faithfull in al ages who haue trod forth the way of life before vs? And this is it causeth Christ to direct his Loue no otherwise but by bidding her Cant. 1. 7. If she were ignorant to get her forth by the steps of the flocks who had trod the tract before her. And for this cawse also is it that the Church is called, 1 Tim. 3. 15. The piller  ground of truth. Manie cold be conten|ted I drewe such a Carde of antiquitie for clearing the life of faithfull in Succession, who yet with Iob haue bene ouerron with an outward scab (sowle vntoucht of Satan) but they shold knoe it vnreasonable to bid the Israelite make brick, and then deny him strawe. And yet yow and I haue gone a war|fare Except vvhat once vvas admi|nistred by six out of England. at our owne charges: though euer we ca~not all things but the lord knoeth, what is necessarie. Meane tyme, as we are debtors to all so let vs (as we may) Eccl. 11. 1. cast our breade on all waters (or sorts of people) for after many days we shall fynd it.* So Ieroin vnderstands it: compa|ring it vvith . 1. 15 And so besuchinge yow to hold fast least another take the crowne, I desire the Lord his sauing spirit to dwell for euer in our spirits: So be it.



 To his beloued Tho. whicks and Ri. Carter,  sauing guiftes of the Spirit, Amen.
NOt knowing if so we shall liue to behold one anothers face againe in this lyfe, let me supplie the wast paper with tho|se few lynes. Returninge Tovvards thend of our Lo. . 1597. from the funerals of my excellent gracious frend Mistris Anne Ogle, I was motioned to con|flict with your neighbour Romanist prisoners. But conside|ring I had no orderly callinge so to doe, yow knoe how vn|willing I was. Yet afterwards perceiuing a nere frend of myne his foote snarled in theyr grin (which amazd me more then all Romish learning could) I not only was willinge, but also made challendg: yet vnder hand-writing, that so a|ny beholder thereof, they might more orderlie iudge. The Doctor agreed. Under his hand (for shaking my ministrie) he put downe this I esis: All true Ministers of the Ghospel are only raised vp within the present established church of Rome. Hereto I opposed, drawing his argument into forme: vrging him to proue the First pro|position:  Minor, the second pro|position: th third is, Co~|clusion: fo an argume in forme (called aso  Syllogismo) it existeth o 3. proposi|tions. Maior: All such Ministers are only raised vp in the established church of Christ (for that I denied) second|lie, That Romes Church euer was or is that only church: which also I denied. To the Minor (but skipping ouer the word On|ly) he said somthing. And therto I excepted: first by cal|ling into question (a~d not vnworthily) if euer Romes Church, was truly established. Secondly (though that shold appeare) I denied the present church of Rome to retaine the Auncient Apostolike faith. And here I propounded theyr Pighiu chap. 6. of . 1. of ecclesi|asticall hier|archi c. Also the Mogun|tine councel hallowing water, wax, Bells for driuing away deuels etc. Episcop Roffensis a|gainst Lu|ther. Biel in exposition of Masse, Lection. 56. D. Purgato|ry fyre for cleansing away sin: theyr constituting Sts. depar|ted Romaine. breuiarie, of Peter  Paul Pope Sixtus his prayer to many saiuts. Prayer to S. Blaze. c. Mediators: wherevnto I now adde, Sauiors: Vigueriue in his theo|logicall in|stitut. (ch. 16.) appro|ued of . theyr postinge ouer one mans works for supplying anothers lack: which they terme works of Super-erogation, a~d the church her treasure, set of sale in leaden Buls in theyr yeare of Iubile: with a Fifte doctrine I now remember not: for I lefte the writings behind in Marshland. Hereat the Doctor sterued, callinge me falsifier etc. denying theyr church to teach those doctrines. As for the Major proposition (though in 3. sondry writs I prouoked him) which first in order shold haue bene handled (in Nature or Art) yow knoe in neuer one of his pa|pers, he wold somuch as looke that way, he perceiuing it (I doubt not) to be an Iron too hot for his fingring. And so Clapham remaines vntouched a~d interessed with a ministrie of the ghospell: although my god knoweth I knoe my self

most vnworthie: and cold be glad thereof to be disburdened.
It now remaineth to be examined if so I charged theyr church falslie. And therein I refer my words to be compared with all Romish writers, manie before, but specially since theyr cursing cursed Held in our Lords y. 1545. Tride~t (in English) a triple toot|hed instru|ment, such as Poets at|tribute to the Sea-god Councell of Trident: Neptunes thre-tynd forke for hurling one sea of errour vpon another. But I knoe he knoes the charge most true: only till he had trapped som sowles and fettered them fast, he wold not haue such trumpe|ry discouered. This was it which caused him speak so plau|sibly, Viz, The common seruice book could neuer beget faith (and yet themselues make most of it theyr owne) that faith is begotten only by preaching (and yet themselues first intro|duced domb priests) that they haue the office of Elders (but yet none that in the same Congregation assisteth a Pastor) as also that of Deacons (although none to waite on the Loue-tables, nor occupied about the poore) such couert speach he vsed, till one was foulie snarled. Yea, such was his fetch in bellowing out against my Biblio-thecaes vvhere I speak of Chr. his presence in the sup|per) chapter 14. 14. chap. sainge first there we|re no such words in Hierom: then being let se them, crying forth I had not truly translated them: afterwards saing I had misalleadged them: as if I had collected two real bodies of Christ, whereas therewith Hierom and Augustine I only collect two manner of presences, not substances. And yet be|ing in place togither, his impudent|lie (yovv knoe) affir|ming I had neuer see~ Ie|rom. vnblushing forehead made me a|bashed, and that to his ytching eared auditorie stood against me for victus, victa, victum.
But such seing, I knoe they will not se when they knoe an Auncient to make against them: as for example: A Romish mate (at table of our right Woo. frend) he in a brauerie (kno|wing none there able in that to conuict him) wold proue that the Beasts nomber Reu. 13. 18 666. it cold not arise (as protesta~ts wold) from the word Latinus. He accomptinge, 666. wold not ari|se, and did not som hearer say he had sufficientlie confuted? I do not think but he well knewe that auncient Episcop of Lions in our Lo. y. 180. in his 2. b. 25. ch. Ireneus said yes, and yet himself of the Latine empire. But you must knoe that the father (as also Iohn) did write in Greeke, and so the word not Latinus but Lateinos: from whence results the nomber thus: L 30. A 1. T. 300.Greek Ep|silon. Laci|nos is in En|glish a Lati|ne. E 5. I 10. N 50. O 70. S 200 And so the Cock crewe before the victory. The same nomber artseth from Ecclesia Italica thus. E 5. C 20. C 20. L 30.greek Eta. Ecclesia Ita|lica, is, Ita|lique Chur. E 8 S 200. I 10. A 1.I 10. T 300. A 1. L 30. I 10. C 20. A 1. Their Paris Genebrard he labours to disgrace such calculation, by propounding the name Luter. But not fynding the nomber

in Greeke, he turnes it into hebrue Character, but yet it will not reatch: he bumbasts it therefore with another L, so ma|kinge it Martin Luther vvill not yeild the 666. except they doble rib him. Lulter for tentoring out 666. But if the Malice of France wold haue the nomber out of an hebrue word, let him count In eng|lish, Ro|mish. Romijth: R 200. O 6. M 40. I 10. I 10. TH 400: and so the Beast (at least for one of the Lamb-like hornes) of the Latine, Italian, Romish Church.
All this but by the way for curbing of peuis spirits in theyr willinge wilful ignorance. But a iudgment iust inough, spe|cially vpon such, as once initiated with the foundamentall truth haue synce that vncoustrained, yea frely forsaken the faith and fellowship they had thereyn. Our English Harding (who once wished his voyce as Osney bells for ringing out Romes trumperie) he afterwards (neglecting his standing) fell and became Reade our Ieuels conflicts vvith that Apostate a patroene to all theyr drudgerie: eue~ to theyr very Stewes. Those that of curiositie will (as did Heuah) confer with the Serpent, it is iust with God to leaue such to the powre of the Tempter. The wyseman wills vs, prou. 19. 27. not to heare the instruction which causeth to erre from the words of knowledge. And our Sauiour Iohn. 10, 5. denies that his sheep will followe or acknowledge a straungers voyce. If God shall ta|ke me away before I publikly handle the vn-masking of An|tichrist ex professo, let the former tractate remaine a goade in your sides for kepinge yow watchfull to your ways. Which if (and I hope all good) then, though a 1000. fall on the right hand by ouer-lashing zeale, and a 1000. on the left hand by Laodiceaes lukewarmnes, ye shall stand to the praise of the Eternall, and your owne neuer dyinge happines. And so with my hartie salute to euerie our christian frends, I leaue yow and them to the mercifull guardure of the hiest.


To the Apostaticall, schismaticall, Factious.
THe faithfull beleiue that Iesus his kingdom excelleth that of Moses in this, that once established Heb. 12. 27 28. Psal 45. 6. Mark. 13 22. Luk. 17. 23. it is neuer remo|ued: though false prophets cry, Lo here, Lo there, as if for manie hundreds of yeares it had bene vanished, and now be|gon to peep vp head in the desert: and therefore haue learned not to goe out of the Catholike Arke. Thow who in an ouer|weninge of thine owne witte and holynes thinks al fooles and

filthie sauing thy Pharisaicall self, knoe O painted tombe, whose out side is fairest uk. 1. 20. 21. psal.  but the kingdom of god rather wi|thin) that wheresoeuer thow goes in that estate, the dreadfull vengeauce of God pursues the: for the prou. 30. 17 Ey which mocketh the father and despiseth the Mothers instruction, the vally-ra|uens shall pick it out and the yong Eagles eat it. Till O ye Fac|tious, ye haue ripened further matter against yow, I for the present conclude thus with the prophet: Isa. 30. 11. Behold all ye haue kindled a fyre  are hemmed in with the sparks: Walk in the light of your fyre  in the sparks ye haue kindled: this shall ye haue of myne hand: Ye shall lye downe in sorowe.
Who wold saue som  as by pulling them out of the fyre.
HE. CLAPHAM.



Escapes in printinge.
Leafe ij, backside, lyne 22. for Sowles read Selues. In iij, in the margin for Mare ethan is c read Mare-atha : n is c. In Bij, in the margins top on the leafes backside, read Centurie 5. in ch. of faith.


GOD PRESERVE OVR QVENE.





