




THE
COLDE SPRING
OF KINGHORNE
CRAIG,
HIS ADMIRABLE AND NEW
TRYED PROPERTIES, SO FAR
foorth as yet are found true by
Experience.
Written
BY PATRIK ANDERSON D. of Physick.
Disco Orbi, quod quis sibi.
EDINBURGH,
Printed by THOMAS FINLASON, Printer to
the Kings most excellent Majestie. 1618.



Psalme 78. vers. 15 and 16.
The Lord claue the Rocks in the wildernesse, and gaue the
people to drinck, as of the great deepes.
16. Hee broght floodes also out of the stonie Rock, so that
hee made the waters to descend like the rivers.
17. Yet they sinned still against him, and provoked the hi|ghest
in the wildernesse.

Kinghorn crag

Wisedome of Solom. Cap. 11.
When they were thristie they called vpon thee, and thou
gaue them water out of the high Rock, and their thirst was
quenched out of the hard stone.




AA

TO
THE RIGHT NOBLE
AND ILLUSTRIOUS LORD,
IOHNE ERLE OF MAR,
LORD ERSKINE AND GARIOCH, c.
Lord high Thesaurer of SCOTLAND,
Knight of the most noble ordor of the
Garter, and one of his Maiesties most
honorable Privie Counsell, of both
Kingdomes.
My singulare good Lord, and Patrone.
Right noble Lord,
_THought Water bee but a wairsh and tai|stles
subject, whereof manie lyke litle to
heare, far less to taist; yet is it of great
worth and so necessare an element, that
without it the most eminent could not
Well consist. The great Emperour of Per|sia
welcomed hairtlie one of his meane sub|jects,
who in his progresse propyned him with a drinck of cold wa|ter,
having no other riches whereby hee might acknowledge his
Prince. And I hope your L. as willinglie will accept from
your owne servand not a drinck, but a discourse of that rare
water, which long hide, hath beene of lait discouered for the
good of manie. But perhaps I haue vndertaken a warre when
I this way aduentured to thrust my selfe into a Printers presse,
ad praelum quasi ad praelium, a plaine discouerie, perchance,

of my owne ignorance. For to speake in Print is to vndergoe a
publick censure. Yet I hope that such as mislyke it, shall either judge
fauorablie, or produce a better as speedilie, Why may not meane wits
in their folies haue equall paines with learned Clerks in their
fancies? Apollo yeelded Oracles as well to poore men for pray+ers,
as to Princes for their propynes starres haue their lightes
and Heires their shadowes; And meane scholars haue even
high mynds, although low fortunes. But being loath to wearie
your L. with a long letter, I am thus emboldned to recomend this
vnworthie pamphlete to your Honours patronage. For that a
greater motiue then that you are your selfe, needeth not to en|courage
mee to this dedicatioun, so far is my loue engaged to
your L. most honourable  auncient house. If it appeare presump|tioun
in mee to show my loue, my duetie vrgeth mee to it. But
setting a part neidlesse feare, and resoluing couragiouslie vpon
your wounted and vndeserued fauour, I would euen but request
your L. to receaue that which is not, for that which I would
it were, letting my insufficiencie bee measured be my goodwill: that
so weghing the mynd and not the matter, my simple abilities
may thryue vnder your L. protectioun, and happilie lead mee
on to some worthier attempt. Take it then my noble Lord, in
good pairt; it being from one who honoureth your worth, oweth
you his loue, and hath altogidder so resolued, and vowed him
selfe to doe your L. and all yours, true seruice all the dayes of his
lyfe. And thus from my hart wishing your L. and your most noble
Ladie a great portion of Methusalems yeeres for this lyfe, and
after it, eternall lyfe. I humblie rest
From my house at Edinb.
the 8. of October 1618.
Your L. most willing Physition,
and obedient Servitour
P. Anderson D.





THE CAVLD SPRING
OF KINGHORNE CRAIG
HIS ADMIRABLE AND NEW
tryed properties, so far as yet are found
true by experience.
_HARD by the shore syde of King|horne,
within a bow-draught or
more to the heaven of Prettie-cur
where the Botes arriue, direct
west the Sands, is a great round
steip Rock, whose fore-front ly|ing
so oppen to the Sea, and opposite to the wea|ther,
is so beatten therewith, as that his superficiall
parts are become so friable, and as it were rotten to
everie light twitching of ones hand.
All this whole craig from the top to the foun|dation,
is so seamed, and as it wer embroydered with
a number of whyte veines much resembling a soft
 bruckle Alabast,  in many places glau~cing in the
night, not vnlyk to Cristall or some bastard Diama~t.
This white spar is accompanied (although but
poore) with some mixture of sundrie starnie metalls,
whereof the greatest pieces aboundes of a certaine
glauncing, cleir,  skelflie stone called Gypsum, wel

knowne of the Apothecareis, yea and is verie pon|derous
and weghtie.
Upon the east syde of the same Rock, in a hol|low
corner is perceived a certaine white cleir congea+led
water snotting through the moyst clifts of the
Craig much resembling the geile of fishe, or repre|senting
the stryne of ane evill rosted egge, called
of those who are skilfull in metalles, Sperma, seu ma|ter
Metallorum.
 Out of the broade face of this foresaid Rock,
springs most plesandly a verie cleir,  delicate cauld
VVater, which being drunk in great measure is neuer
for all that, felt in the belly.
This faire Spring (albeit but laitlie knowne) is
approved by the people which drink thereof, to be
one of the most rare remedies for the Stomach in
the world, gives a good appetit to meate, maketh
one that loaths of his meate to be hungrie, and is
the onlie remedie for Chronick,  lingring disseases,
specialie in those who having spoilled their stomach
by superfluous drying of Cuppes.
It is a most confortable  refreshing drink in all
hote fevers, pestilential agues,  where drouth most
abounds.
It refresheth and cooleth a hott distemper of ye
Lever, helpes all disseases proceeding therethrough,
dryeth vp the Youk, and vniversall Skab, purgeth 
correcteth all salt flegme, abaiteth and tempereth
the heat of the Reines, a great cause of confirmed
stones: and is a most soveraine remedie for the pai|nes

of the Back, proceeding of Gravell or sand, cau|sing
the patient to pisse out many small stones, and
making them to discend without paine.
To some it louseth the belly verie freelie, but not
at the first. Others thinks it bindeth them. Yet it see|meth
to louse moe then it bindeth.
I haue knowne some vomit therewith, but that
I suspect proceedeth of surfet: for that the people
doe as yet vse it, without rule or praescription.
It helpeth many that haue a dimme Sight, for being
wel put in the eyes, it is more sharpe and byting the~
commoun water;  is a singular remedie for those
which are molested with Lippitudo or bleir-eyed, 
stayeth itching and heat.
No liquor hath been tryed more excellent for
itching, and heat of the face with plouks,  pustuls
then this water, it being both drunck and put ther|vpon.
And is also good for singing of the eares.
It is powerfull in helping extenuat and leane per|sons
who are troubled with difficultie of drawing
their Brath: gives vigour and strength to vithered
and debilitat members; and is the onlie last remedie
for all debilities which haue long vexed the body
through a hote distemper of the Lever, such as a hote
Gutte; it allayeth all Inflamations inward  outward.
Guarisce encora il cancaro, i caruoli, i porri fighi
della verga,  la scolatione virolenta di rene, Ambas|ciatori
certi del mal Francese, ma non val niente a i
tenconi, overo panochie nell inguinaglia.
The geallie water, that sweateth out of the craig

coolleth  dryeth being gathered at tymes when it
falleth, and the hands  face rubbed therwith, doth
procure a verie faire  beautiefull skinne.
These bee the Physical properties of this faire
Spring, so far foorth as the disseased haue as yet tryed
by experience,  in whose companie I was somtimes
present my selfe.
Now, what should bee the Physicall and naturall
cause of those wonderfull effects, diverse of the lear+ned
are of diverse judgments. For my owne part,
because I was the first of my profession that crossed
the Forh to that Spring, being moved partlie to sa|tisfie
the desire of my freinds and acquaintence, 
partlie to content my owne curiositie in naturall
things, wherunto from my youth I haue euer bein
bent, as weell at home as abroad: I will onlie write
my opinioun without contentioun, reserving the
resolution thereof to my most learned colleagues,
much more judicious than my selfe.
I, at the first, as also many others, thought it but
ane idle toy,  a conceit of the people, and as some
think it yet. Others, thought it a trick devysed by the
Ferriers onlie for gaine. But seeing the fame there|of
incresse and that not by the meanest, but euen
of those of best credit, who long disseased, wonder|fullie
recovered their vnexpected health in their
owne persons. At length I begoud to think that al|beit
it was no vncouth thing in others countreyes
to haue such minerall waters, yet rare  but of laite
knowne amongst vs. And althogh I call this a mi|nerall

water: yet my meaning is not to conclude that
it proceedeth of metall alone: for that as appeareth is
very poore in this craige: Notwithstanding that al
those riches of goulde and silver which are come
into Spaine since the west Indies were discovered,
haue beine drawne out of such barrane places which
are full beare and fruitles, as this rotten rock seims
to bee. Yea all the ponderous spar inclyneth rather
towards the bottome, a signe doutles which argueth
no rich metall.Ioseph Acesta Hist. natur. and Moral. Lib. 3. Cap. 3. For it is found be experience that where
minerals are most ryfe, the higher the veines bee to
the superfice of the earth, the more rich they find it,
and the deiper it goeth, the poorer it is.
Further, if this water produce such Physicall pro|perties
be reason of metals, Then all springs taking
their course through the richest metals should far
excell this, which runneth but through a verie poor
metall by appearence: yea that wholsome  cauld
spring of the brayes of Arthrey, perteining to the
right honourable The Earle of Montrose should far
excell this of Kinghorne. I haue drunk of both wa+ters,
and in my opinion the one, might by the like
tryall prove as good as the other,  perhaps better.
For there, (no doubt) is a riche metall whose
seame and greate bodie reacheth directlie vpward
to the superfice of the mountaine, and there visi|blie
vncovers it selfe towards the South, the seame
whereof is neere a foot and ane halfe in breadth, 
consisteth in my judgement of Iron, Copper, and
Vitrioll, and no doubt of some Silver, accompanied

also with aboundance of a weghtie whyte spar, to|gidder
with that glancing and emplastie stone cal|led
Gypsum, verie vsuall amongst the learned for
externall ruptures: which minerall spring (for no
doubt it is one amongst diverse others in this land)
if it ran as pleasandlie from the Rock as that of Kin|ghorne,
would be in as great request ere it were long.
I must confesse that all springs having their course
through sto~nie grounds and rocks, minerals  privie
veines of the earth, cannot but contract  participat
of one Phisicall qualitie or other, resembling the
nature of the mettall through which it runneth.
Neither needeth any man of solid judgement to
doubt, but that all springs of water taking their ishue
and race through a hard rock, are to be preferred to
any other water, taking way throgh a muddie earth:
so consequentlie all springs passing through a mi|nerall
Rock, (by reason) must farre excell that of no
minerall, I meane for curing of disseases: for such
waters are no wayes fit for dressing of meates, much
lesse to bee mixed with wine, because no minerall
water feedeth the bodie.
Now that mettals haue beene of old used for phy|sick,
 yet are wonderfull in curing disseases, is no
new thing, as lykewise the infinite works of lear|ned
Physitions yet extant doe testifie.
For Iron, or Steell rightly prepared, then mixed
either in liquid or solid forme, and given at con|venient
houres, and tymes, after due preparation of
the bodie, opneth all obstructions, opilations,  stop|pings

of the noble parts, speciallie when the meseraick
veines, betwix the Lever, gall splen, are stuffed with
a tuich, glause  vilccus flegme: and is a most so|veraine
medecin, recomended of all the learned by
long experience, for the vnplesand peale coloures in
virgins, and other such lyke whatsomever, either in
widowes or maried wyfes. Iron, or Steell haue also
power to stop the Lask or Dysenterie and to heale
inward Apostumes. And what I haue said of Iron or
Steel, the lyke effects are to bee vnderstude of all
springing waters running through the same.
Springes of Vitrioll, helpes too greate moysture
of the Stomach, being moderatlie vsed stayes Nau|sea
a continuall preasse to vomite, and vomiting it
selfe: but being vsed in larger measure, provoketh
vomite, and cleingeth the Stomach of whatsomever
noysome humors. It healeth Stranguria, a painefull
and faschious dissease, when one cannot pish but by
drope and drope.
Springes of Silver, doe coole and drye.
Springs of Bruntstone are hote and whytish, smel|ling
thereof, and the water boyleth hote. They ease
cold disseases, heats the sinewes, consume humors
betwix the skinne and the flesh. They cure the host.
Helpe those who haue the falling siknesse, Heale
scabbes, resiste venome, awaik men of the sleeping
evill, and doe helpe the Gutt and Palsie. They cure
inveterat vlcers, the hardnes of the Melt, Lever, and
Matrice. But Springs of Bruntstone be not good for
the Stomach.

Brassie Springs are not so wholsome, but they are
good for disseases of the eyes, vlcers of the mouth,
palate, or rufe thereof.
Copper Springs are good for dolors of the Gutte,
short Braith, doloures of the Reins, and doe heale
Vlcers.
Alume Springs, doe stay the spitting of Blood, stay
Vomiting, stoppes immoderat flowing of the Hemor|rhoides,
and hinders weomen to part with Chyld.
Springs of Tinne or Lead, doe heale all cancerous
Vlcers, Schirrs or hard Tumoures, and are most pro|per
for all disseases of the Skinne.
That Tinne or Lead be in this craig I greatlie dout,
because Tinne nor Lead worke no such effects as this
water doeth, neither are they so wholsome taken
inwardlie as are any of the other, notwithstanding
their cooling and detersive qualities externalie vsed,
wherein verely they wo~derfully excell. And althogh
it hath beene ane old custome to make springes of
water runne through spoutes of Lead,  that Tin
bee lesse hurtfull, yea, neerer the qualitie of Silver,
Yet neither Tin nor Lead are vsuallie taken at the
mouth, as most of other metals bee, graunting that
it participat some-what of Mercurie, whereof it is
never a graine the better, but rather the more per|nicious
for this pourpose.
Heurnius a man of great experience,Institut. Med. thoght never
much of water whose course was through Lead, 
speaking De potu communi these bee his words, At
quae per tubulos plumbeos invehuntur pessimae habentur

nam plumbi vim perniciosam corpori invehunt, vnde
viscerum gravitates  dysenteria: etiam Columella
prohibet Gallinas potari ex plumbeis vasis. And ci|ting
Galen who componing a medicine ex capitibus
papaveris, aquam pluvialem commendat quae non per
plumbeos tubulos fluxit: qud recrementa quaedam plum+bi
illi immittantur, vnde inquit, eo utentibus dysente|riam
adfert, cerussam enim habet. Hinc mal medici eli|quant
remedia per plumbea vasa: etenim Galenus stan|nea
vasa vitat ad conservationem remediorum. Thus
far Heurnius.
And Fallopius ane Italian Phisition who verie
skilfull of metals in his tyme,Cap. 11. de ther. Met. in his most learned
and Philosophicall discourses of Minerall waters,
sayeth cleirlie that Leaden springs ar no wayes whol|some
taken inwardlie: Dicimus, (inquit) in vniver|sum
omnes illas aquas, quae habent in se metallicum ali|quid
noxium, esse omnino ineptas in potu, cujusmodi sunt
quae habent plumbum, quales sunt Thermales aquae in
Germania plumbeae vel plumbares vocatae, quae in po|tum
nullo modo sunt exhibendae, quia periculum est ne
naturae plumbi conversa vel in Lithargyrum, vel in
aliud simile, vt solet, hominem enecet,  ideo caveatis
a potu talium aquarum, quae habent in se plumbum, 
quae tamen ad purgandos morbos exteriores  insana|biles
sunt praestantissimae, ita vt nihil reperiatur prae|stantius.
 Cap. 7. Si velletis cognoscere quae sit sub|stantia
aquae plumbeae,  stanni, qui sapor, qui odor,
 reliqua, possetis gustare,  videre, aquam illam fri|gidam
 non medicatam. Sed nuncquid  aqua medica|ta

reperiatur, quae haec in se contineat, equidem prorsus
ignoro.
But least I digresse too far, I say that this water
cannot but participat of mo metalles than one:Ios. Acosta Lib 4 cap. 5 For
where ever one mettall is found, there is also some o|ther
with it. And althogh it seeme poore to our
eyes without due tryall: yet the whole craige being
of a straunge and vncouth mixture, and the sparre
so ponderous and weghtie, might perchance after
exquisit tryall, prove more heirin then is looked for.
Wee reade these words in the book of that holy
man Iob,Chap. 28. That stone being molten with heat, is turned
into Copper.Idem lib 4. . 9 Finalie metals ar of diverse colours which
seeme to such as knowe them not, to bee stones of no
value. But the Miners doe presentlie know his qua|litie
and perfection, by certaine signes  small vei|nes
they find into them.
Now because (as I said before) the scaircetie of
this metall (as appeareth) is not liklie to commu|nicate
such Physicall faculties to this water alone,
without some more helpe than the metall. What
then? I take it to bee rather a kynd of doulce Ni|truse
 semi-minerall mixture, wherwith these Cry|stalline
and glauncing stones are obscurelie possessed,
naturalie inherent  engendred, by long protract of
tyme, within the whole bowels of the craige, from
the top to the bottome.
This Nitre in substance,Nitre differs but litle from our
Salpeter, and oftymes vsed in Physick the one for
the other, the proofe whereof I haue often had. And

it is of sundrie kynds, whereof one is minerall, one
other artificiall,Pars est nitri Opt. natura pro+ducta  non at te parata  fal|so putavit Mes. Aphronitrum or spuma Nitri, Flos pa+rietis
 flos Salis: Galen maketh mention of Nitru~
Bernicum, vsed of old in Bathes, which hath great
power to extenuat thick and viscous humors,Auicenn. and
so doeth our refined Salpeter. Hee speaketh also of
a red Nitrum, whereof if any such bee in this Rock,
I dar not affirme: onlie I see in a great hollow caue
neer to the Spring, a red moyst tincture wherewith
the vault within is all coloured, which appearantly
cannot proceed from Tinne.Antidotar. Luminare majus spea|king
of the kynds of Nitrum calleth them species
Baurach,Arab. Bauach absolute dici|tur.  minerae ipsius sunt sicut minerae salis:
Nam ex eo est admodum aquae fluens, deinde petrifica|tur,Borax non ex|coct. nitri genus est fossile.
 ex eo est quod est in minera sua sicut lapis, 
ex eo est rubeum,  ex eo est album,  pulverulentu~,
 multorum colorum.
This Craig is also indued but with a soft Crystall.
The reason hereof I conjecture to bee the low si|tuation
thereof lying too warme, and often opposite
to the Sunne, the speciall cause of the same.Hist. Simp. apud Indos nascent. 48. Gar|cias
ab Orta a curious  learned Spainyard, speaking
of the true Crystall, writeth thus: Amat inquit Cry|stallus
loca frigida qualia sunt Alpes, Germaniam
ab Itali separantes. And as another of the learned
sayeth:Andern. Gignitur ex humore omnium purissimo in ter|rae
visceribus condito; necnon marinorum metallorum
fodinis Germaniae c. So that Crystall is made of wa+ter
materiallie, and that water of it selfe is fleeting:
but by vehement cold is made stedfast Crystall. For

so it is writen in Ecclesiasticus. Cap. 44. The north
wind blew  made Crystall to frize. The experience
whereof, wee may often see in water dropped from
a Rock or other high place, which turneth into sto+nes
of diverse colours, caused by vertue of the vre
and cold in that place, frizing the water the mate|riall
substance of such stones. A number of visible
proofes heirof wee haue at home amongst our sel|fes;Rattray cave.
Such as in Rattray cave in the Barrnie of Slains
perteining to the right Honourable the Earle of
Erroll, high L. Constable of SCOTLAND.
The lyke also I remember this present yeere, by
accident,Roslin chap. visiting that rare peece of Architecture,
the old Chappell of Rosline, nothing inferiour to
the old Roman worke, it was my good luck there, to
meet with that honourable  auncient Baron, who
(although vnacquented) amongst other courtesies,Roslin castel
shewed me the double vaults of his Castell most curi|ouslie
hewed out of a solid Rock; where admiring
the work, I beheld the water by dropping congea|led
into hard stones; a thing no lesse commone than
true, as weel at home as abroad.
Also in Peru where the mines of quick-silver bee,Acosta Hist. natr.  mor. Lib. 3. cap. 17
their is a fountaine that casteth foorth hote water,
which presentlie turneth into a Rock, wherwith the
people of that land doe build their houses. This
stone is soft, and is cutte as wode with Iron. And
if either men or beasts drinck thereof, they die, be+cause
it congealeth in their intralls and turneth into
a stone. In a Farme neere Cusco, springeth a fou~tane

of Salt, which as it runneth, turneth into salt verie
whyte  exceeding goode. The waters which run
in Guajaquell in Peru, almost vnder the equinoctial
lyne, are wholsome for the frensh pocks and such
lyke, by reason of the aboundance of Sarsa-parilla
growing in that place, and the people come thither
a far off to be cured. At the Bathes of Ingua is a
couse of water which runneth foorth all boylling,
and joyning to it is ane other as cold as yee. They
vse to temper the one with the other. At Dunbri|toneDunbritone.
Castle vpon that monstrous steep Rock, there
bee two fountaines, distant two or three fute the
one from the other. The vppermost course wherof
springing from North to South, is a verie salt wa|ter.
The other springing from south to north as ap|peareth,
is a faire fresch water: A straung thing to
see Springes of contrarie qualities so neere others.
Morouer betwix the two great Rocks within the said
Castle, is a Lake or standing pond of water, distant
neere 50. fadoms from the Sea, yet no man seeth
from whence it commeth. A wonderfull thing in
nature,Mag. Philos. although weel knowne amongst vs.
And in Boetia are two springes, the one helpeth
the memorie, the other ingenders forgetfulnes.
In Cicilia are two springs, the one maketh weo|men
barren, the other able to conceaue. In Idu|mea
is a spring which chaungeth colour foure tyms
a yeere: for three moneths it seemeth troubled:
three moneths red as blood: three moneths green:
and three moneths blewish. The cuntrye-men ther

call it Iobs Well. And haue wee not heere neere by
our chiefe Citie of Edinburgh, the oylie Well, cal|led
S: Margarits well, the fatte whereof is almost
equall to naturall Baulme, and whose power hea|leth
all aching of the bones,  all kinds of outbrea|king
of the skinne. one of the rarest things in this I|sland.
Also in Siloa at the foote of mont Syon, is a
Well, which runneth not alway, but certaine dayes
and houres. And many moe Springes drawing their
medicinall and divers qualities from the vaines of
minerals, or semi-minerals wherethrough they tak
their course: now hote, now cold, some binding,
some lowsing, others smelling of Bruntstone, some
troubled, some cleir, some sharp, some sweet, or of
no taist the most wholsome water of all
These waters ar not lyk the superstitious or mud|earth
Wells of Menteith, or Lady Well of Strath-Erne,
and our Ladie Well of Ruthven, with a num|ber
of others in this cuntrie, all tapestried about with
old rags, as certaine signes  sacraments wherwith
they arle the divell with ane arls-pennie of their
health; so subtile is that false knaue, making them
beleeue, that it is only the vertue of the water, and
no thing els. Such people can not say with David,
The Lord is my helper, but the D.
Now after this long digression, having first exa|mined
the materiall substance of this Rock: nixt
declared the tryed power of this water. And third|lie
as I promest giuen my opinion of the Metall,
or semi-minerall wherwith this Rock seemeth to
bee spirituallie tempered.

No thing resteth now, but to show by probable
conjctures, how this sweet saltish Nitrositie, may
agrie with the late effects of this cold spring.
To cleir this then, our disccurse shallbe vpon Cry+stall,
Gypsum, Nitrum: Because in this Rock litle
more is seene,  I feare the Italian proverb be true,
Tutto quell' che luc non  oro, It's not all goulde
that glisters. The Crystall Gypsum is visible. The
Nitre is occult  not seene: yet all three concur|ring
 most sensiblie felt in operation: But some|what
different in their particular qualities, yet litle
or nothing by their mutuall co~munication to this wa+ter;Crystall.
And so this way mixed, turneth all to one effect.
1 Crystall after the learned is naturally cold, with
a drying  binding facultie, almost lyke vnto Gyp|sum,
(but more wholsome) and doeth all what cold
thing may doe. It helpeth against thrist  burning
heat in fevers.Matheol.  Andern. A button of Crystall holden in the
mouth when the tongue is hask and dry in fevers,
presentlie cooleth  moystneth the same, the expe+rience
whereof is tryed in this water.wker. antid. de Lap. g. Ca. 6. It helpeth the
Dysenterie or bloodie Flux, given with old red vine.
It stoppeth  dryeth vp the faschious Q. F. in weo|men
a greate lett to conception. The lyke doeth
this water skilfullie vsed. It engendreth milk in nur|ses
breasts and tempereth the hote qualitie thereof,
chaiffed by toomuch drincking of vnnecessarie li|cour
which is a nurses co~moun fault,  the death of
many young infants.
2 Gypsum is a skelfie,Gypsum cleir,  whyte emplasticke

stone, verie commonlie found in minerall rocks of
Copper, and Iron, and is of a verie binding and dry|ing
qualitie onlie for externall things. It helpeth
the Rupture of the Bowells when they fall doune,Hernel. meth. med. Lib. 6 cap. 12. it
stayeth great sweatings, and all defluxions falling doun
vpon the eyes in Opthalmia.
Nitre after the auncients, hath beene a warsh 
sweetish salt,Dioscorides. differing litle or nothing from our
most refined Salpeter. And howbeit some of our
Tagt.  VVeker. c. Neotericks haue beene somewhat scrupulous to vse
the one for the other: Yet by co~moun experience
in our dayes wee haue observed neither danger nor
difference, but that Salpeter most exquisitlie re+fined,Mes. Lib. 2. cap 12.
may weel serve for the same. It is of a deter|siue,
scouring, and drying qualitie, inclined somewhat
to heat, which notheles mixed with cooling and re|freshing
things, worketh many cold effects. It exte|nuateth
and cutteth flegme,Dioscorides Lib. 5. cap 78. purgeth grosse and cla~mie
humors, even some tyme by vomite, evacuateth crude
and raw humors cleeving fast to the entrals, and is ve|rie
good to giue for the Colick,  grinding of the belly
through wind.
Penotus  Portu,  learned and famouse Chymist,Lib. de vera prepar. Nitri.
amongst his other Philosophicall extractiouns, so
vseth this Nitre, as that hee maketh it a salue for al
sores. Hee calcineth it, prepareth it, draweth the oyle
of it, and fixeth it. Jn end, hee concludeth with these
words. Nitrum inquit ad haec omnia praestantissimum re|medium
esse experimento constat, sive fumatur intern,
sive adhibeatur in fomentationibus, balneis, seu empla|stris

dividit, discutit, subtiliat, laxat, rarificat, ampliat,
extenuat, aperit, lubricat. And besyde all this, so far
doeth hee extoll it for procuring of a good appe|tite,
(a power proclaimed peculiarlie to this water)
that hee is not aschamed to prescryue it for this same
purpose, to bee given to a horse.
To bee short, there is no propertie which the an+cients
hath attribute to Nitre, which with the helpe 
cooling qualities of Crystall, Gypsum, may not bee
appropriat to this cold Spring: for what can this
water doe as yet, which is not in them; or what can
these simples doe, which in some measure this wa|ter
doeth not performe.
Is Niter,Penotus de viribus Nitri. deulie prepared, good to expell gravel and
sand both from the reines  blader? so is this water.
Is it good being disolved to apply outwardlie and for
heat in those parts? This water doeth even the same.
Hath not Ntre a Diaphoretick power, and maketh
some to breck out? so also proveth this water but in
some. And doeth Niter composed and applyed to the
stones, stay their inflammation? No lesse power hath
this water.Dioscorides Lib. 5. cap, 78. Is it not good for the Hydropsie, the Colik
and Iliack passion? Is it not good, I say, for the dure|tie
of the Splen or Milt given with steiled water, for
oppilations or obstructions of the Lever, paines of the
Stomach, and suffocations of the lungs or lights? So
no doubt may this water bee found.
I heare also this cold Spring hath helped paraly|tick
members, the stupiditie, and inhabilitie of the
sinewes, contractions of the nerves in the fingers,

and such lyke, by bathing and drinking thereof. And
that it hath a coroboratiue power to strenthen all
the nervall and ligamentall parts of the bodie, mo|ving
also a gentle Diaphoretick  evaporatiue sweat,
which (maketh me yet suspect that the Rock is po+ssessed
with some silver, althogh but litle to our eyes;
for silver even Philosophicallie prepared, is likwayes
Diaphoretick,) confirmeth also weried  feble mem|bers,
yea  hath ane occult propertie to stay much
sweating in tabide and consumed bodies, and that
because of his mixt qualities with Gypsum, both coo|ling
and drying, and which two qualities to this
effect are verie requisite.
Further, hath it not vnstopped the Lunges to ma|ny
persons, and helped a short braith? How many
people haue beene helped this same last yeere there
with, and oppenlie affirmed against all those who
say the co~trarie?P Now why may not Niter doe all this?
and what simple or miner all doeth so much agree with
these properties as Niter? And who doubteth what
refreshing power this cold Spring hath in hote fe|vers,
in thirst, and in all internall and externall in|flammations?Fallo. VVker.
and may not water taking his course
through cold Crystalline stones, haue more cooling 
refreshing qualities than commoune water, may it not
coole, I say, all inflammations and heat of the Lever?
And doeth not common water even coole  ease
inward paines?nsil. med. ex Schol.141. then let vs see if the words of that
Imperiall Physition Crato bee true, speaking De do|loribus
renum: Multi (inquit) post primum somnum,

jam perfecta coctione, hauriunt aquam frigidam,  in
signe juvamentum percipiunt.Zechil conf. Med. cap. 13. And ane Italian Phy|sition
sayeth by his common practick in Nephre|tick
dolours, Illud nunquam  memoria excidat, nihil
praestantius pro arcendis renum calculis esse, quam aqua
tepida quinque vel sex vnciarum mensura, immedia|t
ante cibum mane,  vesperi modic calidum pota|tum.
And a litle after speaking of thirst, hee sayeth
A pastu ventriculo valde sitiente  astuante gelide mo+dic
binas tantum vel ternas ad summum vncias bi|bere
licebit.
Morover, common water tempereth great heat,
and conserveth the naturall humiditie of the body:
for which cause Hippocrates calleth water, the bodies
temper. And auncient histories sufficientlie testifie,
that water was the first drinck that men vniuersalie
vsed of old,  wherewith they contented them selues
a long tyme, to vse it onlie for quenshing of their
thirst but afterwards when voluptuousnes seased
vpon mens appetites, they invented  set before
them diuerse sorts of drincks, because they thoght
water but a taistles and vnsavorie thing. And yet if
wee will giue credite to experience and heare but
what the writes of the learned doe say,Roe. a Fon Lusitan. de tuend. valetu. Cap. 12. That water
not onlie groweth the bodie, but euen maketh men to
liue longer,  in better health, yea, and to haue a quic|ker
fight, than wine. But now a dayes our queasie sto|maches
are become so tender, and so kitle, that if
wee but ones in a yeere taiste water, wee are in dan|ger
to catch the Colick; no, we must haue a litle Seck

and Sugger, or else our stomach is gone; let Ma|noahs
wife drinck what shee pleaseth,Idg. cap. 13. the bellie now
a dayes hath no eares for such grammer rules. And
yet to speake the truth; cold water is as vnfit for a wo|man
with childe and for such as are accustomed with
frequent birth, as strong wine is vnmixed.
Then seing that co~moun water, either cold or
hote, hath such evident, and anodine properties:
what shall wee thinck of the best sort of these wa|ters
correspondent in all respects to the true nottes
which Dioscorides hath left vnto vs? and what ac|compt
shall wee make of this crystalline or semi|minerall
water,Lib. 5. cap. 9. which not onlie is answerable om|ni-modo
to the best? but also excelleth so far footth
as the qualities of these forsaid mixtures may mak it.
But to returne to our purpose concerning Niter.
Who then thincks that these Nitrous qualities, for
the most part doe not agree competentli with this
faire Spring; hath not well remarcked the obser|vations
of the disseased: for how oppenlie is it known
to expell sand, and bring doune small stones both
from the reines and bladder, to coole the heate of
the back, burning of the vrine, and to aswage all pai|nes
thereabout? experience of the people can testi|fie,
and which aperitiue and diuretick power belon|geth
both to Crystall, and Niter. I haue knowne
it to helpe Sciatick dolours given warme in a Cly|ster
with Salt. To helpe sore eyes, clenge a dimme
sight, to aswage the paines and singing of the eares,
and to scoure them from filth: all which doe well

aggree with Niter. It helpeth the dolour of the head
drawen vp as an Errhin at the nose,  clengeth the
teeth more then co~moun water, maketh the haire
faire and cleene, healeth a reiffie and leprouse skine,
and in a word, maketh even Ladyes faire.
Why may not then, I say, such detersiue and scou|ring
qualities appeare rather to proceed of a drying
and saltish Nitrositie, than of any apparent mettall
in that place; in respect it not onlie purgeth, and
clengeth the bodie, as well inward as outward, but
also clengeth and purgeth tasches and spottes, both
from linning  wollen, and which detersive power
doeth more agree with the vse of Niter, than with
any metall that can bee found in a Rock.
Monavius ane expert and learned Physition wri|ting
of the qualities of Salt,Epist. med. Craton. 215. sayeth thus: Salem (in
quit) detergere,  salsa nitrosa omnia, non solum intra
corpus sumpta, sed  extra admota, praeter experien|tiam
quotidianam in eluendis sordium strigmentis, etia~
vnanimis medicorum consensus testatur. The which
also the holie Scripture approveth by the mouth of
the Prophet saying, Etiamsi laveris te nitro,  mul|tiplicaueris
tibi herbam Borith, tamen signata est ini|quitas
tua c.I. cap. 2. Saponaria.
But which is worse of all, I heare it hath swelled
the bellie of Cacochymick and vnwholsome people,
and stopped their water: So doeth Niter take~ before
the bodie bee well prepared and purged. And hath
it done good to one, and evill to another? So will
any good thing doe, (although good in it selfe) if

it bee not vsed with rule and moderation yea  to
some also, one man's meate is another man's poyson,
a proverb co~moun amongst vs.
And hath it constipat some, and loosed others?
No wonder, for the Spring is possessed with con|trarie
qualities, a vertue proper to best medecines:
for if it did not bind, it could not helpe the lask 
Dysenterie: And if it did not loose, it could not re|moue
their causes. Hath it not cured some without
preparation, and others which Physitions could not
cure? let them thank GOD and sing, Te Deum lau|damus:
Vna enim Hyrundo non facit ver: Then blesse
the Spring with a famous report, and say, Beatus
medicus qui venit in fine morbi.
Then to conclude, I perceiue my verie lerned frend
and old Parisien acquentance M^r VVilliam Barclay,
wold haue all the effects of this water to proceede
from Tinne:Fallop. de foss. atque metal. cap. 22. which effects, sayeth hee, the Paracel|sians
ascryue to Saturne, and so concludeth, Sacha|rum
Saturni to bee the Salt of Tinne, confounding
two metalls in one, as if Iupiter were Saturne, and
Saturne Iupiter: Stannnm Plumbum, and plumbum
stannum. Tinne to bee Lead, and Lead to be Tin,
Which ouersight I can not think to haue proceided
of ignorance, because I know him to bee more ler|ned
than my selfe. I suspect it may bee imputed to
his haist (as hee writeth to the Printer) in making
for the tyde. Or else it may bee that hee thinketh
the difference betwix stannum plumbum to bee so
litle, that propter similitudinem in ardore scribendi, hee

might vse the name of the one for the other without
scruple, because of their affinitie; which if so bee, as
it is liklie, I think there is no oversight at all.
Finalie amongst all the wholsum qualities where
with this water seemeth to bee so secreitlie indued,
the corroboration of the Stomach is not the least:
a great ayde in curing of all disseases, and a power
so oppenlie knowne in this water to steir vp lust to
meate, that few or none haue as yet retourned with
out the proofe heirof.
But that Springs taking their course through Tin
or Lead, can giue appetite to the Stomach, I ca~not
beleeue: nether hath any of the learned ever as yet
remarked such a thing. For Fuschius the most lear|ned
German Physition in his dayes,De co~po. Med cap. 20 recompting the
Physicall properties of minerall waters both into
France and Germanie, writeth thus of the Plumbiers
or leaden Baines of Loraine.Baignes of Loraine. In Lotharingiae, inquit
montanis, Balnea sunt quae plumbiers, quasi plumbea,
ob nimirum copiosam plumbi mixturam, vocantur. Con|stant
ex plumbi, Sulphuris  Aluminis commixtione.
Auxiliatur malignis  curatu difficilibus vlceribus
cancro, phagednis, fistulis, elephantiae recens caeptae, 
omnibus cutis vitiis. Heir is no mention made of the
stomach, much lesse of other inward infirmities this
way cured, either by Tinne or Lead.
How then can it bee any thing, but a detersiue 
drying semi-minerall Nitrositie, which this water
seemeth to haue spirituallie contracted, whose na|turall
 sweetish scharpnes is so tempered by com|munication

of the refreshing qualities of Crystall
and Gypsum, and whose qualities are also detersiue
and drying. The effects whereof bewrayeth it selfe
more in bellifying, and skouring the superficiall de|formities
of the skinne, (then in curing of vlcers
proper to Tinne or Lead) such as are pustules, red
plowks of the face, ytching, and roughnes of the
skinne, proceeding of a dry melancholious  salt
blood, Tetters, Ring wormes, and that sort which the
Frensh men call les Dartres de Naples, the Graecians
, the Latines Impetigines, and with our selfs
is a dry ytching scruffe, or hote fla, oftymes chan|cing
on the face, or on the back of ones hand, which
(as Paulus, Aegineta testifieth) turneth to those of an
ill dyet, into a scabbe or leprosie.Lib. 6. meth. med. cap. 20. The which also that
most eloquent and learned Physition Fernel, hath
well remarked in the properties of Niter, in these wor|des
Nitrum, inquit, quanquam vehementer tergit, non
tamen vlceribus, sed lepris, alphis, impetiginibus, aliis
cutis vitiis expurgandis aptum.
And old Plinius who was so curious in naturall
things, sayeth, it heateth, biteth, and vlcerateth. Which
affects, say our Chyrugions, are no way fit for vl|cers:
 therefore may be the cause, perchance, why
Tabide or co~sumed people by an vlcer of the lungs,
after the immoderat vse of this water, became day|lie
worse and worse by too muche loosing of thee
bellie (a power proper in this water to some,Hippocrates. albeit
vnproper for Tabides) Phthisici enim per alvum rar
aut nuncquam purgandi.

Now because that some may object: if this water
had any Nitrous qualitie, it wold (no dout) bewray
it self, either in taist, colour, or savour? to which
I answer, that Physicall waters possesse either spiri|tuall
qualities, or substantiall quantities,  as there
bee diverse kynds of Salt, so are they diverse kynds
of saltish waters, which differ in their qualities by
degreis. For some be stronger, others mylder, some
sharper, and some sweeter,  others so insipide that
skairslie are they felt on the tongue. And least I
shuld seeme to bee alone of this opinion without
warrand of the learned,Cap. 9. de Therm. atque Metallis. Heare what Fallopius say|eth
of this same subject: Nitrum quidem ipsum, gustu
cognoscitur: difficile tamen est ex gustu discernere, an
aqua habeat in se Nitrum, quia Nitri sapor in ejusmo|di
aquis frigidis, non discernitur. Item visu nec olfactu
vllo modo cognoscitur aquam habere Nitrum. Tactu au|tem
aliquo modo, quia aquae Nitrosae detergunt nec re|linquunt
aliquam asperitatem.
Againe hee sayeth in an other place:Idem. Saepe enim
Sal Alumen sunt cum aquis ita commixta vt im|possile
sit per dissolutionem naturalem ipsa cognoscere.
Item Nitrum non cognscimus in aliqua aqua esse, nisi
insit ipsamet Nitri substantia.Idem.
To bee short then let none think, but Springs of
waters may bee indued with diverse Physicall pro|perties,
minerall or semi-minerall qualities, althogh
they nether bewray them selfes in taist, colour, nor
savour.
But how the, say others, can waters possessed

with saltish and Nitrous faculties, refresh, moysten,
and coole? I answer that a thousand effects in na|turall
causes, may also proceed of co~trarie qualities:
for there be many exceptions even in naturall rules,
so that sometymes wee see by experience subtile na|ture
so to ouerreach and surpasse the skill of arte
in these kynds of mixtures, that simples, natuallie
hote  dry of them selfes, by the companie of others
which coole and refresh, are sensiblie felt to excute
colde ffects.
Iosephus Acosta a worthie and judicious Spanyard
in his naturall and morall historie which he writeth
of the East and West Indies,Cap. 11, Natur Hist. discoursing vpon the
naturall qualitie of the Sea, writteth in these termes:
Althogh, sayeth hee, the water bee salt, yet it is al|wayes
water, whose nature is ever to coole, and it
is a remarkable thing in nature, that in the midst
of the deepe of the Oceane, the water is not made
hote, by the violent heat of the Sunne, as in rivers:
even as Salpeter (sayeth hee) althogh it bee natu|rallie
salt) hath a propertie to coole water, even so
wee see by experience, that in some ports and hea|vens,
the salt water refresheth, which wee haue ob|served
in that of Callao in Peru, whereas they put
the water or wyne which they drinck into the Sea
in flaggons to bee refreshed, whereby wee may vn|doubtedlie
beleeue, that the Ocean hath this pro|pertie,
to temper and moderat the excessiue heate:
for this cause wee find greater heat at land then at
sea, (caeteris paribus) and co~monlie countryes lying

neere the Sea, ar colder the~ those that ar foorther off.
But to illustrat this by many examples, wer no
lesse needlesse then endlesse: for the mater is cleer
of it selfe: and therefore I will ende this colde
discourse, contenting me onlie with the experience
of that famous  learned Empyrick Rulandus in
his tract at which hee writeth de curatione luis Hun|garicoe,
whose words are these: Inflamationi inquit,Cap. 6.
scabritieique faucium  confinium parcium extinguen|dae,
tum aestui restinguendo nullum efficatius remedium
nostrates putant insequenti.
Cape Nitri puri albiss. q. v. pila munda in tenuem pulv.Trochis. de Nitro ord.
comminuito: adsit sartago aenea fundi crassiss. hanc pru|nis
impone, donec incanduerit tota: injice Nitri tusi M.
vnum. Ilico liquatur aquae limpidiss. instar,  dum ita
bullit, injice sulphuris puri  triti, zs. elicies flamma~.
caerulei coloris: quae vbi evanuerit,  tertio bullire Ni|trum
videris, repete Sulphuris adjectionem,  hoc ter
tium reiterato. Demum pilae mundae, aut vasi figulino
pedetentim infundito, exsurgent albi trochisci seu rotu|lae
coagulatae. Has denno terito in pulvere~ tenuiss. vsus
Conserv. Rosar. cochleari pulveris adde triplum ejus
quanto satis ovo satiendo adhibetur.
Praebeatur aegro aestu fere enecto, quoties voluerit.
Nostratum quidam multis in aqua fontana frigid. dis|soluti
hujus ex Nitro remedii portiunculam, iterum at
iterum exhibendo, multos se sanitati restituisse pristinae
gloriantur, parantes idem remedium  secretum sibi
imaginantes. Minim aspernandum est remedium nobis
nec aliis esse debet, nisi Nitri qualitates ignorantibus:

modo rit administretur  curandi methodus potior non
susque deque habeatur.
Goe then with boldnesse,  drinck of this whol|some
and Physicall water, and say not to your selfs,
the Physitions envyeth it, speaketh against it, they
approve it not, and it hindereth their gaine. Onlie
but carie with you these few directions following.
and so faire yee well.



 What wee shoud obserue, before wee goe
to drinck of such Waters.
_THat none drinck of such waters, who haue their
back and reines verie hote,Fallopis de Th c. 31. and the stomach and
whole habite of the bodie cold. For that were euen
as much to destroy a whole ludging, for the gaine
onlie of one co~modious chamber.
2 That no disseased person drinck thereof, before his bodie bee
well prepared and purged, for by this meanes no man shall haue
harme therby, and it is the counsell of the learned. But aboue
all things,Idem. and which most importeth, that none drinck of the
same wth a bund bellie: for I haue not obserued it as yet, to
doe harme to any so much as to those. To hepe this then, and
for such as can take no Physick, no thing is more excellent or
more reddie for this pourpose, then to carie with you a box of
Grana Angelica, and to swellou viij or ix. of them hid in a
vere or potched egg, which you may doe without harme at any
tyme a day, but especiallie at meate in the begnning or mids
of dinner or supper: for then they work best the next day ther|after,
and make not the bodie seike,  is a most familiare  so|ueraine
remedie for all disseases proceeding of constipation.
3 It is not good to take it cupe,Idem. for cupe, without intermis|sion
but to walk moderatlie vp and doune, betwix each draucht,
and that yee grow nether hote nor sweat.
4 It wold bee onlie taken in the morning fasting,Idem. and not at
meaes, as many eroniouslie doe, for it is diuretick.
5 It is not so good being caryed a farr of,Idem. as taken from the Rok
althogh it bee tryed to keep longer vncorrupt then other water.
6 The seike should drinck it seaven dayes togidder at least,
and some longer as the diease requyreth, eating in the meane
tyme meat o easie digeston.
7 It wold be onlie taken (as the learned doe prescriue) in the
hotest moneths,Idem. specialie in Iune, Iulie, and August: Yea euen in

the verie tyme of our dogg-dayes, so much regairded of amongst
vs without cause. The reason of this is not onlie because the wa|ter
is best then: but also for that it is requisite, the whole ha|bite
of the bodie bee patent and oppen, that such cold springes
may haue the more frie passage without stoppe, which opning 
free Ishue in our bodies (as the learned say) is not but in hotest
moneths and seasons, and which heate with vs is but a tempe|rat
heat in regaird of that of other nations.




TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
_GEntle Reader, this Discourse hath beene the
birth of my Idle houres this last vacance, which
I penned more for your particular vse, then
for any gaine to my selfe. If you haue found
any thing heerein to your content, think well of the Au|thor
for his paines. If nothing which you haue red hath ly|ked
you, my luck hath beene naught: for in nothing, there
can bee no great thing. An other before me hath writen
his opinion, and so haue I. if I haue erred  said amisse,
I am but a man. If not well ynough, I wish it were bet|ter.
But if well and truelie, GOD bee praised, I deserue
no blame. I haue done offence to none, but showne
my mynd, for the which I craue no man pardon, nor fur|ther
freindship then I deserue, nor greater thankes then
may requyte goodwill, who wisheth well to you all that
are well mynded, crauing onlie your courtesie to comend
what yee think worthie, and not to disdaine without de|sert.
So if I haue offended in any thing that the wyse can
mislyke, I am reddie to make a mends accordinglie, and
shall Godwilling drinck to you at the Well the nixt So|mer,
with a promesse also to doe you greater service heir
after, and so I end.




