




THREE
HEAVENLY TREA|TISES
VPON THE EIGHT
Chapter to the Romanes.
Viz.

1 Heauen opened.
2 The right way to eternall Glory.
3 The Glorification of a Christian.

VVherein the Counsaile of God con|cerning
Mans saluation is so manifested, that all men
may see the Ancient of dayes, the Iudge of the
world, in his generall Iustice Court, absoluing
the Christian from sinne and death.
Which is the first benefit wee haue by our
Lord Iesus Christ.
Come and see.
Written by M^r^. William Cowper, Minister
of Gods word.
LONDON:
Printed by Thomas Snodham for William Firebrand, and
Iohn Budge, and are to be sould at his shop at the
great Southdoore of Paules. 1609.




TO THE MOST SA|cred,
Christian, truely Ca|tholique,
and mightie Prince
Iames, King of great Britaine, France,
and Ireland, defender of the
faith, c.
_SIR, The Apostle S. Paule, that
chosen vessell of God,Act. 9. 15. and his
ambassadour sent forth into the
world to bring in the house of
Iapheth into the tents of Sem,Gen. 9. 27.
hauing in his peregrination (vn|dertaken
for preaching) from Ie|rusalem
vnto Illyricum,Rom. 15. 19 seene
the most pleasant parts of the world, and in an extasie
transported from earth into the third heauen, seene also
the pleasures of Paradise,2. Cor. 12. as one who knew both, not
by naked speculation but experience, giues out his iudge|ment
of both,Philip. 3. 8. that the most excellent things of this world
were but dung, in respect of the Lord Iesus, and that
whatsoeuer pleasure on earth,1. Cor. 2. 9. may delight the eye, or eare


they haue vnto others, it shalbe no small comfort vnto
me, and my greatest thankefulnesse shalbe declared in
my dayly prayers vnto the Lord God for your Maiestie,
that the name of Iacobs God may defend you from
all euill, and the Lord may send you helpe out of his
Sanctuarie in all your need,Psal. 20. 1. according as hee hath done.
O King beloued of God,Psal. 21. 1. hated of none but for Gods sake,
keepe still your heart in the loue of God, and his truth,
Reioyce in the strength of your God,Psal. 56 4. and feare not
what flesh can doe vnto you. Is it not the Lord, who
set your Highnesse on the throne to bee a feeder of his
people Israel?Psal. 18. 43 Is it not the Lord who hath deliuered
your Maiestie from the contentions of the people, and se|cret
snares of your cursed enimies?Gen. 49. 23. though the Archers
grieued you, hated you, and shot at you, were not the
hands of your armes strengthened by the hands of the
mightie God of Iacob?Gen. 49. 25. Is it not the almightie, who hath
blessed your Maiesty with heauenly blessings from aboue,Psal. 21. 3.
with blessings of the depth that lyes beneath, with bles|sings
of the breast and wombe?
Sir, let his liberall blessings wherewith the Lord your
God hath preuented you,Psal. 18. 50 be so many obligations binding
your Highnesse to honour the Lord,Gen. 12. 1 who hath honoured
you. Let his forepast manifold deliuerances be as so ma|ny
confirmations, that if your Maiestie rest in him,Psal. 68. 20 and
not in man, he will still be a buckler vnto you. Let Abad|don
the King of the Locusts that Romish vsurper rage,Reuel. 9. 11.
Vnto the Lord belongs the issues of death. Can Ba|laam
curse,Numb. 23. 8 where God hath blessed? yea, can Sathan
hurt the man,Iob. 1. 10. who is hedged by the Lord? Let the

Ambassadours of new Babel more shamelesse than Sen|nacherib
his Rabsache,2. Kin. 18. raile at good king Ezekiah ru|ling
in IerusalemEsa, 37. 29. the Lord hath yet a hooke for his
nosethrils, and a bridle for his lips. Doe not the eyes
of the Lord behold the whole earth, to shew himself
strong with them that are strong,2. Chr. 16. 9 and of a perfect heart
toward him?Esa. 8. 12. Therefore feare not their feare, but sancti|fie
the Lord God of hostes, let him be your feare, and hee
shalbe a Sanctuarie vnto your Maiestie.Psal. 69. 9. Count it a part
of your high glorie, and no small matter of your Maiesties
ioy, that with Christ you beare this peece of his crosse,Psal. 21. 7.
that the rebukes of them who rebuke the Lord, are fal|len
vpon you; and trust still O King, in the Lord, and in
the mercie of the most High, and so your Maiestie shall
neuer fall. Long may your Highnesse liue and
raigne ouer vs, as a faithfull seruant to your
God, and a happie King of many
blessings to your people,
Your Maiesties most humble Sub|iect
and dayly Oratour
William Cowper,
Minister at Perth.









works of God,Some books of holy Scripture meeter for vs, then others are August de temp. ser. 49. there is a difference, and some of them more
cleerely then others declares the glorie of God, so it is also
among his holy writs, they breath all out one truth by a
most sweet harmonie, diuine enim lectiones ita sibi connectun|tur,
tanqnam vna sit lectio, quia omnes ex vno ore procedunt:
yet ye shall finde that in some of them the Lord commeth
neere vnto vs, as it were, with the face of a man, talking fa|miliarly
vnto vs; in others againe hee mounts high aboue
vs, as it were with the wings of an Eagle. And the Lord hath
left it free, to delight our selues most in those places of holy
Scripture, wherein for our estate we haue most edification,
and to seeke in this Apothecarie shop of that sweet Sama|ritan
the Lord Iesus, pharmaca morbo nostro conuenientia,
such medicines as are meet for our maladie.
Among all the bookes of the old Testament,Why among the Epistles this to the Ro|manes is first. most fre|quent
testimonies are brought by our blessed Sauiour and
his holy Apostles, out of the booke of the Psalmes. Ierome
called it a treasurie of all learning: And among all the
Epistles of the Apostles,Ierom. epist. ad Paulin. no meruaile this to the Romanes
haue the first place, not that it was first written, but because
aboue the rest, it contayneth a most perfect compend of our
Christian faith. And this middle Chapter thereof hath in
it an Abridgement of all these comforts and instructions,
(one excepted) which otherwise are dispersed throughout
the whole Epistle, and is (so to call it) a pleasant kot of
the garden, and Paradise of God, and therefore shall it not
be vnprofitable for vs, by Gods grace to delight our selues
for a while in it.
As to the connexion of this Chapter with the former,Two parts of this Chapter, the first con|taines comfort against sinne: The second, comfortagainst the crosse.
wee are to know that it is a conclusion of the foregoing
treatise of Iustification. Wherein the Apostle summarilie
collects the excellent state of a Christian, iustified by faith
in Christ Iesus, declaring it to bee such, that there is no con|demnation
to him, that nothing, were it neuer so euill is
able to hurt him, yea by the contrary, that all things workes
for the best vnto him. And because there are onely two

euils which grieue vs in this life, to wit, sinne that remaines
in vs: and affliction that followes vs in the following of
Christ. Against both these the Apostle furnishes the iusti|fied
man, with strong consolations. Comforts against the
remanents of sinne, wee haue from the 1. verse to the 18.
Comforts against our afflictions, wee haue from the midst
of the 18. verse, to the 31.
That this is the very purpose and order of the Apostle,This order of the Apostle is manifest out of his owne con|clusion.
is euident out of his owne conclusion, set downe from the
31. verse, to the end: wherein hee drawes all that hee hath
spoken in this Chapter to a short summe, contayning the
glorious triumph of a Christian ouer all his enimies. The
triumph is first set downe generally, verse 31.Rom. 8. 31. What shall
wee then say to these things, if God bee with vs, who can bee
against vs, c. This generall incontinent hee parts in two,
there is (sayeth hee) but two things may hurt vs, either
Sinne, or Affliction. As to Sinne, hee triumphs against it,
verse 33. and 34.vers. 33. 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God
his chosen? it is God that iustifieth, who shall condemne? It is
Christ, who is dead, or rather, who is risen againe, who is also
at the right hand of God, and maketh request for vs. As to
Affliction, hee triumphs against it, from the 35. to the end,
Who shall seperate vs from the loue of Christ? shall tribulation,ver. 35.
anguish, or persecution? shall famine, nakednesse, or perill? yea
shall death doe it? or that which is much more, shall An|gels,
principalities, or powers doe it? No, In all these things
wee are more than Conquerours, through him that loued vs.
Thus doth the Apostle like a faithfull steward in the house
of God, take by the hand the weary sonnes and daughters
of the liuing God, that hee may leade vs into the Lords
winesellers, there to refresh,Cant. 2. 4. and stay vs with the lagons of
his Wine,Cant. 5. 1. to comfort vs with his Apples, to strengthen vs with
his hid Manna, and to make vs merry with that Milke and
Hony which our immortall husband Iesus Christ, hath pro|uided
for vs, to sustaine vs, that we faint not through our ma|nifold
tentations that compasse vs in this barren wildernes.

We come then to the first part of the Chapter,Subdiuision of the first part. where|in
the Apostle keepes this order. First, hee sets downe a
generall proposition of comfort belonging to the iustified
man. Secondly, he subioynes a confirmation therof. Third|ly,
he explanes his reason of confirmation, and fourthly, ap|plyes
ifirst by commination of them who walke after the
flesh, secondly, by consolation of the godly against the re|manents
of the flesh, thirdly, by exhortation of both not to
walke after the flesh. In the proposition againe set downe,
 Verse 1.Proposition. first, he points at the comfort; Now then there is no
condemnation: secondly, he sets downe a limitation, restray|ning
this comfort; To them who are in Christ: thirdly, hee
subioynes a clearer declaration of those persons who are in
Christ, to wit, they walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.
Verse 1.Coherence of this Chapter with the for|mer. Now then. This is a relatiue to his former dis|course,
and is (as I haue said) a Conclusion inferred vpon
that which goeth before. Seeing wee are iustified by Faith
in Iesus Christ, and are now no more vnder the Law, but
vnder Grace; seeing we are buryed with Christ by Baptisme
into his death, that like as he was raised from the dead by
the glory of his Father, so we also should walke in new|nesse
of life, hauing receiued that spirit of Christ, whereby
wee fight against the Law of sinne in our members, which
rebelleth against the Law of our minde: seeing it is so, we
may be sure that the remanent power of sinne in vs, shall
neuer be able to condemne vs.
We see then that these words containe the Apostles glo|rying
against the remanents of sinne,The Apostles former lamen|tation turned into a triumph. the sense whereof,
in the end of the last Chapter made him burst out in a pit|tifull
lamentation, and cry; O miserable man, who will deliuer
me from the body of this death, but now considering the cer|taintie
of his deliuerance by Iesus Christ, he reioyceth and
triumpheth. Wherein for our first lesson, we marke the di|uersitie
of dispositions, to which the Children of God are
subiect in this life, sometime so full of comfort that they can
not containe themselues, but must needs breake forth into

glorious reioycings: at other times so far deiected in mind,
that their ioy is turned into mourning; and this ariseth in
them from the variable change of their sight and feeling.
The Disciples on mount Tabor,Math. 17. 2. seeing the bright shining
glorie of Christ were rauished with ioy, but incontinent
when the cloud ouershadowes them, they become afraid.
If the Lord let vs feele his mercies, wee are aliue, but if hee
hide his face,Psal. 50. 21. and set our sinnes in order before vs, wee are
sore troubled.The life of a Christian is a mixed webbe, wrought of trouble and comfort. As the troubles wee haue in this life are not
without comforts; blessed bee God the Father of our Lord
Iesus, the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, who com|forts
vs in all our tribulation: so our ioy, saith Saint Peter,
is not without heauinesse, the one arising of the knowledge
of that vndeserued inheritance,2 Cor. 1. 3. reserued for vs in heauen: the
other of our manifold tentations,1 Pet. 1. 3. to which wee are subiect
here vpon earth; it is these vicissitudes and changes which
wrought in Dauid such different dispositions, as appeareth
in him in the Booke of the Psalmes, and which all the godly
may be experience finde in themselues,Bernard. Pascimur hic  pa|timur:
for here we are so nourished with the comforts of
God, that we are nurtred with his crosses. It is the Lords
dispensation, and we are to reuerence it, resting assured that
the peace and ioy which once the Lord hath giuen vs, may
be interrupted, but can neuer vtterly be taken from vs, the
Lord who will not suffer the rod of the wicked for euer to lie
vpon the back of the righteous,Psal. 125. 3. least they put out their hand to
wickednesse, will frre lesse suffer his owne terrours conti|nually
oppresse our consciences, least we faint and dispaire,
though he wound vs,Hose. 6. 2 he will binde vs vp againe, after two daies
he will reuine vs, and we shall liue in his sight; Weeping may
abide in the Euening, but ioy shall come in the Morning. The
chosen vessell of God shall not alway lament, and cry woe
is me, sometime the Lord will put a song of thanksgiuing
in his mouth,Chrisost. in Mat. hom. and make him to reioyce, thus de aduersis 
prosperis admir abilivirtute vitam Sanctorum contexuit Deus.
The life of a Christian may bee compared to a webbe, so

meruailously mixed and wouen of comfort and trouble, by
the hand of God, that the long thread thereof reaching
from the day of our birth to the day of our death, are all of
trouble, but the weft interiected, manifold comforts, and
this haue we marked vpon the coherenee of the beginning
of this Chapter, with the end of the former.
Now in these words it is to be obserued,Papist wrong|fully collect here, that there is sin on, or damnable act in them who are in Christ. the Apostle saies
not, there is no sinne in them who are in Christ, but he saith,
there is no condemnation to them: he hath confessed before
that he did the euill which he would not, and that he saw a
law in his members rebelling against the law of his minde,
but now hee reioyceth in Christ, that sinne in him is not
able to condemne him. It is then a false exposition of these
words, which is made by Caietane and Aquinas: Nihil est
damnabile in illis,Aquinas, Caietane on this place. qui sunt in Christo, nullus actus quo merea|mur
damnari, that in them who are is Christ, there is no|thing
worthy to be damned, no act that merits damnation:
for the Apostle condemnes these motions of sinne, which
he found in himselfe, as euill and repugnant to the Law of
God: and if the holy Apostle was not ashamed to confesse
this of himselfe, what blinde presumption is this in them,
to exempt themselues, or others from such motions, as are
worthy to be damned, wee shall still confesse our guiltines,
there remaines in vs of our owne which the Lord might
condemne, if he would enter into iudgement with vs, and
shall so much the more praise his mercie, who hath deliue|red
vs from condemnation: and further comfort then this
the Apostles words do not afford vnto vs, .
There is no iudgement, no sentence to be giuen against
them who are in Chrst. Surely our righteousnesse in this
life, consists rather in the remission of sinnes, then in the
perfection of vertue.Cypriain orat. dom. Ne quis sibi, quasi innocens placeat, cum
innocens nemo sit,  se extollendo plus pereat, instruitur  do|cetur,
peccare se quotidie, dum quotidie pro peccatis iubetur
orare, that no man (saith Cyprian) should flatter himselfe, as
though he wer innocent, when as indeed no man is innocent,

and so by extolling himselfe, should perish so much the
more, he is instructed and taught that he sinnes, while as
euery day hee is commaunded to pray for remission of
sins, but this errour we shall God willing further improue
hereafter.
In the meane time for our comfort let vs consider,Reasons why the Lord suf|fers sin to re|maine in the iustified man. that
albeit the Lord, when hee iustified vs, might haue vtterly
destroyed the life of this sinning sinne in vs, yet for waigh|ty
causes hath he suffered some life thereof to abide in vs
for a time:For the exercise of our Faith. the first is, for the exercise of our faith, Peccata 
quorum reatum Soluit Deus, ne post hanc vitam obsint, ma|nere
tamen voluit ad certamen fidei; these sinnes (saith Au|gustine)
the guiltinesse whereof God hath loosed, that they
should not hurt vs in the life to come,Aug. in Ioan. tract. 41. hee will haue to re|maine
for the exercise of our faith. No man is crowned, ex|cept
he striue as he ought,2. Tim. 2. 5. and therefore the Lord who hath
prepared for vs a crowne, and hath put vpon vs his com|pleat
armour, hath also suffered some enimies to remaine,
against whom we may fight, for the tryall of our faith, pa|tience
and perseuerance, euen as the Cananites were left in
the Land, that the Lord by them might proue the Israe|lits,
whether if or not, they would keepe the way of the Lord
to walke into it.
Secondly,For our instru|ction that we may know what benefite we haue by Christ. some life of sinne is left in vs for our instru|ction,
that wee may know the better how farre we are ob|lieged
to Gods mercy, and how excellent is that deliuerance
which we haue by Iesus Christ. Nulla quidem est condem|natio
his qui sunt in Christo, tamen ad humiliandos nos pec|catum
adhuc patitu vitere in nobis,  grauiter nos affligere, vt
sentiamus,Bernard. quid gratia nobis praestet,  semper ad illius auxi|lium
recurramus. It is true indeed (saith Bernard) that there
is no condemnation to them who are in Christ, yet for our
humiliation the Lord suffers sinne to liue in vs, and often|times
afflict vs, that we may know the benefit wee haue by
Grace, and make our recourse for helpe vnto it continually,
and indeed, except by experience wee felt how powerfull

sin is of it selfe to ouer rule vs, we could neuer haue knowne
that vile bondage and seruitude of sinne, vnder which wee
lay by nature, nor that excellent Grace of Christ, by which
we haue gotten deliuerance. And therefore so oft as wee
are troubled with our inhabitant corruption, we are to con|sider,
that if the remanents of the old man breed vs such
strong and restlesse tentations, how would it tyrannize o|uer
vs, if it were liuing in the full vigour,  strength thereof?
that so we may praise and magnifie that sauing Grace of
the Lord Iesus, which hath freed vs from so intollerable a
tyrannie.
 Thirdly,For the greater glory of God, and Sathans greater confu|sion. the Lord hath done this for his own greater glo|ry,
like vnto those Victors in battaile, who albeit they may,
yet will not put all their enimies to the edge of the sword,
some of them they take Captiues, and reserues for a while
aliue against the day of triumph, to be put then to death, to
their greater shame, and the greater honour of their Con|querours.Iosh. 10. 23.
When Ioshua had discomfited those fiue Kings,
who made warre against Gibeon, hee would not slay them
in the battaile, but inclosed them in a caue, that the battell
being ended, he might put them to death in sight of all his
people: and then for their further confirmation, hee caused
his Captaines and chiefe men of warre, to tread vpon the
necks of these Kings, to assure them that after the same man|ner
the Lord should subdue all the rest of their enimies vn|der
them. And so our Captaine  mightie conquerour, the
Lord Iesus, hath by himselfe obtained vnto vs victorie ouer
all our enimies, these Kings which besieged Gibeon are
turned to flight, these inordinate affections, which held vs
Captiues before, are now by his power captiued of vs, they
are closed vp vvithin vs (as in a Caue) vvhere they remaine
vvith some life, but restrained of their former libertie and
power. And vve rest assured, that when the battaile shall be
finished, our Lord Iesus shall altogether spoyle them of
their life:Rom. 16. 20 The God of peace shall shortly tread Sathan vnder
our feete: then Goliah being ouercome, his army of the

Philistines shall flie, and no inordinate desire shall bee left
within vs. Thus wee see how the Lord permits his enimie
to liue, and will not (fully) torment him before the time, it is
not because he wants power to subdue him,Ciril. catech. 8. Set vt o ma|gis
confundatur, but that so much the more he may confound
him. When as all the warriours of God, aswell those who
are to come in the last age of the world, as those who were
in the forefront of the battaile, haue foughten against
him, and ouercome him,1 Cor. 15. 25 then shall the Lord Iesus put all
his enimies vnder his feete. Yea, euen now in the very time
of the conflict is Sathan wonderfully confounded in this,How Sathan is daily confoun|ded in the godly.
that notwithstanding the Serpent keepe his sting, yet there
is no deadly power in it. This vncircumcised Goliah hath
that same sword in his hand, by which he hath slaine many
one, the Lord permits him also to strike the Christian man
therewith, but hee sees himselfe it is in vaine. O how doth
he returne ashamed and confounded, when hauing gotten
leaue to shoot out his sting, and to strike with his accusto|med
sword (of sinne) those whom he hateth vnto death, he
perceiues that for all hee can doe, there remaines in them
a seed of life which cannot be destroyed?
But that the greatnesse of this benefite which we haue
by Iesus Christ,Christians are not exempted from the con|demnatory sen|tence of men. may the better appeare, let vs see what a
condemnation this is, from which we are deliuered. In the
Scriptures there is ascribed to man a iudging, by which he
absolueth or condemneth; there is also ascribed to God a
iudging, by which he absolueth or condemneth, As to
mans condemnation, we are not exempted from it. Daniel
condemned for a Rebell, Ioseph condemned for an Adulte|rer;
Iob condemned of his friends for an Hypocrit; our Sa|uiour
condemned for an Enimie to Caesar; his Disciples con|demned
and iudged worthy of stripes, stand as so many ex|amples
to confirme vs, that vve faint not when vve are con|demned
of men: yea, vvith the Apostle vve must learne to
passe little from mans iudgement, and striue in a good con|science
to be approued of God, for sure the Lord vvill not

peruert iudgement, it is farre from the Iudge of all the
world to doe vnrighteously, hee vvill at the last plead the
cause of his Seruants, and bring their righteousnesse to
light.
This condemnation then,But from the condemnatory sentence of God. from which vvee are deliue|red,
is the sentence of God the righteous Iudge, by which
finding man guiltie of sinne, for sinne hee addgeth him
vnto eternall damnation, from this all they, who are in
Christ are deliuered:Iohn. 5. 24. Hee that beleeueth in him who sent
mee, hath euerlasting life, and shall not come into condem|nation,
but hath passed from death to life. In this condem|nation
the Lord proceedes at three sundry dyats against
the wicked.Three sundry dyats the Lord keepes against the wicked in the processe of their condem+nation. First, hee condemneth them in the Court
of Conscience. Next, in the day of their particular iudge|ment.
Thirdly, in the day of generall Iudgement. First,
(I say) the Lord holdeth a Iustice Court against the
vvicked in his owne Conscience: For the Lord iudgeth
 the righteous,The first is kept against them in the iustice court of their owne Conscience. and him that contemneth God euery day. Af|ter
sinne committed by him, there ariseth in his Consci|ence
accusing thoughtes, and there is a sentence vvithin
him, giuen out against him. The Apostle speakes it of
Heretikes, one sort of vvicked men, and it is true in them
all,Psal. 50. 5. they sinne, being damned of their owne selues, ,
by themselues Iudgement is giuen out against
themselues: which sentence albeit euery vvicked man doe
not marke the voyce of their disordered affections, some|time
being so loud, that they heare not the condemnato|ie
voyce of their Conscience, so clearely as it is pro|nounced,
yet doe they heare as much, as makes them in|excusable,
and breedes in them a certaine feare and ter|rour,
which is but a fore-runner of a more fearefull iudge|ment
to come, vvhich howsoeuer in time of their securi|tie
they labour to smoother, and quench by externall de|lights,
yet at the length affection shall bee silenced, and
Conscience shall pronounce sentence against them vvith
so shill a voyce, that their deafest eare shall heare it. This

I haue marked, that vve may learne not to esteeme lightly
the Iudgement of our Conscience, but that so oft as vvee
are condemned by it, vvee may make our refuge to the
throne of Grace to seeke mercy; Ioh. 3. 20 For if Conscience con|demne
vs, God is greater then the Conscience, and will much
more condemne vs,Aug. hom. 50 Ascendat ita homo tribunal mentis suae,
si  illud, meminerit, quod oportet eum, ante tribunal
Christi exhiberi. Let therefore a man (saith Augustine) goe
vp to the tribunall of his owne mind (in time) if he feare it,
let him remember that he must be presented before a grea|ter
tribunall.
The second dyat of iudgement, which the Lord keepes 
against the wicked,The second is kept against them in the houre of death is in the houre of death, wherein the
Lord doth not onely repeat their former sentence of con|demnation,
and that in a more fearefull and iudiciall man|ner,
but proceeds also to execution, adiudging their bodies
(vntill the day of last iudgement) to the prison of the graue,
to vnderly that curse pronounced on man for his Apostasie,
and condemning their spirits to be banished from the pre|sence
of God, and cast into vtter darknesse. Let not there|fore
the wicked man nourish himselfe in sinne, with a vaine
conceit of the delay of iudgement, wherefore wilt thou put
farre from thee the euill day? what, suppose the day of
generall iudgement were not to come for many yeeres, is
not the day of thy perticular iudgement at hand? vnto which
thou shalt be drawne sodainely, and perforce in the midst
of thy deceiuing imaginations, thou shalt bee taken away
in an houre wherein thou thought not to dye, more mise|rable
than that rich glutton, who hauing stored his head
with false conclusions, dreaming of many dayes to come,
when he had not one, was that same day taken away to
iudgement. And this shall moue vs the more, if we doe re|member,
that such as we are in the day of death, such shall
we bee found in the day of iudgement.Aug. epist. ad Hesych. In quo enim quem
invenerit suns nouissimus dies, in hoc eum comprehendet mun|di
nouissimus dies, quia qualis in die ifto quisque moritur, talis

in die illo iudicabitur, and euery man in the last day shall be
iudged to bee such, as hee is when hee dyeth. It would wa|ken
vs all more carefully to thinke vpon our end, that so
we might prepare our selues for this second dyat of iudge|ment.
 But the third day of iudgement shall be most fearefull,The third dyat shall bee kept against them in the day of generall iudge|ment.
when all the wicked being gathered together in one shall
bee condemned, in that high and supreame court of iustice,
which the Lord shall hold vpon all that euer tooke life, then
shall the full measure of the wrath of God bee powred vp|pon
all those who are not in Christ Iesus, both in soule
and body, they shall bee punished with euerlasting perditi|on.
This iudgement shall bee most equitable, for when
that Ancient of dayes, shal sit downe vpon his white throne,
before whose face heauen and earth shall flee away,Dan. 12. 6. and
when the Sea, and the Earth, hath rendred vp their dead,
then the bookes shall bee opened,Reuel. 10. 8. according to which hee shall
proceed vnto iudgement.This iudgment shall proceede, by the bookes of Law, and Conscience. And the bookes are two, the
booke of the law, which sheweth to a man what the should
doe; and the booke of Conscience, which sheweth him what
hee hath done; by those shall the wicked man bee iudged,
and hee shall not bee able to make exception against any
of them: against the booke of the law, hee shall bee able
to speake nothing,Psal. 19. 9. for the Commandements of the Lord are
pure, and righteous altogether. And as to the booke of con|science,
thou canst not denye it, the Lord shall not iudge
thee by an other mans conscience, but by thine owne; that
booke thou hast had it alway in thine owne keeping, who
then could falsifie it? neither is any thing written in it of
things thou hast done, but that which thine owne hand
hath written, how then canst thou make any exception
against it?
Thus the bookes being opened,How the wic|ked shall bee conuicted by the booke of the Law. the iudgement shall
proceed in this manner. The Law shall pleade for trans|gression
of her precepts, requiring that the wicked may be
put to death, for their most vnreasonable disobedience, her

commandements for number being but ten, and so not bur|denable
to the memorie; for vnderstanding plaine, written
in the hart of euery man; for equitie not contradictable, for
the Law craueth nothing of man, but that which by
the holinesse of his nature receiued by Creation, hee was
able to performe, neither doth the law command any thing
profitable to God, vvho gaue it, but vnto man, who recei|ued
it. And for holinesse euery precept of the law, when
God proclaymed it on mount Sinai, was assisted with a
thousand of his Saints, as witnesses of the holinesse therof:
all these circumstances doe aggrauate the waight of that
iudgement which the law shall giue out against the trans|gressors
thereof.How they shal be conuicted by the booke of conscience. Then from the Law iudgement shall pro|ceede
to Conscience, and Conscience shall witnesse against
them of their transgressions against euery precept of the
law; wherein they shall be so cleerely conuinced, that their
perticular sinnes with the circumstances thereof, time, and
place, though now they haue cast them behind their backs,
shall then be set in order before them; and so iustly euery
manner of way shall iudgement goe out against them.
Eliphaz spoke it falslie to Iob,Iob. 15. 6. thy owne mouth and not I
condemnes thee, but most iustly shall the ruler of the world
lay it vpon the wicked,Luk. 19. 22. out of thy owne mouth I iudge thee,
O thou euill and vnfaithfull seruant, the voyce of thine own
conscience, and no other shall condemne thee.
And as this condemnation will bee most righteous,This iudgment shall also bee most terrible. so
shall it bee also most fearefull, not onely in regard of the
manner of the Lords proceeding in that last iudgement,
but chieflie in regard of that irrevocable sentence of dam|nation,Exod. 19. 16.
which shall be executed without delay. The Law
was giuen with Thunders and Lightnings,Moses trem|bled for feare at the giuing of the Law what will the wic|doe at the exe|cution thereof? and a thicke
cloud vpon the mount, with an exceeding loude sound of
the Trumpet, so that all the people were afraide; yea so
terrible was the sight, that Moses said I feare, and quake.
The lawes of mighty Monarches are executed with greater
terror, then they are proclaymed; what then shall we looke

for, when the God of glory shall appeare, to iudge the world
according to his law?Reuel. 6. 14. the Heauens shall passe away with a
noyse, the Elements shall melt with heate, the Earth with
the workes which are therein shall be burnt vp, the Arch|angell
shall blow a Trumpet, at the voyce whereof the
dead shall rise. If Moses the seruant of the Lord, quaked to
heare the first Trumpet, how shall the wicked, condemned
in their owne conscience tremble, and quake to heare the
second?Reu. 6. 15. Then shall the Kings of the Earth, and the great
men, and the rich men, and the chiefe Captaines, and the
mightie men, hide themselues in the Dennes, and among the
rockes of the Mountaines: (for what strength is there in
man, who is but stubble, to stand before a consuming fire?)
and or euer their doome bee giuen out, they shall crye
Mountaines and Rockes fall vpon vs, and hide vs from the
presence of him that sitteth on the Throne, but when they
shall heare that fearefull sentence,Mat. 25. 41. depart from me yee cursed
into euerlasting fire, prepared for the Diuell and his Angels
O how shall the terrour thereof confound their spirits, and
presse them downe to the bottome of hell. O fearefull sen|tence!
(depart from me) what shall the creature doe, when
the Creator in his wrath commaunds it to depart, and by
his power banishes it from his presence? O man wilt thou
consider in time,Remembrance of this last iudg+ment is a preser+atiue against sinne. vvho shall receiue thee when God casts
thee out from his face; or who shall pittie and bee able to
comfort thee, when God shal persecute thee with his wrath?
assure thy selfe euery creature shall refuse her comfort to
thee, if a drop of colde water might bee a reliefe vnto thee
thou shalt not get it. Happie therefore are they vvho in
time resolues themselues vvith Peter,Math. 10. Lord whether away
shall wee goe from thee, thou hast the wordes of eternall life.
For they who doe now goe a whoring from the LORD,
wandring after lying vanities, shall in that day receiue this
for a recompence of their errour,Iud. 10. 14. goe to the Gods whom yee
haue serued.Mat. 25. 41. Your whole life was but a turning backe from
mee, now therefore depart from mee, and whether? into fire,

and what fire? euerlasting fire, and with whom? with the
Diuell and his Angels: thou hast forsaken, mee, thou hast
followed them, goe thy way with them, a companion of
their torment. O fearefull sentence! quae cum it a sint bene
nobiscum ageretur,Augustine. si iam nunc sic nos paeniteret super malis
nostris, quomodo tunc sine vllo remedio paenitebit. It were good
therefore sayes Augustine, if novv all men could so repent of
their sinnes, as it is certaine in that day they shall repent
without any remedie, for then the wicked vvill shed teares
aboundantly, but they shall bee fruitlesse.
And if yet all this cannot waken thee to goe to the Lord
Iesus vpon the feete of faith and repentance,The day be|fore the last iudgement Mercy shall be offered, but none after it. that in him
thou mayest bee deliuered from this fearefull damnation,
yet remember that seeing this iudgement is supreame and
the last, from which will bee no recalling, most foolish art
thou, if in time thou doe not foresee and prouide, how
thou mayest stand in it. Now if thy conscience condemne
thee, thou may get if thou, seeke absolution in Christ, but
in that day if the Lord condemne thee, thou shalt neuer be
absolued; the day before the Trumpet sound, mercy shall
bee preached to the penitent and beleeuers by the Gospell,
but from the time that once the sentence is giuen out, there
shall neuer bee more offering of mercy; the doore shall be
closed, though the wicked cry for mercy, and vvith Esau
seeke the blessing vvith many teares, yet shall they neuer
finde it.
Of all this novv it is euident,By Christ wee haue deliuerce from this three fold condem|nation. vvhat an excellent benefit
wee haue by Iesus Christ, in that vve are deliuered from
this threefold condemnation. For first being iustified by
faith vve haue peace vvith God in our consciences, that holy
spirit of adoption testifying vnto vs that our sinnes are for|giuen
vs: whereof arises in our heart an vnspeakable and
glorious ioy, which ioy notwithstanding cannot be full nor
perfect vntill the former sentence of our absolution be also
pronounced, in the other two iudgements, that in the houre
of death wee heare that ioyfull sentence,Mat. 25. 21. Come to mee thou



(with the Apostle) the terrour of that day, but surely when
the Lord shall set vs on mount Sion among those thousands
which follow the Lambe, and we shall see the smoake of
the damned ascending continually; when we shall stand at
the right hand of the Lord Iesus, and shall heare that feare|full
sentence pronounced on the wicked, and see the spee|die
and terrible execution thereof, the earth opening incon|tinent
to swallow them, then shall we perfectly know, how
greatly the Lord hath magnified his mercies towards vs, in
deliuering vs from so fearefull a condemnation.
Last of all,How miserable are they who are not in Christ? as this is the happy estate of them who are
in Christ, that now there is no condemnation for them, so
is it the contrary miserable estate of the damned, doe what
they will, euery action of their life makes out the processe
of their most iust condemnation, for to the vncleane all
things are vncleane, yea, euen their consciences are defiled,
and their prayer is abhominable and turned into sinne, but
thanks be to God through Iesus Christ, who hath deliuered
vs from this most vnhappie condition.
To them who are in Christ.Deliuerance by Christ pertains not vnto al men onely to them who are of the houshold of Faith. Albeit the former mentioned
deliuerance from the wrath to come, be most comfortable,
yet this which is subioyned should waken euery man to
take heed vnto himselfe when we heare that this deliue|rance
is limited and restrained onely to them who are in
Christ. It is true that by the offence of one man the fault
came on all to condemnation, but by the obedience of one
all are not made righteous, onely they who receiue the abun|dance
of grace, and gift of righteousnesse shall reigne in life
through one Iesus Christ. As therfore we haue receiued with|in
our selues by nature the sentence of death, knowing that
we are borne heyres of the wrath of God by disobedience,
so wisedome craues, that we neuer rest nor suffer our eies
to sleepe, nor our eye-lids to slumber, but that wee should
recount our former sinnes in the bitternesse of our heart, and
water our couch with teares in the night, and call vpon the
Lord without ceasing in the day, continually, vntill we finde

that we are translated from darknesse to light, taken out of
nature and planted in Christ, and that first sentence of ab|solution
be pronounced to our conscience by the spirit of
adoption,Mat. 9. 2. goe thy way, thy sinnes are forgiuen thee. For the
Apostle vseth here this limitation of the comfort to certain
persons, thereby to declare, that it appertaines not vnto the
remnant of the world.As none were saued without the arke, the fa|milie of Lot,  house of Rahab. When the originall world was ouer|whelmed
with waters, none were saued but such as were in
the Arke: when Sodome was burnt with fire, none were
saued but those of the familie of Lot: when Iericho was de|stroyed,Gen. 7. 33.
none were preserued but such as were in the Fa|milie
of Rahab,Gen. 19. 16. all these are figures shadowing vnto vs, that
when the Lord shall come to cut downe the wicked with
the sword or hooke of his iustice,Iosh. 2. to cast them for euer into
the wine-presse of his wrath, saluation shall belong onely
to those who are of the houshold of faith, euen that whole
familie whereof God in Iesus Christ is the Father, which
number is indeede exceeding small, if they bee compared
with the remnant and great multitude of the world, there|fore
let not their euill example deceiue vs, but remembring
the kingdome of heauen suffers violence,Mat. 11. 12. let vs cast away these
burdens and impediments,Heb. 12. 2. specially this sinne which hang|eth
so fast on, that we may enter in time into the arke of
God, and Familie of Rahab, that so vvee may bee
saued.
Wee haue here then first to obserue a certaine distincti|on
of mankinde,A threefold di|stinction of mankinde. whereof some are in Christ, these are ves|sels
of honour reserued to mercy, others out of Christ, and
these are vessels of dishonour,Made in God his eternall counsaile. ordained vnto wrath. This 
distinction is first made in God his secret counsell, electing
some, and leaing others according to the good pleasure of
his will,Made in this life by effectual calling, of those who are chosen and this is onely knowne vnto himselfe. It begins 
first to be manifest, when the Lord by effectuall calling se|perates
his Elect from the children of wrath and disobedi|ence,
and then it is knowne, but properly and truely of those
onely,Reuel. 3. 12. who are effectually called, for that now name, which



To them that are in Christ.The Apostle excludes not himselfe from that naturall miserie wher|vnto others are subiect. The Apostle you see chan|ges
the manner of his speach: when hee spake of the power
of sinne remayning in our nature, he spake of it in his owne
person, but when hee speakes of our deliuerance by Iesus
Christ, he speakes of it in the person of others. Thus the
Apostle by an holy wisedome doth order his speach for
the comfort of the children of GOD, for least that other
weake christians might bee discouraged by reason of their
sinnes, hee speakes of remanent sinfull corruption in his
owne person, to declare that none, no, not the holy Apo|stles
are exempted from it. Of deliuerance againe he speaks
in the person of others,Neither ex|cludes hee o|thers from that mercy which hee himselfe hath receiued. least any should thinke that the
grace of Christ were restrayned onely to such singular per|sons,
as holy Apostles,  were not also extended to others.
Commonly these wh are of such a tender Conscience,
makes exception of themselues, as if the comfort of other
christians belonged not to them; the Apostle therefore in|cludes
within the communion of this benefit, all vvhosoeuer,
Pastors, people, learned, vnlearned, poore, rich, weake and
strong, prouiding that they bee in Iesus Christ. Men who
are truely godly, in the matter of misery chiefly contemne
themselues, therefore the Apostle calles himselfe the chiefe
of all sinners,1 Tim. 2. 15. but they neuer exclude others from the same
communion of mercie,2. Tim. 4. 8. I know sayes the Apostle that there
is layd vp for mee a crowne of glory, and not onely for mee, but
for all them who loue the second appearing of the Lord Iesus.
It is farre otherwise with naturall men,Naturalists blinded with presumptio~ do far otherwise. blinded with
presumption, they extoll their owne righteousnesse aboue
others,  in their conceit with the proud Pharisee, condem|neth
euery other man as a greater sinner than himselfe; they
carrie in their bagge two measures, by the one they take to
themselues, making much of the smallest good which is in
them, by the other they giue, setting that by for light, which
is most excellent in another. Our Sauiour properly expres|ses
their corrupt iudgement, when hee compares it to the
light of the eye, which can see any other thing better than it

selfe, and can espye a moate sooner in another, than a beame
in it selfe. After this manner hipocrites looke out, curiosi ad
cognoscendm vitam alienam,Aug. confes. lib. 10. dsidiosi ad corrigendum suam,
curious searchers of the life of others, carelesse correcters of
their owne.Basil. hexam. hom. 9. Mens peracute perspiciens alienos errores, tarda
est ad proprios cognoscendos defectus, the minde that sharply
lookes to the faults of others, doth but slowly consider her
owne defects: but let vs learne by the precept of our blessed
Sauiour, and practise of this holy Apostle, rather to looke
to our selues, searching out our owne sins, then neglecting
our selues to prattle vainely of the sinnes of other men.
That are in Christ.Our vnion with Christ ex|pressed by fiue similitudes in holy scripture. But now to come to the matter. The
spirit of God in holy Scripture expresses our vnion with
Christ, by fiue sundry similitudes: first by a marriage, wher|in
Christ is the husband, and we the spouse. Secondly, by a
body, whereof Christ is the head, and wee the members.
Thirdly, by a building or house, wherein Christ is the foun|dation
or ground stone, and wee the vpper building vpon
him. Fourthly, by the similitude of ingrafting, wherein
Christ is compared to the Vine, and wee to the branches
grafted into him. Lastly, by the similitude of feeding, wher|in
Christ is compared to the foode, and wee to the bodie
which is nourished.
As for the similitude of Marriage,As Eue was to Adam, his wife his sister, and his Daughter, so are we vnto Christ. the strongest bands of
coniunction that euer was betweene two creatures, was be|tweene
Adam and Eue, for Eue was his Wife, his Sister, and
his Daughter: his Wife being ioyned with him in marriage
by God, she became one flesh with him: she was his Sister,
made immediately by the hand of that same Father who
made Adam, and that without Adams helpe: shee was
also his Daughter, for of him shee was made, bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh. All these wayes are we alyed
vnto Iesus Christ; we are his spouse in respect of that mu|tuall
contract and couenant which is betweene vs, he hath
marryed vs to himselfe in righteousnesse, iudgement, mercy,
and compassion. We are his Sonnes and Daughters in respect

of regeneration, which is our new creation: we are also his
brethren and sisters in respect of the spirit of adoption, by
whom we acknowledge God the father of our Lord Iesus
Christ to be our father also in him, and his sonne Iesus to
be our elder brother.
Yet is our allyance with Christ so neere,Yet this expres|seth not our al|lyance with Christ,  ther|fore other simi|litudes are vsed. that all these
whereof we haue spoken can not expresse it, and therefore
ye shall finde, that there is not a way, by which in nature
two things are made one, but from it the spirit of God bor|rowes
similitudes to declare how Christ and we are one in
him, as the branch in the tree; we are of him, as Eue was of
Adam, we are of him, as the house is built on the foundati|on,
wee are one with him, and that many manner of wayes,
one with him, as brother with brother, as husband and wife,
as the body, and the head; as meat and that which is nou|rished,
what meruaile the considering all these, that the
Apostle with boldnes breakes out in this glorious triumph,
there is no condemnation to them; who are in Christ, seeing
we are in him, as branches in the tree, it is not possible that
we can wither or decay for want of the sap of Grace, so
long as he doth retaine it, and that shall be for euer: seeing
we are built on him like an house vpon a sure foundation,
what storme can ouerblow vs, let the winde rise, and the
raine fall, wee shall not be ouerthrowne, because wee are
the building of God standing vpon a sure foundation, see|ing
wee are his spouse, who can haue action against vs, our
debts fall to be payd by our husband, he liueth to make an|swere
for vs: seeing we are his conquered inheritance, who
will take vs out of his hand,Ioh. 10. 28. My sheepe can no man take out of
my hand (saith our blessed Sauiour.) Most happy then, and
sure is the estate of all those, who are in Christ Iesus.
But leauing other similitudes,In the simili|tude of ingraf|ting foure things conside|red. let vs consider that this
phrase to be in Christ, is borrowed from planting or ingraf|ting.
Our Sauiour vses this same similitude, Iohn. 15. And
in it we haue these things to consider. First, who is the stock,
or root: secondly, who are the grafts or branches ingrafted:

thirdly, what is the manner of the ingrafting: fourthly, some
comfors and instructions arising hereof.
The root or stock whereinto this ingrafting is made,The stock or roote. is 
Iesus Christ, called by himselfe the true Vine: by the Apo|stles,
the true Oliue: by the Prophets, the roote of Iesse, and
the righteous branch,Iohn. 15. 1. this roote that great husbandman the
eternall God prepared to be as a stocke of life,Rom. 11. 17 wherein he
ingrafts all of Adams lost posteritie,Isaiah. 11. 1. whom he hath conclu|ded
to saue, to the praise of the glory of his mercie. After
that in the fulnes of time God hath sent him into the world,
clad with our nature, and he hath done the work for which
he came, the Lord laid him in the graue, and as it were
set him in the graue, but at once like a liuely roote hee
sprang vp, and rested not till his branches spred to the
vttermost ends of the earth, and till his top mounted vp vn|to
heauen, for there now he sits and raignes in life, who be|fore
was humbled to death.
The branches or graftes ingrafted in him are of two
sorts:The branches whereof some are onely exter|nally ingrafted these may be cut off. first, all the members of the Church visible, who by 
externall Baptisme are entred to a profession of Christ, bap|tised
with water, but not with the holy Ghost, this kinde
of ingrafting will suffer a cutting off, if thou continue not in
his bountifulnesse, thou shalt also be cut off. For they haue not
the sap of grace ministred to them from the stocke of life,Rom. 11. 22
but are as dead trees,2 Tim. 3. 5. hauing leaues without fruit, they haue
a shew of Godlinesse, but haue denyed the power thereof, these
are no better then Esau, who lay in the same wombe with
Iacob, borne and brought vp in the same Family of Isaac,
which was the Church of God, marked also with the same
sacrament of Circumcision,Aug. de bap. cont. Donatist lib. 10. ca. 10 Na sicut ille ex legittima ma|tre
natus gratiam superbe spreuit,  reprobatus est, it a qui in
vera Ecclesia baptizantur,  gratiam Dei non amplectuntur,
cum Esauo reijciuntur. For as hee being borne of a law|full
Mother, proudely despised Grace, and was cast off,
so they who are baptised in the true Church of God, and
embrace not the grace of God, shall be reiected with Esau,

neyther shall it auaile them, that by an externall kinde of
ingrafting, they haue beene adioyned to the fellowship of
the visible Church.
The other sort,Others inter|nally ingrafted, and to these be|longs this com|fort. are they who beside the outward ingraf|ting
whereof we haue spoken, are also inwardly grafted by
the holy Ghost in Iesus Christ, in such sort that Christ is
in them, and they in Christ, and can say with the Apostle,
Now I liue, yet not I any more, but Christ Iesus liueth in me;
these haue in them that same minde which was in Iesus,Gal. 2. 20. the
onely sure argument of our spirituall vnion with him, for if
any man haue not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his, and
they who are quickned and ruled by this spirit, are assu|redly
his.
 As for the manner of the ingrafting,The manner of the ingrafting, it is made by the word and spirit. it is spiritual, wrought
by the holy Ghost, who creating faith in our heart by hea|ring
of the Gospell, makes vs to goe out of our selues, 


tranfire in Christum,  so to relie vpon him, that by his light
we are illuminated, by his spirit wee are quickned, by the
continuall furniture of his grace we perseuere, and increase
in spirituall strength; in a word, so we liue that in our selues
we dye. Euery lampe of the golden candlesticke hath his
owne pipe, through which these two oliues, that stand with
the ruler of the whole world emptie themselues into the
gold, that is euery member of the Church of Christ, re|ceiues
grace from that fulnesse of Grace which is in him,
through the secret conduits of the spirit, whereby he cau|seth
vs to grow, and preserueth our soules in life.
Though he be in heauen and we on earth,Distance of place staies not our vnion with him. no distance
of place can stay this vnion, for seeing the members of the
body howsoeuer scattered through sundry parts of the
world, so farre that many of them haue neuer seene others
in the face, are notwithstanding knit together by the band
of one spirit, into one holy communion, why should it bee
denyed, but that the head and members of this mysticall
body, are also one by the same Spirit? suppose the head be
in heauen, and the members on earth, or what need is there

to enforce for effecting of this vnion, such a corporall pre|sence
of Christ in the Sacrament, as cannot stand with the
truth of Gods word?
Now the comforts that ariseth vnto vs of our commu|nion 
with Christ are exceeding great,Comforts ari|sing of this our vnion with Christ. for first we haue with
him a communion of natures, hee hath taken vpon him
ours, and hath communicated his nature vnto vs. Of the
first (after a sort) all mankinde may glory,Communion of Natures. forasmuch as 
Christ tooke not on the nature of Angels, but the nature
of man, yet if there bee no more, the comfort is small, yea
the condemnation of man is the greater that the Lord Iesus
came vnto man, in mans nature, and man would not receiue
him. But as for the godly, let them reioyce in this, that the
Lord Iesus hath not onely assumed our nature, but also
made vs pertakers of the diuine nature,2 Pet. 1. 4. before hee assumed
our nature, hee sanctified it, and now hauing by his owne
spirit ioyned vs to himselfe, wee may bee out of doubt hee
shall not cease till he hath fully sanctified vs.
It is a notable comfort that the worke of our perfect
sanctification is not left vnto vs to doe,A notable com|fort, the Lord who sanctified our nature that he might as|sume it, will also sanctifie vs seeing hee hath vnited vs to himselfe. the Lord Iesus hath
taken it into his owne hand to performe it, what then shall
hinder it, I am perswaded that hee who hath begunne this good
worke in you, will performe it against the day of Iesus Christ.
Hee who at his pleasure turned water into Wine; hee who
made the bitter vvaters to become sweet; hee who makes
the wildernesse a fruitfull land, and the barren woman to
become the mother of many children;Phil. 1. 6. in a word, hee who
calles things which are not, and causeth them to bee, is hee
not able to make sinners become Saints? or shall hee not
perfect that worke of the new creation which hee hath be|gunne
in vs? As for man he may bege children but cannot
renew their nature; he may marrie a Wife, but cannot change
her conditions,Ber. serm. de mutatione aquae in vinu~. no more than Moses, qui Aethiopissam duxit
sed non potuit aethiopissae mutare colorem: who married an
Aethiopian woman, but could not change her colour. But
the Lord Iesus hath so loued his Church, that hee shall make



head, and remanent members, euidently shewes that this spi|rituall
life is but weake in vs.
Last of all,By our vnion with Christ we are made sure of perse|uerance by our ingrafting in Christ, wee haue this
comfort, that we are sure of the benefite of perseuerance,
and that because (as the Apostle saith) we beare not the root
the root beares vs, our saluation depends not vpon vs (for
that were an vnsure foundation) it depends vpon him, be|cause
we are in him, we grow and increase, yea, the older
we be in Christ, the more we fasten our roote and flourish,
for they who are planted in the Courts of the Lord flourish in
their old age and bring forth fruit:Psal. 146. and wheras other branches
may be pulled away from their stocke, eyther by violence
of winde, or force of the hands of men, or at least consu|med
by length of time, it shall not be so with them, who are
in Christ,Esa. 40. 24. they keepe not him, but are kept by him, because
I am not changed, therefore yee are not consumed, O yee sonnes
of Iacob, but as to those who are not planted in Iesus, bee
who they will, they shall be pulled vp, they shall not con|tinue
in honour.Psal. 49. 14. The Princes of the earth, their breath shall
decay, they shall returne to their earth, and their thoughts shall
perish, the Iudges thereof shall bee made as vanitie, as though
they were not planted, nor sowen, or as if their stocke tooke no
root in the earth. The Lord shall blow vpon them, and they shall
wither, the whirle-wind shal take them away like stubble. O silly
glory of worldlings, which dieth to them oftentimes before
themselues, at least with them, their beutie consumes when
they go from the house to the graue,  their pomp doth not
descend after them. Onely happy  sure is the state of that
man who is in Christ: neyther life nor death, things present
nor things to come shal seperate him from the loue of God.
Now the lessons of instruction are chiefely two:The who are planted in Christ should be humble, the root beares the~ not they the roote. first is
a lesson of humilitie; seeing it is so that in Christ we haue
life let vs be humble in our selues, forasmuch as that which
we haue, we haue of another, so taught the auncient fathers
agreeable to holy scripture, eleauen hundred yeers before vs,
which I mark the rather to point out the agreement in one
truth between vs and the Fathers of the primitiue Church.

Ita sunt in vite palmites:Consil. . vt illi nihil conferant, sed inde acci|piant,Arausicanu~ ex Carranza
vnde viuant, sic quippe vitis est in palmitibus, vt vitale
subministret illis, non sumat ab ijs, ac per hoc  manentem in
se habere Christum,  manere in Christo, discipulis prodest,
non Christo: the branches are so in the vine that they giue
nothing vnto it, but receiues from it that sap of grace wher|by
they liue, but the vine is so in the branches, that it mi|nisters
life vnto them, and receiues nothing from them, that
therefore Christ abideth in vs, and we in him, is profitable
to vs, who are his Disciples, but not vnto himselfe. Thus
they learned from our Sauiour, who in his speach to his
Disciples denyes that man is able to doe any good thing
without him, as the branch can beare no fruit except it abide
in the root, no more can ye, except ye abide in me, for with|out
me ye are able to do nothing. And that which is subioyned
doth yet more humble vs,Ibidem. praeciso palmite potest de viuae radice
alius pullulare, qui autem praecisus est non potest sine radice vi|uere,
though a branch be cut off from the root, another may
spring out, but the branch which is cut off cannot liue,
without the root it withereth, and is meet for nothing but
the fire: he that falleth away from Christ shall perish like
a withered branch, but the Lord Iesus shal not want ano|ther
who shall grow vp in him;Rom. 11. 16 we stand by faith, let vs not
be high minded but feare.
The second is a lesson of thankfulnesse,They who are planted in Christ beares fruit so soone as they are planted. wee who pro|fesse
that we are in Christ should be fruitfull in good works,
herein (saithour Sauiour) is my Father glorified, that yee
beare much fruit. There is such a liuely power in this stock
of life, that they who are planted in him flourish inconti|nent.
Proofe hereof we haue in Lidia, and in the Theefe
crucified with Christ, and conuerted by him. Aarons rodde
was no sooner changed from a withered sticke into a flou|rishing
tree, then is hee from a barren malefactor into a
fruitfull professor; for see what a fruit hee beares in an in|stant,
he confesseth his owne sins, he rebuketh the sinnes of
his companion, hee giueth a good testimonie vnto Christ,
and earnestly prayes that Christ would remember him,



concupiscence proceeds from sin  endeth vnto sin, but
is not sin, which he labors to expresse by this similitude he
that hears (saith he) another man speking filthy language, 
consents not vnto it, but rather is angry at it, and reproues
it, sinneth not, but merits a greater reward: euen so, when
our concupiscence send out any sinfull motion, if we con|sent
not vnto it, we sinne not. And the Fathers of that coun|sell
of Trent, which haue as many curses as Canons, haue
decreed in this manner,Conc. trident this concupiscence which sometime the
Apostle calleth sinne, the holy Synode declares that the Catho|like
Church did neuer vnderstand it to be called sinne, because
it is truely and properly sinne in the regeuerate, but because it
commeth of sinne, and inclineth to sinne.
Now because this is a mother errour which brings forth
and strengthens many other errours,Their errour disprooued. wee will shortly dis|proue
 it by Scripture, reason and antiquitie. In the end of
the last Chapter the Apostle condemneth the motions of
concupiscence for sinne,By Scripture. euen when consent is not giuen
vnto them, for he protests of himselfe that he resisted these
motions of sin, but was oftentimes sore against his will cap|tiued
by them, he condemnes them as euill, albeit he gaue
no consent vnto them; for the Law (as I haue said) doth
not onely condemne sinne in the branch, but also in the root,
there shall not bee in thee an euill thought against the Lord thy
God.
 And this is also confirmed by reason. Consent in it owne
nature is a thing indifferent,By Reason. if that whereunto I consent be
good, my consent is good, but if it be euill my consent is
euill: if the first motion of sinne be not an euill thing in it
selfe (as they say) then it is not an euill thing to consent vn|to
it: for that which is not euill in it selfe, by my consenting
cannot become euill. It is not then the consent following,
that makes the preceeding motion to bee euill, but it is the
preceeding euill motion, that makes the subsequent consent
euill.Costers simili|tude makes a|gainst himselfe. Now as for Coster his similitude, it makes plainely a|gainst
himselfe, for it is true indeed, that hee who heareth

euill spoken and reproues it, is worthy of praise, but it is al|so
true, that he who spake the euill hath sinned, euen so, al|beit
wee doe well when wee consent not to the motions of
concupiscence in vs, yet concupiscence is not the lesse to be
condemned, because it hath sent out in the eare of our soule,
that voyce of a filthy desire, which is not agreeable to Gods
most holy Law.
And of this same iudgement with vs are also the ancient 
Fathers.By ancient Fa|thers. Cum concupisco, quamuis concupiscentis assensum non
praebeam,Aug. ser. 5. fit tamen in me quod nolo,  quod etiam non vult
Lex. When I lust (saith Augustine) albeit I consent not to
my lust, yet that is done in me, which I will not, and which
also the law will not.Aug. ser. de Temp. 45. And againe, desiderium tuum tali debet
esse ad Deum, vt omnino non sit ipsa concupiscentia cui resistere
oporteat, resistis enim,  non consentiendo vincis sed melius est
hostem non habere quam vincere: thy desire should in such
sort be vpon God, that there should not be in thee at all, so
much as a concupiscence which hath need of resistance, for
thou resists, and by not consenting thou ouercommest, but
it were better not to haue an enemie then to ouercome him:
with him agrees also Bernard,Bernard. Genus illud peccati quod to|ties
nos conturbat, reprimi quidem potest,  debet per gratiam
Dei (concupiscentias loquor  praua desideria) vt non regnet
in nobis, nec demus membra nostra arma iniquitatis peccato,
 sic nulla est damnatio his, qui sunt in Christo, sed non eijci|tur
nii in morte. That kinde of sinne (saith he) which so oft
troubles vs, (Concupiscence and euill desires I meane) may
and should be repressed by the grace of God, so that it
raigne not in vs, and that we giue not our members weapons
of vnrighteousnesse to sinne, and this way there is no dam|nation
to them who are in Christ, yet is it not cast out but in
death. Thus doth Bernard cleerely agree with vs in the
exposition of this place. Of all which is euident, that the
motions of concupiscence are euill and sinfull, euen when
they are repressed, and no consent giuen vnto them.
But now leauing further improbation of this errour, wee



toler abilius enim lingua qua~ vita menttur,Aug. contra Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 21. the lye (saith Augu|stine)
which is made by the tongue, is more tollerable then
that vvhich is made by the life: where the tongue professes
Christ, and the hart is giuen to impietie, this is not professio,
sed abnegatio Christi, a profession, but a denying of Christ.
It is a great sinne to beare false witnesse against our
neighbour,Onely apostate Angels  men beare false wit|nesse against God. but a greater sinne to beare false witnesse against
the Lord. Euery creature in their kinde giues a true testi|monie
vnto God, the heauens declare his glory, the earth,
and all that therein is sets foorth his goodnesse, yea the little
Emmet proclaimes his prouidence: hee must bee a proui|uident
father, that hath put so great prouidence in so small
a creature; onely apostate Angels, and men are false wit|nesses
against the Lord. Sathan hath wyles continually a|gainst
his mercy, as when hee sayes to the penitent and be|leeuing
man, God will not forgiue him, vvyles against his
iustice, when hee beares the wicked in hand that God will
not punish him, wyles against his prouidence, when hee
would perswade the afflicted that God cannot deliuer them.
And as for the Apostate man, hee is also a false vvitnesse a|gainst
God, hee calleth himselfe the childe of God, and be|hold
hee carryeth the image of Sathan, as if the Lord be|gat
children to another image and not to his owne.An euill life of aprofessor saies in effect, there is no vertue in Christ. Cer|tainely
the sinfull life of one professing Christ, is a publick
testimonie, falsly proclayming to the vvorld (as I haue said)
that there is no vertue in Christ, and that hee is such a Sa|uiour
as can neither sanctifie nor saue from sinne such as
are his; a fearefull blasphemie.
All Christians are not honoured with the second marti|dome,A godly life is the first martir|dome, without suffering for Christ which is the second, martirdome is not acceptable to him.
that is, to bee Christs vvitnesses, by suffering of
death for his truths sake; yet all are bound by a godly life
to bee vvitnesses of his sauing and renuing power, shewing
forth his meruailous vertue, who hath translated vs from dark|nesse
into his light. Tota vita martyrium esse debet, hoc est
testimonium deo reddere, c. the whole life of a Christian
should be a martirdome,Cyp. de dupli|ci martirio. that is, a continuall witnessing of

the truth of God: and this is so necessarie that without it
the second martirdome, that is, the testimonie vvhich thou
bearest to the truth of God by shedding of thy blood is
worth nothing; it availes not to giue thy body to be burnt in
the fire, vnlesse that first thou mortifie thy earthly mem|bers,Col 3. 5.
and by reasonable seruice offer vp thy body a liuely and
an acceptable sacrifice to God.Rom. 12. 1. And hereunto also tendeth
that which bee subioynes. Efficacius est vitae quam linguae te|stimonium
habent etiam opera suam linguam, c. The testi|monie
of the life is more effectuall than the testimonie of
the tongue, workes haue also their owne language, yea and
their owne eloquence, though the tongue be silent: there|fore
our blessed Sauiour in the Gospell sayeth, the workes
which the Father hath giuen mee to doe,Ioh. 5. 36. the same workes
that I doe beare witnesse of mee. Like as (Cyprian sayeth)
good workes professes that there is a God, so euill workes
say in their owne kinde that there is no God, nor knowledge
of the most high. Thus it is a most fearefull sinne for them
to walke after the flesh, who professes that they are in
Iesus Christ.
For no sinne can be committed of them vvithout horri|ble
sacriledge,Sinnes of men professing Christ are not committed without sacri|ledge. euery worke of the flesh, though done by a
Pagan is a transgression of Gods law, which shall bee pu|nished
vnto death: but the same committed by Christians
are not onely sinnes, but sacrilegious sinnes, and that of the
highest degree:Dan. 5. 1. then came the sinnes of Belshazar to the
height, when to all his former sinnes hee ioyned the abuse
of those vessels which were holy: to haue drunke intem|perately
for the honor of his Idol in any vessell, was a fear|full
sinne, but to doe it in the vessels dedicated to the ho|nour
of the true God was a double sinne:More fearefull tha~ Belshazars. Yet is this sacri|ledge
small, if it shall bee compared with thine, who pro|fessing
Christ liues profanely, hee abused dead vessels of
gold  siluer but thou erects a temple for the liuing God,
in a temple for Idoles, thou defilest the sanctuary of
God with all vncleannesse, those vessels which by Baptisme



O what neede haue wee therefore in all the actions of our
life to walke circumspectly?Seeing there are in vs two par|ties, let vs helpe that which we would haue to preuaile. we haue neede of eyes within,
and without vs, that wee may discerne the inward desires of
the Spirit, from these of the Flesh; and may looke right|ly
on those outward obiects which may cherish the one, and
suppresse the other. In a battaile betweene two, euery man
assists that partie, which hee would faine haue to be victori|ous,Bail serm. 2. de ieiunio.
for the helpe of the one, (saith Bail) is the ouerthrow
of the other, so is it in this combat betweene the Flesh and
the Spirit, the Flesh being strengthened by outward allure|ments
and carnall exercises, quencheth the Spirit, and brin|geth
it in subiection, but the more the body bee subdued
by moderate discipline, the stronger waxes the man of God.
Happy were wee if our care were continuall to strengthen
the one by all spiritual exercises, that we might daily weaken
the other.
For the greatest perfection wherevnto we can attaine in
this life,Our best estate in this life is fighting. is to fight against these lusts of the Flesh, which
fight against our soules. Our life saith Iob in the earth is a
warfare. Bellum est, non triumphus, it is a battaile, not a tri|umph
(saith Augustine:) though after many particular vi|ctories
the Lord put that voyce of triumph many times in
our mouthes,August. de temp. ser. 45. thanks be to God, who alway makes vs to tri|umph
in Christ Iesus,2 Cor. 2. 14. yet let vs remember, that incontinent
we must fight againe; so long as we are in this mortall body
wherein the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, wee cannot bee
free from carnall and euill desires, if thou dissemble not,
thou shall alway finde within thy selfe some thing which
hath neede to be resisted, for our sinfull superfluities (saith
Bernard,)Bernard. are such, putata repullulant, effugata redeunt, 
reaccenduntur extincta, that being cut off they spring out a|gaine,
chased away they returne againe, being quenched
they are kindled againe. Velis, nolis, intra fines tuos habitabit
Iebusaeus, will thou, nill thou, the Iebusit shall dwell within
thy borders, Subigare potest, exterminare non potest, he may
be subdued, but cannot be rooted out.

And this againe doe wee marke for the comfort of weak
consciences,Christs mem|bers militant  triumphant are not to bee tryed by one rule. it is Sathans subtiltie, whereby commonly hee
disquiets many, that because carnall corruption is in them, he
would therefore beare them in hand that they are none of
Christs. In this hee playes the deceiuer, hee tryes vs by the
wrong rule, when hee tryes vs by the rule of perfect sancti|fication,
this is the square vvhich ought to be laid to Christs
members triumphant in heauen, and not to those who are
militant here vpon earth: Sinne remayning in me will not
proue that therefore I am not in Christ, (otherwise Christ
should haue no members vpon earth) but grace working
that new disposition which nature could neuer effect, proues
vndoubtedly that we are in Christ Iesus.
Let this therefore bee our comfort,There is fleshly corruption in the Christian militant, but he follows it not. that albeit there bee
in vs a fleshly corruption, yet thankes be to God we walke
not after it, that is, wee follow not willingly the direction
and commandement thereof. It is true, and alas wee finde
it by experience, the regenerate man may bee led captiue
(for a time) to the law of sinne, hee may bee pulled per|force
out of the way of Gods commandements, wherein he
delights to walke, and compelled to doe those things which
hee would not, yet euen at that same time he disclaymes the
gouerment of the flesh, mourning and lamenting within
himselfe that hee should bee drawne from the obedience of
his owne Lord and gouernour, the spirit of Iesus.
And indeede it is worthie to bee marked that what euer
seruice the regenerate man giues vnto sinne,Any seruice the Christian giues to sinne, is throwne out by oppression, like that which Israel gaue to Pharaoh. it is like the ser|uice
that Israell gaue to Pharaoh in Egipt, throwne out by
oppression, and therefore compelled them to sigh and cry
vnto God: but the seruice which the regenerate man giues
to the Lord is voluntarie, done as vnto his most lawfull su|periour,
with gladnesse, ioy and contentment of minde.
Happie is that man who can make this reply to his spiri|tuall
aduersarie, when hee is challenged of his sinnes. It is
true (O enimie) that I haue done many things by thy en|tisement,
yet heerein I reioyce, that whatsoeuer seruice I



God as Dauid did. O happy ourney, wherin Christ is both
the end,Ber. in paruis Sermonibus Serm. 23. the way and the guid. Eamus post Christum, quia
veritas, per Christum, quia via, ad Christum, quia vita, Let vs
vvalke after Christ, because he is the truth, let vs walke in
Christ, because hee is the way, let vs vvalke toward Christ,
because he is the life. If yee looke to the companies of men
in the vvorld, ye shall see some in stead of following Christ,
flying from him, Qui enim male facit, odit lucem, for hee
vvho doth euill hateth the light: Others vvhere they should
follow him, runne before him, not waiting vpon his light 
direction in matters of his vvorship, followes their owne
spirit, doing that vvhich is good in their owne eyes, they run
vvith zeale, but not in the right vvay.
And vve haue so much the more to take heede vnto the
vvay,For he that walketh after the flesh, shall at length en|counter with death. because euery mans course declareth vvhat kinde of
man he is, vvhether carnall or spirituall, and vvhat vvill be
his end, he that soweth to the flesh, of the flesh will reape cor|ruption,
but he that soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reape
life euerlasting. I am perswaded there is no man among vs,
vvho vvill not say hee vvould be at the best end, vvhich is
eternall life, but here is the vvonderfull folly of men, the
proposed end of their pilgrimage vvhereat they vvould be
is heauen, but the vvay vvherein they vvalk, is the vvay that
leadeth close into hell. Who vvill not esteeme him a foole,
vvho in word saith his iourney is toward the South, and yet
for no mans vvarning vvill refraine his feete from vvalking
toward the North: but more foolish is hee, vvho profes|sing
himselfe a pilgrime trauailing towards heauenly Ieru|salem,
keepes notwithstanding a contrarie course, hauing
his backe vpon heauen, and his face towards hell, vvalking
not after the Spirit but after the Flesh. O pittifull blind|nesse
and folly, how many witnesses of God haue forewar|ned
thee, in thy life, all crying to thee vvith a loud voice,
this vvay wherein thou walkest (O sinfull man) is the way
of death: hee vvho liues after the Flesh, shall dye assuredly,
yet wilt thou not returne, nor change the course of thy

life, to walke after the liuing God, that thy mayest be saued.
And hauing once found the right way which may lead
vs vnto God,Three profita|ble helpes of a godly Life. let vs strengthen our selues to walke in it, by
those three most notable helpes of a godly life, deliuered to
vs by Dauid in three verses of 119 Psal. vers. 57.Psal. 119. O Lord I
haue determined to keepe thy word. 58. I haue made my sup|plication
in thy presence with my whole hart. 59. I haue consi|dered 
my wayes and turned my feete vnto thy testimonies.Determinatio~. De|termination
is the first,Supplication. it is a good thing by setled resolution 
to conclude with thy selfe, that thou wilt liue godly. Sup|plication
is the second, except by continuall prayer our de|termination
bee confimed and strengthned by grce from
God, our conclusions vvhich vve take to day, shall vanish
to morrow.Consideration. Consideration is the third, and it is profitable 
to reduce vs againe into the way of God, so often as of weak|nes
we wander from it, contrary to our first determination.
These are the three helpes to keepe our hart in the way of
God, so necessary that if without them we doe any worke,
it is not possible but wee shall bee snared. And therefore
as in a ship which is ready to sayle, so soone as the sayles are
hoysed vp, presently some skilfull Marriner starteth to the
rudder: so euery morning, wherein vve rise from our rest,
and make our selues ready to go forward in our pilgrimage,
let vs first of all take heed vnto the hart, for it is the rudder
of the whole bodie; let vs knit it vnto God by this threefold
cord, whereof I haue spoken: so shall our wayes be ordered
aright, and vve shall make a happie progresse euery day
in that way which leades to eternall life. By determination
we begin to keepe a good course. By supplication vve con|tinue
in it. By consideration we see vvhether we be right or
wrong: if vve be out of the way consideration warnes vs to
returne againe into it. Happie is that man in whose life one
of these three is alwayes an actour.
And fourthly,Our life should be a daily pro|gresse in god|linesse. by this metaphor of walking, that in our 
Christian conuersation, there should bee a continuall pro|gresse
in godlinesse. For as in walking (saith Basil) the steps



other thing, but the life of Christ, like that Reuel. 11. 11.
Againe, the law of the spirit of life in Christ, is no other thing
but that forcible working liuely power vvhich is in Christ:
for it is customable to the holy Apostle to vse the vvord
law to expresse any thing, wherein there is a commanding
or working power; so hee hath ascribed a law to sinne, a
law to his members, a law to death, and now very pro|perly
hee oppones vnto them a law of the spirit of life in
Christ, vvhich is more liuely and powerfull to saue, to free,
and to quicken, then any law that hath contrary power, can
be able to destroy, captiue, or slay them who are in Christ.
Thus the words being expounded,Our aduersa|ries Sathan, sinne  death, are strong, but our Sauiour is stronger. the first lesson will a|rise
out of the Apostles manner of speach who ascribing to
sinne and death a law, vvhich may condemne and destroy,
ascribes to Christ a more powerfull law, to iustifie and pre|serue.
Most sure then is our estate vvho are in Iesus Christ,
for there is a power in our Lord, vvhich shall bring euery
contrary power of man and Angell in subiecton to him,
that tyrant sinne hath indeede oppressed and ouer-ruled
many a one, but our Lord Iesus the valiant conquerour
hath a mightie power able to disanull the lavv of sinne: and
Sathan is that strong one vvho by nature possesses the hart
of man, as his owne house, but Iesus is that stronger one,
vvho vvill dispossesse him and cast him out of the hearts of
all such as are his: The God of peace shall shortly tread Sa|than
vnder our feet,Rom. 16. 20 and therefore suppose vve bee vveake
in our selues, yet vve vvill reioyce in the strength of the Lord
Iesus.
Secondly,In what a vile bondage wee liued by nature vve learne here that without Christ vve liued
in a vile seruitude and bondage, of all seruants those are in
vvorst case who are sould, and of those vvho are sould, they
are vvorst vvho must doe seruice in prison, and of them
vvho are in prison, most lamentable is their estate vvho are
chayned and bound in prison, yet such seruants were vve by
nature before Christ made vs free, vve were not onely the
seruants of sinne, and sould vnder sinne, as witnesseth the

Apostle, but more also vve vvere, as sayth Esay, captiued and
bound with chaines in prison, the Iaylour vvhereof is infi|delitie,
for wee were all shut vp vnder vnbeliefe, a Iaylour
so straite and tyrannous, as permitted vs not so long as wee
were in his keeping, so much as o lift vp our head or looke
vp to heauen for deliuerance from him from whom onely
comes our helpe. Our oppressers in this bondage, are Sa|than
and Sinne, and sinnes of so many sorts, as doe mise|rably
distract the soule. Pride one while vsurping dominion
ouer vs; Auarice another while vendicating a seat to her selfe
with power to commaund vs; Concupiscence most com|monly
challenging vs to doe her seruice, as our soueraigne.
Sic certant in me de me ipso cuis potissimum esse videar,Ber. hom. 4. thus
doe they striue within mee (saith Bernard) about mee to
which of their dominion I should appertaine. That which
hee confessed of himselfe all the Godly may feele in their
owne experience, innumerable are those tyrants that striue
among themselues, but all of them striue against vs to haue
domination ouer vs, but indeede these are vncouth Lords,
and such as can claime no title nor right vnto vs, wee are
the workemanship of God, the redeemed of the Lord, and
are bound to doe seruice to none but to him alone. O Lord
therefore come downe and possesse thine owne kingdome,
erect a throne to thy selfe in our hearts, that thou by thy
Spirit may raigne in vs as our King, and make vs free from
these tyrants that would oppresse vs.
But that wee may the better perceiue how abhomina|ble
this seruitude is,Three things to be co~sidered in this bondage. let vs out of the Apostles words mark
these three things: first, how this dominion is tyrannicall:
Secondly, how the Commaundements of these tyrants are
all wicked: and thirdly, are all deadly; these three he tou|cheth
shortly, when he saith that Christ hath freed vs from
the law of sinne and death.How a Law is ascribed vnto sinne. First then he ascribeth vnto sinne
a Law, not as if sin proceeded by a Law, (properly so cal|led)
or that there were any lawfulnesse in sinne, but onely to
poynt out the tyranny thereof: for as Rulers ordayned by



the image of God, inuested in this dignitie to be Lord, and
ruler ouer the creatures.Basil hexam. hom. 10. Animal es O homo principatu decora|tum,
vt quid seruis affectionibus, quamobrem tuam ipsius dig|nitatem
abijcis, te ipsum seruum peccati constituis, quare tcip|sumfacis
captiuu~ diaboli, Princeps creaturarum constitutus es,
 dignitatem naturae tuae proijcs. O man thou art a creature
adorned with princely power (by thy first creation) why
then seruest thou affections, why dost thou cast away thine
owne dignitie, and makes thy selfe a captiue of Sathan? thou
wast placed Lord of the creatures, thou wast appoynted to
rule ouer the fish of the Sea, and euery beast of the field,
what shame is it then that thou shouldest be ouerruled with
those beasts which are within thee?
 Secondly,What we hope to be after this life. consider what thou hopest to bee after this
life, dost thou not hope to raigne as a King in the heauens,
and wilt thou now liue as a slaue to Sathan vpon earth? Is
any man crowned except he striue as he ought? or doth he
receiue the price, who runnes not the race, or ca hee ob|taine
the victorie, who neuer wrestled? why then fightest
thou not? why runnest thou not? why beginnest thou not
to raigne in earth as a king ouer thy lusts, seeing thou hopest
to raigne as a king in heauen in glory? Doe not deceiue thy
selfe, that crowne is for conquerours not for captiues. Non
sperare potest regnum coelorum,Ber. de perse|cutione susti|nenda. cap. 11 1 Iohn. 3. 2. cui supra propria membra reg|nare
non donatur: hee cannot looke for that heauenly king|dome,
to whom it is not giuen to raign ouer his owne earth|ly
members. Wee know that when Iesus shall appeare we shall
bee like him, for wee shall see him as hee is, and hee that hath
this hope in himselfe, purgeth himselfe euen as hee is pure.
Certainely, if the Lord through Grace prepare thee not
for his Heauenly Kingdome, thou canst neuer say with
a warrant, that the Lord hath prepared that kingdome for
thee.
 And thirdly,What presently we may bee. the consideration of the present occasion
should waken vs to goe out of this house of bondage, for
now the Sonne of God offers to make vs free, a Prince of

greater power, is content to enter in confederacie with vs,
hee promiseth to restore vs to all the priuiledges wee lost
in Adam; yea to giue vs much more than euer we had in
him, and shall we neglect so faire an occasion? When Cyrus
king of Persia proclaymed liberty to the Iewes to goe from
Babell, the place of their captiuitie, homeward to Ierusalem,
it is said, that all those went forward whose spirit God had
raised vp: and now when the Lords annoynted proclaymes
liberty to the captiues, and the opening of the dore to them
that are in prison, I know that none shall follow his calling
but such whose spirit the Lord hath raysed vp, the rest being
miserably blind, delight to lye still in captiuitie, thinking
their bondage liberty. The Lord giue vs grace that we may
discerne the time of our visitation, that with Dauid we may
aduance our eyes toward the Lord, who hath begunne to
plucke our feete out of the net, and that still we may lift vp,
and stretch out our hands vnto him, till hee haue deliuered
vs fully from the power of the enimie.
This being spoken of the bondage,Our deliue|rance from this bondage is to be ascribed vn|to Christ only. vve are now to con|sider
that our deliuerance from it, is here ascribed to Iesus
Christ. Thy perdition is of thy selfe O Israel. But our saluation
belongs to the Lord, and to the Lambe that sits vpon the throne.
Let no man therefore bee so vnthankfull as to ascribe any
part of this glory to another,Heb. 13. 9. my glory will I not giue to an o|ther,Re. 7. 10. saith the Lord:Isai. 42. 8. the glory of a temporall deliuerance
God will not giue it vnto man; hee would not saue Israell
vnder Gideon, with thirtie two thousand, and why? least
Israell should vaunt against the Lord, and say my right
hand hath done it. Or euer he entred his people Israell into
the land of Canaan, he forewarned them that they should
not say it was for their righteousnesse, and will hee then
thinke yee giue the praise of this most notable deliuerance
to the Creature? No, the whole booke of God witnesseth
that it is not for our righteousnesse, but for the praise of
the glory of his rich mercie, that wee are entred into hea|uenly
Canaan. Did Peter, Iames and Iohn help the Lord

Iesus, in that agonie which hee suffered in the garden? no
surely, hee bad them watch with him and pray, but when
hee was sweating blood, they were sleeping; when hee was
buffeed in Caiphas hall, did not Peter deny him? when hee
went to the Crosse, did not all his Disciples forsake him?
and those who loued him most dearely, did they not stand
a farre off from him? Certainely he alone troad the wine|presse
of the wrath of God, he alone bare the punishment
of our sinnes in his blessed body on the Crosse, to him ther|fore
alone pertayneth the glory of our saluation.
As for the persons to whom this deliuerance pertaines,Mercies of god shewed vpon others should confirme vs if we repent, to looke for the like to ourselus.
the Apostle names himselfe among them; hath freed vs, not
to exclude, but rather to confirme all others who are in
Iesus Christ. For hee confesses of himselfe that hee was re|ceiued
to mercy, for this end, that God might shew vpon
him an example of long suffering, to them who shall in time to
come beleue in him vnto eternall life:2 Tim. 1. 16. therefore is it that hee
speakes of this deliuerance in his owne person, for the con|firmation
of others, who hauing beene before, as hee was,
notorious sinners, are now become such as repents, and
beleeues. And indeede euery example of GODS mercy
shewed vnto others, should serue to strengthen vs. Audientes
Christum non horruisse confitentem latronem,Bernard. c. when wee
heare (sayth Bernard) that the Lord Iesus abhorred not
the penitent Theefe on the Crosse; that hee despised not
the sinfull Cananitish woman, when she made supplication;
nor the woman taken in Adultrie; nor him that sat at the
receipt of Custome; nor the Publicane, when hee sought
mercie; nor the Disciple that denyed him; neither yet the
persecuter of his Disciples: in odore horum vnguentorum
curramus post eum, in the sweet smell of these oyntments, let
vs runne after him.
Alwaies we see that the Apostle doth so speak vnto others
of a deliuerance obtayned by Christ,Preachers not pertakers of that mercy, which they as being also pertaker
thereof himselfe. As he was a Preacher of Christ, so he was
a follower of Christ, he beate downe his body by discipline,

least that preaching vnto others hee should haue beene a
reprobate himselfe:pronounce to others are most miserable and therfore he now speaks as one who
is sure that hee also hath his portion in Christ. Otherwise
what comfort can it be, either to Preacher or professor to
speake of that life and grace, which commeth by Christ
Iesus, they themselues in the meane time being like to that
miserable Atheist Simon Magus, to whom Peter gaue out
that fearefull sentence,Acts. 8. 21. thou hast neither part nor fellowship in
this businesse, or like those Priests in Ierusalem in the dayes
of Herode, who directed others to Bethleem by the light
of the word, to worship Christ, but went not themselues;
or those builders of Noahs Arke, who helped to build a
vessell for preseruation of others, but perished in the deluge
themselues; or like Bilhah and Zilpah, who brought forth
and nourished freemen vnto Iacob, but remayned them|selues
in the state of bond women: from this vnhappie
condition the Lord deliuer vs, and make vs pertakers of
that mercie and grace, whereof he hath made vs Preachers
and professors.
From the Law of sinne and death. Here the Apostle
shewes from what it is that we are deliuered.Psal. 18. 51. Dauid sayth,
many deliuerances giueth the Lord to his annoynted, he spake
it of himselfe, and it is true of all the Children of God. By
a great deliuerance he saued Noah in the deluge; Lot in the
burning of Sodome; Israell out of Egipt; Ioseph in the pri|son;
Daniell in the denne; the three Children in the fierie
furnace, but all these are small if they be compared with this
deliuerance from sin and death.
Where first we learne how the Apostle conioynes these
two,Sinne  death God hath con|ioyned, who shall seperate them? sinne and death, if wee be deliuered from the first wee
shall also be deliuered from the second, but if wee abide in
the first wee shall be sure not to escape the second: if there|fore
Sathan say vnto vs as hee did to our first parents, though
you cate of this forbidden tree yee shall not dye, let vs answere
him, he hath proued already a shamelesse lyar, and we are
not any more to credit him; that same penaltie lyes vpon

euery sinne, which was layd vpon the first, if ye do it, ye shall
die. God hath conioyned them,  who shall seperate them?
though the Lord speake not instantly to euery sinner, as he
did to Abimelech,Gen. 20. 3. behold thou art but dead, because of this
sinne, yet is it true of euery sinne, when it is finished it brings
out death.Chris. hom. 5 ad popu. Ant. So soone as Ionas entred into the Sea (saith Chri|sostome)
the storme rose, to teach vs that Vbi peccatum, ibi
procella, where there is sinne, specially committed with re|bellion,
there will not faile to arise a storme of the wrath
of God.
It is true indeed the sinner in committing of sinne doth
not perceiue this,What a decei|uer Sathan is in tempting to sinne. being blinder than Balaam he walks on
in an euill course, and sees not the sword of Gods vengeance
which is before him, but imagines alway to reape some good
either of profit, or pleasure, by committing of sin; for these
are Sathans two baites, vnder which hee couers his deadly
hookes. It is therefore a poynt of singular wisedome to de|cerne
betweene the deceit of sinne present, and the fruit of
sinne to come, betweene that which Sathan promises, and
that which wee finde in experience performed. He promi|sed
to our parents that they should be made like vnto God,
but in very deede hee made them miserable like himselfe.
And if thou wilt also obserue that which thou findest in thy
owne experience, what fruit hast thou of a sinne, when thou
hast committed it? doth not darknesse arise in thy minde?
heauinesse in thy heart? terrour, feare, and accusing cogi|tations
in thy conscience? Euery man may finde it, who list
to marke it by moe then a thousand experiences in himselfe,
that Sathan is a shameles deceiuer; yea more deceitfull then
Laban,Gen. 34. who promised to giue to Iacob beautifull Rahel,
but in the darke hee gaue him blear-eyed eah: be assured
he will change thy wages, promise thee one thing and pay
thee with another. As Hamor spake to his Sichemies, so
doth Sathan to his blindfolded citizens, hee perswaded his
people that if they would bee circumcised all Iacobs sub|stance
and cattell should bee theirs, but indeed the contrary

ensued, for the goods of the Sichemits befell to the house
of Iacob, and they themselues perished by the sword. Let
vs therefore beware of the inuenomed tongue of the Diuell
mentitur,Cypr. lib. 1. epist. 8. vt fallat, vitam pollicetur, vt perimat: he lyes that
hee may deceiue, hee promiseth life, that hee may inflict
death: say hee what hee will, let vs beleeue the word of
the Lord, confirmed by doolefull daily experience, the wa|ges
of sinne is death. God hath knit them together, and who
shall seperate them?
So oft then as Sathan by the deceit of sinne would be|guile
thee,Sin seems sweet but the fruite therof is bitter. remember that though sinne seeme to be sweet,
the fruit thereof is exceeding bitter, if thou feare not sinne,
feare that end whereunto sinne leads thee, dulce peccatum,
sed amara mors, sinne is sweet, but death is bitter: remem|ber
that the wages which Sathan promiseth and man would
haue, hee shall not get, but the wages which God threat|neth,
and man would not haue, shall assuredly bee payed
him: for this is the miserie of those who walke in their sins,
illud propter quod peccant,Aug. hom. 42 hic dimittunt,  ipsa peccata se cum
portant, that for which they sinne, they leaue it behinde
them, and carries their sinnes away out of the world with
them. So that in the end, when they shall gather the pro|fite
of all their former sinnes into a summe, they shall find
no other,Rom. 6. 21. but that foretold by the Apostle, What profit haue
ye now of all these things whereof ye are ashamed? surely there
is no fruit but shame and death to bee pluckt from the for|bidden
tree of sinne.
But here it may bee obiected by the weake conscience
of the godly,Comfort for the godly who are troubled with the tenta|tions of sinne. how can this comfort bee ours, that wee are
freed from sin, who finde our selues so continually assaul|ted,
yea oftentimes oppressed of sinne? For answere, let vs
marke that the Apostle saith not wee are fully freed from
sinne in this life, but we are freed from the law of sin, that
is, both from the commaunding and condemning power
thereof. Sinne doth not now raigne in our mortall bodyes
as before, neither hath it power any more to detaine vs

vnder death. But as for the temptations of sinne, there is
no sort of men more troubled with them, then they whom
God hath begunne to deliuer from the Law of sinne: for
Sathan being impatient of his losse, seekes daily to recouer
his forme dominion. From the time that once the Gibeonits
made peace for themselues with Ioshua,Ioshua. 9. all the rest of the
Kings of Canaan made warre against them, and so soone as
we enter into a couenant with the Lord Iesus, Sathan shall
not faile the more fiercely to assault vs, seeking to recouer
his old possession; yet if as the Gibeonits did, we send spee|dilie
messengers to Ioshua, to shew him how wee are trou|bled
for his sake, hee shall not with-draw his helping hand
from vs.
Our deliuerance from sinne is begunne now,Our begun de|liuerance from sinne, the Lord shall perfect. but not
perfected, but we know that our God is faithfull, by whom we
are called, hee shall also confirme vs to the end. Euen hee who
hath begunne this good worke in vs,1 Cor. 1. 8. will performe it vntill the
day of Christ.Phil. 1. 6. As the Angell who deliuered Peter out of pri|son,
appeared to him with a shining light in the darke pri|son,
smote him vpon his side, and wakened him out of
his sleepe, made his chaines to fall from him, and caused
him to arise and follow him, went still before him, to lead
him in the way through all impediments, and departed not
from him till hee had entred him within the Cittie of Ie|rusalem:
so the spirit of our Lord Iesus who hath once come
downe vpon vs in this prison, and hath lightned our dark|nesse,
wakened vs out of our dead securitie, and loosed the
chaines of our sinnes wherewith wee were bond, shall abide
continually with vs, gouerning vs with his light and truth,
till hee haue entred vs within the portes of heauenly Ieru|salem.
Blessed be the Lord, where before wee were the cap|tiues
of sinne, now the course of the battell is changed, sin
is become our captiue through Christ, it remaineth in vs
not as a commaunder, but as a captie of the Lord Iesus: it
is true, the boltes of sinne are yet vpon our hands and feet
to admonish vs of our former miserable thraldome, we draw

as yet the chaines of sinne after vs, which makes vs indeed
goe forward the more slowlie, but are not able to detaine vs
in that bondage, wherein wee lay before.
And as concerning our deliuerance from death,How we are de|liuered from death both first and second. wee are
to know that death is two-fold: the first, and second, the
first is a separation of the soule from the body: the second
is a separation of them both from the Lord, Mors prima
pellit animam nelentem de corpore,Aug. de ciuit. dei. li. 21. ca. 3 mors secunda detinet anima~
nlentem in corpore. The first death expels the soule against
the will out of the body, the second death compels the soule
against the will to abide in the body, for vnto the greater
augmentation of their paine, as they were companions of
sin, so shall they be compelled to abide companions of pu|nishment.
This second death hath three degrees,Second death hath three de|grees. the first is when
the soule by sinne is separated from the Lord: the second
is, when the body by the power of that curse due to sinne,
is turned into dust and the soule is sent to hell: the third is,
when both soule and body being ioyned together againe
in the resurrection, shall be banished from the presence of
the Lord, and cast into vtter darknesse. And it is called the
second death because it is executed vpon the wicked after
their first death, otherwise the first death that euer came in
the world,Aug. de verb. was the first degree of the second death, Mors
anim prcessit,Apost. ser. 33 anima deserente Deum,  mors corporis se|quut
est, anima deserente corpus, deeruit Deum voles ani|m,
 coacta est deserere corpus nolens, the death of the soule
went before, the soule departing from God, and the death
of the body followed the soule,How Christi|ans are exerci|sed with terrors of conscience which in the owne nature are forerunners of the second death. departing from the bodie,
the soule departed from God willing, and therefore is com|pelled
vnwillingly to depart out of the body.
Now from both these dehs wee are deliuered by the
Lord Iesus for our soules being freed from sinne, are recon|ciled
with God, and so exempted from that wrath which
is to come. For albeit the deere children of God bee some|time
exercised with inward terrours of conscience, which

in their owne nature are forerunners of these paynes pre|pared
for the wicked, and are as the smoake of that fie
which afterward shall torment them: yet vnto the godlie
their nature is changed, they are sent vnto them, not to se|perate
them from the Lord, but to draw their hars neere
vnto him, and to worke in them a greater conformitie with
Christ.
And as for the first death,The nature of the first death changed to the Christian. wee are so deliuered from it,
that albeit in the owne nature it bee the Centre of all mise|ries,
and a fearefull effect of Gods curse on man for sinne,
Yet to the godly the nature thereof is also changed, so that
now it is not the death of the man, but the death of sinne in
the man:Amb. de bono mort. cap. 4. mors est sepultura vitiorum, death (saith Ambrose)
is the buiall of all vices. As the worme which is bred in
the tree, saith Chrisostome, doth at last consume it, so death
which is brought out by sinne, doth at the length consume
and destroy sinne in the children of God. Finally, death is
the progresse and accomplishment of the full motification
of all our earthly members, wherein that filthie luxe of
sinne is dryed vp at an instant. It is a voluntarie sacrificing
of the whole man soule and body to the Lord, the greatest
and highest seruice wee can doe to him in the earth: for
where in the course of our life wee are continualy fighting
against our inordinate Iustes and affections, to bring them
in subiection to Christ, by death as it were with one stroke
they are all smitten and slaine, and the soule is offered vp
to God in a sacrifice of full and perfect obedience.



Verse 3.
For that that was impossible to the Law, in as
much as it was weake, because of the flesh, God send|ing
his owne Sonne, in the similitude of sinfull flesh,
and that for sinne, condmned sinne in the flesh.
_THE Apostle hauing set downe in the first 
Verse a Proposition of Comfort,Explication of the confirma|tion. belonging
to them who are in Christ, and confirmed it
in the second,Here followes an explication of the confir|mation of his generall pro|position. he proceedeth now to the expli|cation
of the Confirmation: Declaring how it is that Christ
hath freed vs from the law of sinne, and first he shewes how
Christ hath freed vs from the condemning power of sinne,
in this verse: namely, that hee taking vpon him our nature,
and therewithall the burden of our sinnes, hath condemned 
sinne in his blessed bodie,He snews how we are freed from the con|demning pow|er of sinne. and so disanulled it, that it hath
no power to condemne vs. And this benefit he amplyfies,
shewing that by no other meanes we could obtaine it: for
where without Christ there is but one way for men to come
to life,The law could not saue vs. namely, the obseruance of the law, hee lets vs see it
was impossible for the law to saue vs: and least it should
seeme that hee blamed the law, hee subioynes, that this im|potencie
of the Law to saue vs, proceeds from our selues,
because that we through leshly corruption which is in vs
cannot fulfill that righteousnesse which the law requires.
This impotencie of the law appeareth by these two
things;Impotencie of the law to saue vs appeares in two things. first it craued that of vs which we had not to giue,
namely, perfect obedience vnto all the Lords commande|ments,
and that vnder paine of death: which albeit most
iustly it be required of vs,It craues that which now our nature can not giue. considering that by creation we 
receiued from God a nature so holy that it was able to doe
the law, yet now by reason of the deprauation of our na|ture,
drawne on by our selues, it is impossible that wee can
performe it. Secondly,It giues not that which our estte now craueth. the law could not giue that vnto vs 
whereof wee stood in neede, namely, that the infinit debt

of transgressions, which we had contracted should bee for|giuen
vnto vs: this I say the law could not doe, for the law
commaunds obedience, but promises not pardon of diso|bedience;
yea rather it bindes the curse of God vpon vs for
it. And againe we stood in neede of a supernaturall grace
to reforme deformed nature, and this also the law could
not doe, it being a doctrine that shewe vs the way to life,
but ministers not grace vnto vs to walke therein, but all
these which the law could not doe, Iesus Christ by whom
commeth grace and life, hath done vnto vs.
Where first we haue to marke the pittfull estate of those
who seeke life in the obseruance of the law,Miserablle blinde are they who seeke life in perfect ob|seruance of the Law. which here the
Apostle saith is impossible for the law to giue, they seeke
life where they shall neuer finde it. The Apostle in another
place calles the law the ministerie of death and condemna|tion,
and that because it instantly bindes men vnder death
for euery transgression of her commandements, so that hee
who hath eyes to see what an vniuersall rebellion of na|ture
there is in man vnregenerate to Gods holy law, yea
what imperfections and discordance with the law are re|manent
in them who are renued by grace, may easily espye
the blinde presumption of those that seeke their liues in the
ministry of death.Yet such are all the children of Adam by na|ture. Yet so vniuersall is this errour, that it
hath ouergone the whole posteritie of Adam, nature tea|ching
all men who are not illuminated by Christ, to seeke
saluation in their owne deeds, that is, to stand to the coue|nant
of workes. But the supernaturall doctrine of the Euan|gelist
teaches vs to transcend nature, to goe out of our selues,
and to seeke saluation in the Lord Iesus, and so to vse the
law, not that we seek life by fulfilling it, which here is im|possible,
but as a schole-maister to leade vs vnto Christ, in
whom wee haue remission of our sinnes, sanctification of
our nature, acceptation of our imperfect obedience, bene|fits
which the law could neuer aford vnto vs.
Inasmuch as it was weake because of the flesh. The Apo|stle
doth in such sort ascribe to the law an impotencie to

saue vs that hee blames not the Law,The impoten|cie of the law comes not of the law which is good, but of our owne cor|rupted nature. but the corruption of
our fleshly nature, being not able to fulfill that righteous|nesse
which the law requireth: yea as the Apostle hath
taught vs before, so farre is our nature peruerted by our A|postasie
from God, that we are not onely vnable to doe that
which the good and holy law of God requires, but also vve
become worse by the law: for by the commandements of
the law, sin reuiues in our nature, and takes occasion by the
law to become more sinfull, and so like a desperate disease it
conuerts that medicine vvhich is ministred to cure it into a
nourishment and confirmation of the sicknesse it selfe.Our nature be|comes worse by the law. It is
the nature of contraries, that euery one of them intends the
selfe to expell another; whereof it comes that there is grea|test
cold in the bosome of the earth, euen then when the
Sunne with greatest vehemencie shines on it, to callifie and
heat it: euen so our corrupted nature doth neuer shevv it
selfe more rebellious and stubborne, than vvhen the lavv of
God beginnes to rectifie it. As an vnruly and vntamed
horse, the more hee is spurred forward the faster he runnes
backward: so the peruerse nature of man, nititur semper in
vetitum, is so farre from being reformed by the law, that by
the contrary sinne that was dead without the lavv, is reuiued
by the law, and takes occasion to worke in vs all manner of
concupiscence. The Apostle is not ashamed to confesse that
hee found this in his own person;August. lib. 2 confess. cap. 4. Augustine also examining
his former sinfull life, doth hereby aggrauate his corruption,
that in his young yeeres hee vvas accustomed to steale his
neighbours fruit, not so much for loue of the fruit, for hee
had better at home, as for a sinfull delight he had to goe with
his companions to commit euill: so that where the lavv
should haue restrayned his sinfull nature, it was so much the
more prouoked to sinne by the lavv. Let therefore the
Semipelagians of our time say to the contrary what they will,
let them magnifie the arme of flesh, to diminish the praise
of the grace of God, and dreame that mans nature vnrege|nerate
can bring forth merits of congruitie, or workes of

preparation, yet doth the Lord heerein greatly abase
man, when hee telleth him, that not onely he cannot doe
that which the law requireth, but that also the more he is
commaunded the more hee repines, vntill Grace reforme
him.
God sending his owne Sonne.How Christ hath done that which the law could not. The Apostle proceedes and
let vs see how the Lord by Christ hath wrought that sal|uation
which the Law could not. Wherein first it is to bee
marked, that the Apostle saith not wee sought from the
Lord a Sauiour, but that the Lord sent him vnto vs vnre|quired.
Surely neither man nor Angell could haue euer
thought of such a way of Saluation, the Lord hath found
it out himselfe, in his incomprehensible wisedome a way so
to saue man, that the glory both of his mercie and iustice
shall bee saued also. Most properly therefore is hee called,
Pater non indiciorum, sed misericordiarum, Father not of
iudgements but of mercies,Why God is called father of mercie not of iudgements. for both the purpose, and the
meanes of our saluation are from himselfe: hee hath found
causes without him, mouing to execute his iustice, hee hath
beene prouoked thereunto by the disobedience of apostate
Angels, and man; but a cause mouing him to shew mercie
is within himselfe, this praise is due to God, it is the grea|test
glory, that can bee giuen vnto him. Abhominable
therefore is that errour of fore-seene merites by which
the aduersaryes doe what they can to obscure the praise of
the bright shining glory of Gods mercie.
His owne Sonne.How Christ is Gods owne son Iesus Christ is called Gods owne
Sonne, to distinguish him from all others who are his sonnes
by adoption, onely Christ is the Sonne of God by nature,
by that diuine inutterable generation, whereof Esay saith,
Who can expresse it. Thus is hee Gods owne sonne, that is,
coeternall and coessentiall, begotten of the Father before
all time, by the full communication of his whole essence vn|to
him, in a manner that cannot bee expressed. And in the
fulnesse of time hee became man, God being manifested in
the flesh, and in regard of his humane nature, which was

conceiued of the holy Ghost, and vnited in a personall vni|on
with his diuine, hee stands in the title of Gods owne
sonne, after so singular a manner, that hee admits no com|panion.
The last of these two,Christs diuine generation a great mysterie. the Apostle makes the first point
of the misterie of Godlinesse. God manifested in the flesh, where|in
he bridles our curiositie, for if his manifestation in the
flesh,1 Tim. 3. 16. that is, his incarnation be a mysterie, that goes beyond
our vnderstanding, what shall we say of his diuine genera|tion?
a mystery indeed to bee adored not to be enquired, an
article proposed to be belieued,Mans curiosity restrained from searching it. not to bee disputed. The
Arrians seeking to search out this vnsearchable mysterie
with naturall reason, by infinite degrees more foolish then
if they had presumed to number the starres of heauen, or
measure with their fist all the vvaters in the Sea, they stum|bled
and fell, being neuer able to comprehend, how the son
that was begotten should bee coeternall and coessentiall to
the Father who begot him: therefore the worthy Fathers
of the primitiue Church to expresse the presumption of
these arrogant spirits, drew them down from the dangerous
speculation of these high mysteries far aboue their capa|citie,
to consideration of things which are in nature. Si in
Creatura genitum inueniri potest,August. coaeuum genitori, an non ae|quum
est conced as posse ista in creatore coaeterna inueniri? if in
things created, that which is begotten may be found equall
in time to that which begat it, why should it be denyed that
in the Creator, the begetter, and begotten are equall in eter|nitie?
When a candle (saith Augustine) is first lighted, at
once there are two things, the fire and the splendor, or light:
if it be enquired whether the fire come from the light, or
the light from the fire, all men will agree that the splendor
or light comes from the fire: but if againe it be demanded
which of them is first or last in time, it cannot be determi|ned.
But vvherefore shall vve vse these similitudes? as the
Creator is aboue the creature, so is that mysterie aboue all
the secrets of nature; no similitude can bee found in nature

so much as shadow that most high and supernaturall myste|rie,
yet is the endeuor of these godly fathers commendable,
vvho haue laboured to bring downe men to the exercising
of their wits in things vvhich are below, like vnto them|selues,
leauing curious inquisition of higher secrets, vvhich as
I haue said, are to be receiued with faith, reuerenced vvith
silence,Rom. 11. 20 not searched out by curiositie. O man bee not high
minded but feare.
In the similitude of sinnefull flesh.Christ came like a sinfull man, but with|out sinne. Wee must not so vnder|stand
these words, as if Iesus had onely the similitude of
a naturall bodie, no, hee was very man, made of the seed of
Dauid, he hath taken on our flesh indeed, yet was he not a
sinfull man, but separated from sinners. A holy One, from
the first moment of his conception, conceiued of the holy
Ghost.Dan. 2. 45. A Stone cut out of the mountaine without hands. The
Flower of the field, that groweth without mans labour or in|dustry.1 Cor. 15.
The second Adam, very man as was the first, but
not begotten of man. So then the word (similitude) is not
to be ioyned vvith the word (Flesh) but with the word
(sinfull.) He tooke on mans nature without sin, yet subiect
to those infirmities, mortalitie and death, which sin brought
vpon vs, he appeared like a sinfull man, being indeed with|out
sinne; in the shape of a Seruant, content to be made in|feriour
not onely to Angels, but to men of the vilest sort;
sold for thirtie pieces of siluer; not so worthy to liue as Bar|rabas;
ranked vvith Theeues on the Crosse, and repu|ted
as a Worme of the earth: thus being voyde of all
sinne, yet was hee handled as a sinner and most wicked ma|lefactor.
Wherein wee are to consider so farre as vve may,How deerely the Lord loued vs, perceiue by the price he hath giuen for our ransome. though
vve cannot comprehend it, that vvonderfull loue vvhich the
Lord hath shevved vs in this vvorke of our saluation, how
deere and precious our life hath beene in his eyes, perceiue
by the greatnesse of that prise which hee hath giuen for vs,
for vvho vvill giue much for that vvhereof he esteemes but
little? it was not vvith gold nor siluer nor any corruptible

thing, that the Lord hath redeemed vs, but vvith the preci|ous
bloud of his owne Son Iesus, as of a Lambe vnblemi|shed
and vnspotted. If Dauid considering the goodnesse of
God towards man in the vvork of creation, fell out into this
admiration,Psal. 8. O Lord what is man that thou art mindfull of him,
or the Son of man that thou doest visite him? how much more
haue vve cause so to crye out, considering the riches of God,
his vvonderfull mercies shewed vs in the vvork of redemp|tion.
It vvas a great kindnesse vvhich Abraham shewed to
Lot, vvhen he hazarded his owne life, and the liues of his
familie, to recouer Lot out of the hands of Chedarlaomer,
but not comparable to that kindenesse which our kinsman
the Lord Iesus hath shewed vnto vs, who hath giuen his life
to deliuer vs out of the hand of our enimies. The Lord shed
abroad in our hearts more and more abundantly the sence
of that loue, that wee may endeauour to be thankfull for it,
by this threefold dutie, first of thanksgiuing: secondly, of
seruice: thirdly, of loue toward those who are beloued of
him.
As for the first,Our thankful|nes again shold be testified by this threefold duetie. our life should bee a continuall thanks|giuing,
and worshipping before him, who hath loued vs, and
washed vs from our sinnes in his bloud. When the chil|dren
of Israell had passed the red sea, suppose they had a
wast wildernesse between them and Canaan, yet they prai|sed
God with a song of thanksgiuing,Continuall thanksgiuing. and the Lord appoin|ted 
an yearely remembrance of that benefit. If smaller mer|cies
are to be remembred with thanksgiuing, what shall wee
think of the greater?
As for the second, which is seruice,Seruice. Zacharie teacheth 
vs that for this end God hath deliuered vs from all our eni|mies,Luke. 1. 74.
that all our dayes wee should serue him in righteous|nesse
and holinesse, the reason why the Israelites bound
themselues to giue subiection and obedience to Dauid,2 Sam. 19. 9 was
that he had deliuered them from the hand of the Philistins,
the same reason Ezra vsed to the Iewes returned from cap|tiuitie
to make them obedient to the Lord,Ezra. 9. 13. Seeing thou O

Lord hath giuen vs such deliuerances, shall we returne any more
to breake thy Commaundements? but much more should it
binde vs to doe seruice to our Lord Iesus, seeing hee hath
made vs free by his bloud, shall wee againe make our selues
the seruants of sinne?Professors con|uinced that serue him not. The Lord neuer shewed a greater
mercie on man, then this that hee gaue his sonne Iesus
Christ vnto the death for vs, and there can be no higher
contempt done to God by man, then if after so great a
loue shewed vs, wee shall still refuse to bee his seruants:
much will be required of him, to whom much is giuen, those
Gentiles to whom the Lord reuealed himselfe in goodnes
onely as their Creator, because they did not glorifie him,
the Apostle saith that the wrath of God was reuealed from
heauen vpon them, and what wrath then maist thou looke
for, to whom the Lord hath manifested himselfe in mercy
also, as thy Redeemer in Christ, and yet thou wilt not glo|rifie
him: thou receiuest not him whom thy Father hath
sent vnto thee, neyther wilt thou liue vnto him, that gaue
himselfe to dye for thee, but by thy wicked life thou cruci|fiest
againe the Sonne of God, and treadest vnder thy feet
the bloud of the new couenant: certainely Sodome and
Gomorrha shall be in an easier estate in the day of iudge|ment,
then the wicked of this generation. For in this last
age the Lord hath spoken to vs by his Son, he hath none
greater to send after him: those labourers of the vineyard
that slew the Seruants of the great King, were not for
that instantly punished, but when the Sonne came, and they
had murthered him also, then was their iudgement no lon|ger
delayed. It was not written for the Iewes onely in whom
it was first accomplished, but for vs also to whom the Fa|ther
in this last age hath sent his owne Sonne, and by
whom hee hath spoken vnto vs from himselfe, if we despise
him there remaines no more but a violent looking for of
iudgement.
The third dutie is,Loue to those whom he hath bidden loue for his sake. that for Christs sake wee loue vnfai|nedly
those vvhom hee hath recommended vnto vs, our

goodnesse cannot extend vnto the Lord, neither haue vve
him vvalking vvith vs vpon earth, that vve may minister vn|to
him, may wash his feete, and annoynt his blessed bodie
vvith precious oyntments, therefore should our delight bee
vpon these his excellent ones that are vpon earth. When Io|nathan
was dead, Dauid for Ionathans sake shewed kind|nesse
to Mephibosheth: our Ionathan is not dead, hee liues,
and raignes in heauen, yet can we not declare our kindnesse
to himselfe, let vs seeke some Mephibosheth, some of Christs
little weake and impotent children, of vvhom he hath said,
what yee doe to one of these little ones for my sake is done
to mee, and let vs shew kindnesse vnto them, for the great
loue which the Lord Iesus hath shewed vnto vs.
And that for sinne.Christ came to destroy sinne, cursed are they who nourish it. These wordes containe the end of
Christs manifestation in the flesh, which is, that in our na|ture
hee might beare the punishment of our sinnes, satisfie
the iustice of God, and so abolish sinne. Saint Iohn makes
this cleare, when he saith, that hee appeared to destroy the
workes of the diuell, that is, sinne: for sinne being remoued
there is nothing in man, but the workmanship of God. By
this it is euident how highly they offend God, who abuseth
the death of Christ, to nourish themselues in their sinne,
being the bolder to commit sinne, because Christ dyed for
them: surely this is to turne the grace of God into wanton|nesse.
The Lord came to abolish sinne, not to nourish it,
Christ once suffered,1 Pe. 3. 18. the iust for the vniust (not that we should
still abide vniust) but that hee might bring vs to God. Thou
therefore who continuest vniust, maist say, as thou hast
heard, that there is a Sauiour come into the world, but can
not say in truth, that there is a Sauiour come to thee. For
where Christ comes hee worketh that worke for which hee
came, namely, hee destroyes the worke of the diuell, that is
hee enfeebles, and abolishes at the last the power of sinne.
Condemned sinne.How Christ hath condem|ned sinne. Sinne by a metaphor is said to be con|demned,
for as they vvho are condemned are depriued of all
the liberty, power, and priuiledges they had before, and hath

no more any place to appeare in iudgement, so hath the
Lord Iesus disanulled sinne, that it hath now no power to
command, and condemne vs, hee hath spoyled principali|ties
and powers,Colos. 2. 24. and triumphed ouer them in the Crosse,
and hath nayled vnto it the obligation of ordinances which
was against vs,Ambrose in hunc locum. and so sustulit illam quasi authoritatem pec|cati,
qua homines detinebat in inferno, hath taken away that
povver and authoritie of sinne, whereby it detayned men
vnder damnation. This hath hee done most lawfully,
and in iudgement, as vve shall heare, bearing our sinnes in
his blessed body on the Crosse, hee hath suffered that pu|nishment
vvhich the law required to bee inflicted on man
for sinne, and that in the flesh, that is, in the same nature of
man vvhich had offended.
For,Two head or chiefe iustice Courts holden by God. this word of Condemnation imports a iust, and lawful
proceeding of a Iudge in iudgement: which that vve may
the better vnderstand, let vs consider that there are two ge|nerall
and head iustice Courts, vvhich the Lord hath set vn|to
men, the one is holden already, the other is to bee hol|den:
 in the first the sinnes of all the elect are lawfully con|demned,In the first the sinnes of all Gods elect are condemned.
that themselues may be absolued; in the second the
persons of all the reprobate shall bee iusty condemned. In
the first by the ordinance of God the Father, our sinnes
were laid vpon the back of Iesus Christ, and a law imposed
to him which was neuer giuen to any other, neyther An|gell
or man, to wit, the law of a Mediator, that hee should
make vp peace betweene God and man; loue God in such
sort, that hee should by suffering preserue the glory of his
Fathers iustice, and yet make manifest the glory of his mer|cy;
that hee should loue his brethren in such sort, that hee
should take the burden of their transgressions vpon him,
which as by the Father it vvas inioyned vnto him, so did hee
vvillingly vndertake it. And therefore hauing our sinnes
imputed vnto him, hee presented himselfe for vs vpon the
Crosse, as vpon a pannell before the Iudge, to vnderly the
law, which craued that our sinnes should be punished to the

death. The decree according to the law is executed, death
yea an accursed death, as the punishment of sinne, is laide
vpon Christ: wherevpon there followes of equitie an abso|lution
of all those for whom the Lord Iesus suffered as Cau|tioner,In the second the persons of all the wicked shall bee con|demned.
their sinne is condemned and made of no force to 
condemne them hereafter. The other generall iustice court
will bee holden in the last day, wherein all flesh must ap|peare
before the Lord, as their superiour: and in that su|preame
and last Court of iustice shall bee condemned the
persons of all those whose sinnes were not condemned be|fore
in Christ Iesus, onely therefore blessed are they who
are in Christ:Ioh. 5. 24. Hee that heares my wordes, and belieues in him
that sent me, hath euerlasting life, and shall not come into con|demnation,
but hath passed from death to life,
And lastly we may obserue here what a powerfull Saui|our
wee haue,Christ did greatest works when to mans iudgement hee was weakest. when to the iudgement of man he was wea|kest,
then did hee the greatest worke that euer was done in
the world: he was powerfull in working of miracles in his
life, but more powerfull in his death; for then hee darkened
the Sunne; hee shooke the earth; hee made the rockes to
cleaue; he rent the vaile of the temple a sunder; and caused
the dead to rise:Cyp. de dupli|ci martirio. Mortuum Caesarem quis metuat, sed morte
Christi quid efficacius, if Caesar bee once dead who will feare,
Christ euen when hee is dead is terrible to his enimies: no|thing
can be more effectuall then his death. By it he did a
greater worke than was the creation of the world; by it he
brought in new heauens; and a new earth; by suffering death
he destroyed him who had the power of death; when hee
was condemned of man, hee condemned sinne that it should
not condemne man:August. de temp. ser. 7. passus est vt infirmus, operatus vt fortis,
e suffered as a weake man, but wrought as a strong one.
Sicut serpens mortuus,Mcar. hom. 11. c. As that Serpent without life
(erected by Moses in the wildernesse) ouercame the liuing
Serpents that stung Israell: so the Lord Iesus by suffering
death hath slaine that serpent, that liuing in vs had slung vs
vnto death.Chris. hom. 2 in Math. Hic vides mortem morte peremptam maledictum

maledicto extinctum,  per quae Diabolus iam antea valebat,
per ea ipsa tyrannidem ipsius esse destructam, here thou seest
(saith Chrisostome) death slaine by death, and the tyrannie of
Sathan destroyed by these same meanes by which before
most of all he preuailed.
O wonderfull worke!Christ a power full Sauiour, stronger then Samson, yea, stronger then that strong one surely the weaknesse of God is
stronger then man: hee is that stronge One indeed, stronger
then Samson. When the Philistines thought they had him
sure within the portes of Azzah, hee arose at midnight,
and tooke the doores of the gates of the Cittie, and the two
posts, and carried them away with the bars thereof on his
shoulders vp to the top of the mountaine, which is before
Hebron; but our mightie Conquerour and deliuerer the
Lord Iesus, hath in a more excellent manner magnified his
power, for being closed in the graue, clasped in the bands
of death, and a stone rolled to the mouth of the graue, the
Sepulcher sealed, and guarded with souldiers, he rose againe
the third day before the rising of the Sunne, he carried like
a victor the bars and posts of death away, as vpon his shoul|ders,
and vpon the mount of Oliues hee ascended on high
leading captiuitie captiue.
Like as therefore wee receiued before great comfort
through the consideration of Christs incomprehensible
loue toward vs,Christs power yeelds vs great comfort. so is it now confirmed by the meditation
of his power Let Sathan boast like Rabsache that the Lord
is not able to deliuer Ierusalem out of his hands,2 Kin. 18. 35 hee is but
a blasphemous Lyar, the Lord will rebuke him, and will
shortly tread Sathan vnder our feet: it is the curse of the wic|ked,Deut. 28. 29
hee shall be oppressed, and there shall bee none to deliuer
him, but blessed bee the Lord who hath prouided a strong
deliuerer for vs, who certainly shall set vs free from our eni|mies,Psal. 143. 12 and destroy all the oppressours of our soules. Glory
therefore be vnto him for euer.



Verse 4.
That the righteousnesse of the Law might be
fulfilled in vs, who walke not after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit.
_THe Apostle hauing taught vs in the former verse,Here followes the second member of the explication, wherein hee shewes how we are deliue|red from the commanding power of sin.
how the Lord Iesus hath freed vs from the con|demning
power of sinne, doth now let vs see how
we are freed also from the commanding power of
sinne; for hee sets downe this to bee the first, and neerest end
of Christs death in respect of vs, the renouation of our na|ture,
and conformitie thereof with God his holy law: which
hee expresses more cleerely in another place, when he saith,
that Christ gaue himselfe to the death for his Church,Ephes. 5. 26. that hee
might sanctifie it, and make it to himselfe a glorious Church,
not hauing spot, or wrinckle, or any such thing, but that it should
bee holy and without blame. This is the end which Christ
hath proposed vnto himselfe, and whereof hee cannot bee
frustrate, as hee hath begunne it, so he shall finish it, he shall
conforme vs to the law, the righteousnesse thereof shall be
fulfilled in vs, there shall not bee left in our nature so much
as a sinfull motion or desire, but hee shall at the last present
vs pure and without blame to his Father.
This righteousnesse of the law,How the righ|teousnesse of the law is ful|filled in vs. I vnderstand to be that
perfect obedience to the Commaundements thereof, which
the law requires flowing from the perfect loue of God and
our neighbour: and it is fulfilled in vs two manner of wayes,
first by application or imputation of Christs righteousnesse
vnto vs, he is our head and we his members, and are so vnited
with him, that now we are not to be taken as sundry but as
one bodie with him. By vertue of the which communion it
comes to passe, that that which is ours is his, and that which
is his, is ours, so that in our head we haue fulfilled the law,
satisfied Gods iustice for our sinnes. Secondly, it will be ful|filled
in vs by our perfect sanctification, though now wee
haue but begunne obedience and in part, the Lord Iesus at

the last shall bring it in vs to perfection.
The Iesuites of Rhemes in their marginall notes on this
Verse,The Iesuits collect here that the Law is fulfilled in this life. collects a note which the word here rendreth not
vnto them. Wee see (say they) that the Law which is Gods
commandements, may be kept, that the keeping therof is iustice,
and that in Christian men that is fulfilled by Christs grace,
which by the force of the Law could neuer be fulfilled: that the
law may be fulfilled, and also shall be fulfilled by the grace
of Christ, who hath deliuered vs from the Law of sinne, is
euident out of the Apostles words,This place prooueth no such thing. we confesse it, and are
comforted in it, this is an end which Christ hath proposed
vnto himselfe; that he may make vs perfectly answerable to
that holinesse, which the Law requireth, and in his owne
good time he shall bring it to passe: but that the Law is ful|filled
of men in this life, cannot be proued, neyther out of
this place, nor any other place of holy Scripture, Damna|tum
est pecatum,Caietane. non extinctum, Sinne is condemned
(sayeth Caietane, one of their owne) but not extingui|shed.
And hereunto beside infinite testimonies of holy Scrip|ture
agreeth also the suffrages of pure antiquitie.That the law is not fulfilld in vs, nor by vs in this life is proued. Non di|cit
familia tua sana sum, medicum non requiro, sed sana me
Domine,  sanabor. It is not (saith Ambrose) the voyce of
thy familie,Amb. de paeni|ten. li. 1. cap. 6 Ierem. 17. I am whole, and needes not a Phisition, but
heale mee O Lord, and I shall be healed, Tu audes Noua|tiane
mundum te dicre, qui etsi operibus mundus esses hoe solo
verbo immundus fieres. Ambrose spake it to the Nouatians
Heretiques of his time, and it may bee fuly turned
ouer to the Iesuits of our time: Darest thou O Iesuit call thy
selfe cleane and holy? albeit thou wert cleane in regard of thy
works, this one word were enough to make thee vncleane,
With him also agrees Augustine,Aug. de verb Apost. ser. 29 Sunt quidam inflti vtres
spritu elationis pleni, non magnitudine ingentes, sed superbiae
morbo tumentes, vt audeant dicere inuenri homines  pec|cato.
There are some (saith hee) like vnto vessels blowne
vp with winde, filled with a hautie spirit, not solidly great,

but swelled with the sicknesse of pride, who dare be bolde
to say, that men are found in earth without sinne? Of such
as these hee demaunds in that same place:Ibidem. Interrogo te, O
homo sancte, iuste, sine macula, oratio ista, dimitte nobis debita
nostra, fidelium est, an catechumenorum? certe regenerato|rum
est, immo filiorum, nam si non est filiorum qua fronte dici|tur
Pater noster, qui es in coelis, vbi ergo estis, O iusti, sancti, in
quibus peccata non sunt.A question for Papists. I demand of thee (O man) thou who
art iust and holy, this prayer, Forgiue vs our sinnes, whether
is it a prayer to bee sayd by Catechists onely, or to be said
also of such as are beleeuers and conuerted Christians? sure|lie
it is the prayer of men regenerated, yea, it is the prayer
of the Sonnes of God, for they call God their Father, in
heauen; where then are ye, O ye iust and holy ones in whom
are no sinnes? If the regenerate and sonnes of God haue
need to craue remission of sinnes, what are yee who say
ye haue no sinne?1. Ioh. 1. 9. If wee say wee haue no sinne, we lie, and the
truth is not in vs, and our blessed Sauiour to let vs see how
farre wee are from doing that which wee should doe, saith:
When yee haue done all that yee can doe,Luke. 17. 10. yet say yee are vnpro|fitable
Seruants. Where because they haue a silly subterfuge,
that albeit wee were neuer so righteous, yet for humilities
sake, wee should say wee are vnprofitable: I answere them,
as Augustine answered the same obiection in his time,Aug. de verb. prop|ter
humilitatem ergo mentiris,Apost. ser. 29 then for humilities sake, thou
lyest, but it is certaine, Christ neuer taught man to lye
for humilitie, this is but a forged falshoode of their owne.
And to ioyne the third witnesse with the former two.
Bernard who liued in a very corrupt time, yet retained this
truth,Ber. in annu~. Mariae. Quis melior Propheta? de quo dixit Deus, inueni virum
secundum cor meum,  tamen ipse necesse habuit dicere Deo:
Ne intres in iudicium cum seruo tuo, who is better then the
Prophet Dauid? of whom the Lord said, I haue found a man
after mine owne heart, yet had he need to say, Lord enter not
into iudgement with thy Seruant.Ber. in Cant. Serm. 23. And againe, Sufficit mihi
ad omnem iustitiam solum habere propitium, cui soli peccaui:

non peccare Dei iustitia est, hominis iustitia indulgentia Dei,
It sufficeth me for all righteousnes to haue him onely mer|cifull
to me, whom I haue onely offended, to bee without
sinne is the righteousnesse of God, mans righteousnesse is
Gods indulgence, pardoning his finne: we conclude there|fore
with him.Ber ser. cont. vitiu~ingrati. V generationi huic miserae, cui sufficere vide|tur
sua insufficientia, immo inopia tanta, quis enim ad perfectio|nem
illam, quam Scripturae tradunt, vel aspirare videtur? woe
to this miserable generation, to whom their owne insuffici|encie
seemes sufficient, for who is it that hath so much as
aspired to that perfection, which the holy Scripture com|maunds
vs?
But to maintaine their error,Places of scrip|ture wherein godly men are called Saints  righteous, makes not for their error of perfect obser|uance of the Law. they enforce these places
of holy Scripture, wherein mention is made of innocencie,
iustice and perfection in the Godly, whereupon they simply
inferre that the Law is fulfilled. Their paralogismes shall
easily be discouered, if we keepe Augustines rule: when the
perfection of any man is mentioned, wee must consider
wherein, for a man may bee righteous in comparison of
others, so Noah was a righteous man in comparison of that
generation wherein hee liued, yet was hee not with|out
sinne. A man may bee also so called in comparison of
himselfe, the Lord iudging a man according to that where
vnto the greater part of his disposition is inclined: for the
Lord doth repute and account his Children not after the
remanents of the old man, but according to the new work|manship
of his grace in them; whereof it commeth to
passe, that albeit in a great part they bee sinfull, yet the
Lord giueth vnto them, the names of Saints and righteous
men.
Againe,In what sense Godly men are called perfect in holy Scrip|ture. in handling of the Apostles words Philippians 3.
let vs as many as are perfect bee thus minded, hee moues the
question, seeing the Apostle hath said immediately before,
that he was not perfect, how doth he now rancke himselfe
among those who are perfect? how agrees these two, that
hee is perfect, and not perfect? Hee answeres, the Apostle

was perfect,August. in Psal. 38. secundum intentionem, non secundum peruentio|nem,
that is, perfect in regard of his intention and purpose,
not in regard of peruention, and obtayning of his purpose.
And hereunto agrees that of Bernard,Ber. in Cant. serm. 49. Magnum illud electi|onis
vas perfectum abnuit, profectum fatetur, that great cho|sen
vessell of election graunts profection, that is, a going
forward, but denyes perfection, for  is not onely he
who hath come to the end, but hee also who is walk|ing
toward it, we are so perfect in this life that wee are yet
but walking to perfection:Ambros. in Rom. cap. 8. ver. 9. therefore saith Ambrose, Apo|stolus
aliquando quasi perfectis loquitur, aliquando quasi per|fecturis,
hoc est aliquando laudat, aliquando commonet: the
Apostle speaketh vnto Christians sometime as vnto men
that are perfect, othertimes as vnto men who are to perfect
that which is required of them, that is, sometimes he pray|ses
them for the good they haue done, and otherwhiles he
admonishes them of the good they haue to doe. Wee con|clude
therefore with Augustine,August. de temp. ser. 49. perfectio hominis est, inuenisse
se non esse perfectum, this is the perfection of man to finde
that hee is not perfect.
And as for that place of Saint Luke,How Zacharie and Elizabeth walked in all the commande+ments of God. where it is said that
Zacharie and Elizabeth walked without reproofe in all the
Commandements of God because the Iesuits of Rhemes in
their obseruations would wrest it to confirme their errour,
we will shortly make it manifest.Luke. 1. 6. That it makes not for
them, Augustine hath two reasons, whereby hee proues out
of that same Scripture, that Zacharie was not without sinne,
first because he was a Priest, and was bound to offer aswell
for his owne sins, as the sins of the people. Secondly, in that
the Euangelist saith,Heb. 5. 3. hee walked in the commandements of
God, it is an agreement, that as yet hee had not attayned
to the marke: to the which wee may adde the third out of
that same place, the dombnesse inflicted vpon him for his
misbeleeuing, euidently proues he was not so perfect as to
bee without sinne. Beside this, he customably distinguishes
betweene peccatum  crimen, sinne and a crime, that is,

some grieuous offence that giues slaunder and is worthie of
crimination. Sanctorum hominum vitam inveniri posse dici|mus
sine crimine,Aug. Enchi. we affirme that the life of holy men may
be found without a crime. And againe, nunc bene viuitur si
sine crimine, sin peccato autem, qui se viuere existimat, non id
agit vt peccatum non habeat, sed vt veniam non accipiat: now
men liue well if they liue without crime, but he who thinkes
he can liue without sinne, doth not thereby make himselfe
free of sinne, but debarres himselfe from the pardon of his
sinne. And so much for refutation of their errour.
Now for our instruction we marke againe here,The end of Christs death is our sanctifi|cation, there|fore it should not be abused to giue libertie to sinne. that see|ing
the end of Christs death is our sanctification, it cannot
be but a mocking of the sonne of God, and a treading of
his holy blood, vnder the vncleane feete of men, to make
the death of Christ a nourishment of sin: let such thoughts
bee farre from vs, that we should take liberty to sinne, be|cause
we haue a Sauiour? this is to make Christ a minister
of sinne, and as was said, to build vp that which Christ came
to destroy. O thou who louest the Lord Iesus, bee it far from
thee to take pleasure in that which made his blessed soule
heauie vnto death, let vs neuer nourish that life of sin, which
was the cause of the death of Christ, but let vs daily cleanse
our selues from all filthinesse of the flesh and spirit,2 Cor. 7. 1. and grow vp
vnto full holinesse in the feare of God.
For albeit by Christ we be deliuered from the curse of the
Law,Christ hath freed vs from the curse of the law not from the obe|dience thereof. yet are we not exempted from the obedience thereof.
In respect of the one, the Apostle said, Wee are not vnder
the Law but vnder Grace: in respect of the other, hee hath
said that the Law is good: and our Sauiour protests he came
not to destroy the Law,Rom. 6. 15. but to fulfill it, both in himselfe
and his members,Rom. 7. 12. not onely by righteousnesse imputed, but
also inherent.Rom. 5. 17. For the law stands to vs a rule of our life, we
loue the holinesse thereof, and striues to conforme our selues
vnto it:Ambrose in Rom. cap. 8. iustificati enim amici leges efficiuntur, for men when
they are iustified, become louers of the law, which before
they hated.Rom. 7. 22. So that hereby wee are to try whether we be in

Christ, if we delight in the law of God, if wee be grieued
when our sinfull nature transgresses the precepts thereof, if
we finde a begunne harmonie betweene our affections,
actions, and her commandements, by these and the like ef|fects
may we know that in Christ we are iustified.
Lastly,We are sure our begun san|ctification shall be perfected. we haue this comfort that seeing our sanctificati|on
is an end which the Lord Iesus hath proposed vnto him|selfe,
wee may be sure hee shall attaine vnto it. In the first
creation what he commaunded was done, hee made light to
shine out of darknesse, no impediment could stay the work
of the Lord: so is it in the second creation, neither Sathans
mallice, nor the deceitfull allurements of the world, nor the
sinnefull corruption of our owne nature, shall stay that work
of our perfect sanctification, which the Lord Iesus hath
not onely begun, but also taken vpon him to accomplish.


Verse 5.
For they who are after the flesh, sauour the
things of the flesh, but they who are after the spirit
sauour the things of the spirit.
_HItherto we haue heard the proposition of com|fort;Application of his former do|ctrine, contay|ning first a Commination of the wicked, wherein is de|clared their mi|serable state who walke af|ter the flesh.
the reason of confirmation and explicati|on
thereof. Now because the Apostle restray|ned
that comfort to those who walkes after the
spirit, not after the flesh: now in this third member of the
first part of the Chapter, hee subioynes an exhortation.
Wherein by sundry reasons he disswades vs for walking af|ter
the flesh, and exhorts vs to walke after the spirit: where|in
he keepes this order. First he oppones these two, to walke
after the flesh, and after the spirit, as contraries, which can|not
consist. He lets vs see the miserable estate of them who
walke after the one, and illustrates it by the happy estate of
those who walke after the other, and then concludes that
they who are in the flesh cannot please God, vers. 5. 6. 7. 8.
Secondly he comforts the godly, least that they considering



vpright, and can looke to heauen, the soule which is from
aboue, hath forgotten her originall, is crooked to the earth,
and like a Serpent creeping on many feet, so walketh it af|ter
the dust with all her affections, sauouring onely those
things which are carnall. This is mans miserable estate by
nature. The Lord open our eyes, that wee may see how
farre wee are fallen by our apostacie, how deadly wee are
wounded, that in time wee may make our recourse to the
Physition of our soules, who now offers by Grace to re|store
vs.
But to returne,The diuers dis|position of the Christian and carnall man flowes from the diuersitie of their generati|ons. this diuersitie of dispositions in the man
naturall and spirituall, the Apostle designes to flow from
the diuersitie of their generations, they who are after the flesh,
that is as our Sauiour expounds it, that which is borne of the
flesh, is flesh: so then the cause why they are carnall and sa|uours
onely the things of the flesh, is because they are onely
pertakers of a carnall generation. Euery creature, as ye may
see,Iohn. 3. 6. hath an inclination to follow the owne kind, some liues
in the earth, some in the water, euery one of them by in|stinct
of that nature, which they receiued in their generation,
following so earnestly their owne kinde, that a contrarie
education cannot make them to forsake it. The Fowle
whose kinde is to liue in the waters, though she be brought
vp vnder the wings of another damme, whose kinde is to
liue in the earth, so soone, as shee is strengthened with fea|thers,
forsaking her education, followes her kinde: so also
in euery man the disposition of his affections and actions is
answerable to the nature of his life. If he haue no more but
a naturall life, his cogitations, counsels, resolutions, and acti|ons
are onely carnall, but if he haue also a spirituall life, then
shall he be able to mount aboue nature, hauing an inclina|tion
to heauenly things, for euery one who is risen with Ie|sus,
seekes those things which are aboue.
Now this difference of ther dispositions,The contrary disposition of the christian  carnall man appeares. flowing from
their different kindes, shall appeare the more clearely, if ye
compare the affections, words, and actions of the one with

the other.In their vnder|standing. And first to begin at the vnderstanding, it is cer|taine 
that the naturall man vnderstands not those things
which are of God. Let Iesus Christ speake to naturall Ni|codemus
of regeneration,Iohn. 3. 4. and Nicodemus shall conceiue that
he speakes of a naturall generation.Act. 26. 24. Let Paul speake before
Agrippa of the heauenly vision, and Festus shall count him
a foole.Gen. 19. Let Lot speake to his Sonnes in Law of the iudge|ment
to come vpon Sodome, and they shall esteeme him
as a mocker: thus Naturalists can neyther vnderstand the
words of mercy nor iudgement, to be allured with the one,
or terrified with the other, for he minds onely earthly things;
but as for the spiritual man, he hath receiued that new mind,
Whereby he knowes him that is the true one,1 Iohn. 5. 20. hee is indued
with new senses, whereby he perceiues things which are
excellent,Aug. de verb Apost. ser. 17 habet enim oculos interiores, quibus videt iustitiae lu|men,
he hath those naturall eyes whereby he seeth the light
of righteousnesse.
And if from the vnderstanding we proceed to the affecti|ons,In their affecti|ons.
whereupon can the naturall man set his affections, but
vpon those things which his vnderstanding commends for
good: for euery man hath his heart enclined to that which
accoding to his knowledge hee thinks best for himselfe.
The Gadarens wil prefer their Swine before Christ,Math. 8. and na|turalists
make more of their smallest earthly commodities,
than of those things which are aboue at the right hand of
God;  the Christian accounts the testimonies of the Lord
sweeter nto him then all the treasures of worldlings, hee
findes ore ioy in the lightsome countenance of God, then
in all abundance of Wheat and Wine; the best things of this
earth he accounts but doung; the pleasures of the world are
loathsome vnto him,Aug. ibid. her glory is despised in his eyes, habet
enim olfactum interius, de quo dixit Apostolus Christi bonus
odor mus Deo in omni loco; est verbum illi odor vitae ad vi|tam
for he hath that internall sense of smelling, whereof
the Apostle speakes,2 Cor. 5. 15. wee are vnto God the sweet sauour of
Christ in euery place, this makes the word of God vnto him



either reason which should rule is ouer-ruled by the will, or
at least the crooked is led by the blinde,In the soule of a carnall man the blind leads the crooked. that is, a blinded
vnderstanding directs the crooked will and peruerse affe|ctions
a wrong way; and what meruaile then if both fall in|to
the ditch: for where the eye which is the light of the bo|dy
is darknesse, how great must be the darknesse of the
whole man? and seeing the vnderstanding facultie of the
soule giues no counsels nor conclusions, but such as are
deadly, what can the will and affections doe, but run head|long
into the wayes of death?
This is that encrease of knowledge,The most ex|cellent know|ledge of the naturall man brings out death. which we haue got|ten
by our Apostasie from God, this is the fruit wee haue
plucked from off the forbidden tree, we haue a wisedome,
which brings out death, the most excellent knowledge
whereunto the quickest ingines could euer attaine by the
light of nature, profited them not vnto saluation. Lanctantius
compared all the learning of Philosophers to a liuelesse
body wanting a head, in seeing they were blind, in hearing
they heard not, vnderstanding they vnderstood not, while
they professed themselues to be wise they became fooles.
As the sences are in the head,Neither natu|rall nor morall philosophie could profit men to salua|tion. so all spirituall vnderstanding
of the way of life is in Christ Iesus, by naturall philosophie
they attayned to the knowledge of the creatures, but lear|ned
not to know the Creator; by natural reason they learned
to discerne the sophistrie of men, but not to resist the sophi|strie
of Sathan. By practise also of Morall philosophie they
attayned to a shew of those vertues which they called cardi|nall,
to a shew I say, but as for true Prudence, Iustice, Tem|perance
and Fortitude, they attayned not vnto them, with|out
faith it is impossible to please God, neyther can there
be without it any thing which deserueth the name of vertue,
quid enim illis cum virtutibus, qui Dei virtutem Christum ig|norant,
for what haue they to doe with vertue who are igno|rant
of Christ, the vertue and power of God?
All the light that is in nature is like to the sight of blin|ded
Sampson,Naturalists are all blinde like Sampson. for as he without a guide could not finde one

pillar of the house; no more can naturall vnderstanding
finde out so much as one of the articles of our faith: nasci|mur
vniuersi viae ciuitatis prorsus ignari, wee are all borne al|together
ignorant of the way that leadeth to the citie of God;Wisest among them cannot preuent their miserable end, more then A|chitophel, farre lesse the wrath to come.
, as the Apostle cals vs, without a minde to know
any thing pertayning to our owne saluation. Whatsoeuer
wisedome man hath without grace, may leade him forward
to euill, but cannot teach him to eschew euill. Achitophell
was counted wise in his time, and his wisedome and
counsell as the oracle of God, but hee had no wisedome to
foresee nor preuent his miserable end,2 Sam. 17. he hanged himselfe
in his impatiencie: yet is the wit of naturalists in our time
no better than his, they are wise in their owne eyes, and
glories within themselues that by their subtile wits they haue
gone through dangerous courses, wherein others haue fal|len;
yet they know not their end, neither are sure that the
politique deuise wherein they haue placed their confidence
shall not at length be a snare to themselues. Therefore the
spirit of God vouchsafeth not vpon the men of this world
the  of wise men, but calles them wise with arestriction,
they are wise (saith Ieremie) to doe euill.Iere. 4. 22. Wiser (saith our Sa|uiour)
in their owne generation than the children of God.Luke. 16. 8. Basil
properly compares them vnto Howlets,Compared to Howlets. which see somthing
in the night, but nothing in the day: such are worldlings, they
haue some vnderstanding of the works of darknesse,Basil hexam. hom. 8. but
no iudgement how to approue themselues to the light of
God, wise to compasse things present, but carelesse for those
which are to come.
Where if it be demaunded why then doth the Apostle
attribute wisedome to them who vvalke after the flesh? it
is answered, Prudentia dicitur cum res stulta sit, quia sic ipsis
videtur, it is called wisedome because so it seemes to them
who haue it,The carnall man and the Christian ey|ther of them iudgeth other to be foolish. albeit in very deed it bee foolishnesse. The
iudgements of the carnall and Christian man are so diffe|rent,
that eyther of them esteemes another foolish, but the
one iudges with a warrant, the other not so: the spirituall



Spirit they haue not. As the waues of the Sea are stirred
with euery winde, so are their mindes perturbed through
the tumultuous desire of their variable affections. And as for
peace of Conscience, which ariseth of the sense of Gods
mercy towards vs in Christ, how can they haue it whose life
is a continuance in inimitie with God?Psal. 8 5. for righteousnesse and
peace doe kisse one another, where there is no righteousnesse
how can there be peace,August. de tem. ser. 200 pax est haereditas Christianoru~, peace
is the heritage of Christians. The wicked haue their owne
carnall securitie, they blesse themselues in their heart, when
the word of the Lord doth curse them, but the false conclu|sions
of peace and safetie which they haue laid in their
owne hearts, shall not preserue them from that sodaine de|struction,
which (as trauaile vpon a woman with childe)
shall come vpon them: their securitie is like the securitie of
Ionas,Their securitie is like the secu|ritie of Ionas. who slept most soundly, when he had most cause to
watch and pray, for the Lord was pursuing him as a fugi|tiue
seruant, the officers of God gathered about him to lay
hands on him, the windes commoned against him, the ra|ging
waues of the Sea refusing all other satisfaction, offe|red
by the Mariners, rolled with violence about the Barke
wherein hee was, determining not to rest till they appre|hend
him, all his companions were afraid and compelled to
cry euery man vnto his God, onely Ionas was sleeping: what
think yee? was this true peace? no indeed, but false securi|tie.
It fareth euen so with the wicked, the Lord stands of|fended
with them, the heauens aboue closed vpon them,
hell beneath opened to receiue them, Sathan the deuouring
Lyon hungring for them, waiting when they shall be giuen
him for a pray; but they are eating, drinking, making
merry in the depth of a dead Conscience, but certainely
their securitie will end in a fearefull wakening, they shall
bee taken out of their bed of ease wherein they lye, and
shall be cast into that bottomles deepe of the wrath of God,
wherein their worme shall neuer dye, and their fire shall ne|uer
be quenched.

But to leaue them and returne to the Christian,A Christian hath peace with God, and himselfe,  his brethren, but not perfect in this. it may
be demaunded, how is he pertaker of peace? whose crosses
are so continuall as his? who more exercised with inward
terrours then hee? Is not his battell without intermission?
where then is his peace? To this I answere wee haue in|deed
peace with God, with our selues, and our Christian
brethren,Greg. moral. in Iob. lib. 6. but our peace is not perfect, Pax nostra ex diside|rio
creatoris inchoatur, ex manifesta autem visione perficitur,
a begun peace wee haue arising of that feruent desire wee
haue towards our God: but it is the manifest vision and
cleare sight of God that must perfect it: we attaine to the
beginnings of this peace, cum mentem Deo,  menti car|nem
subiugamus, vvhen vve subdue the minde to God, and
the flesh to the minde, but it cannot be perfect, quamdiu
mens ignoratione caecatur,  carnis suae impugnatione concu|titur,
so long as the minde is darkned with ignorance, and
disquieted with the assaults of the flesh. And to the same
purpose saith Augustine,Aug. in Ioan. tract. 77. Est nobis pax aliqua, quia condelec|tamur
Legi Dei secundum interiorem hominem, sed non plena,
quia videmus aliam legem in membris nostris repugnantem
legi mentis nostrae, wee haue some peace vvithin our selues,
when vve finde that our inward man delights in the Law
of God, but it is no perfect peace; because vve see an other
Law in our members rebelling against the law of our mind,
nether can our peace with our brethren here be perfect,
cogitationes cordis nostri inuicem non videmus,Ibidem.  quaedam de
nobis, quae non sunt in nobis, vel in melius inuicem, vol in dete|rius
opinamur; thus haue vve a peace but not perfect, not
without interruption.
Yet our comfort stands,Inward  out|ward troubles may interrupt our peace but cannot take it away. that how euer our peace be in|terrupted
by outward troubles and inward terrours of con|science,
yet it cannot bee taken from vs, albeit no trouble
for the present be sweet, yet it vvorketh in vs good effects:
by it vvee are made more humble, more feruent in prayer,
more abundant in teares, the hard heart by this holy ham|mer
of God being made soft: so that sanctified trouble by

the Lords wonderfull working becomes a meane to esta|blish
our peace.Greg. moral. in Iob. lib. 2. Corda electorum aliquando concussa melius
solidantur, the harts of the elect are best setled, after they
haue beene shaken with crosses. All the children of God
findes this by experience, that their inward troubles are pre|paratiues
to inward consolations: as hee who goes to build
a house the higher he intends to raise it, the deeper he layes
the foundations thereof, so the Lord humbles them lowest
vvith his terrours, to vvhom he purposes to communicate
the highest measure of his consolations. As his sufferings
abounds in vs,2 Cor. 1. 5. so shall our consolation abound through him, vve
vvill therefore that peace which vve haue in Christ, and
vvhich he hath left vs, none shall be able to take from vs.


Verse 7.
Because the wisedome of the flesh is inimitie
against God: for it is not subiect to the Law of God,
neither indeede can it bee.
_THe Apostle proceeds, and giues the reason why
hee called the wisedome of the flesh, death: because
it is inimitie with God. Hee proues it is inimitie
with God because neither is it, nor can it be sub|iect
vnto the law of God.
Of this manner of reasoning vsed by the Apostle wee
first learne,Our life stands  with God. that our life consists in our peace with God,
and that our death is procured by our inimitie with him.
Compare sinnefull Adam, with innocent Adam, and this
shll be made manifest: so long as hee stood at peace with
God hee liued a ioyfull life, familiar vvith his maker: but
from the time hee began the inimitie by transgression of the
commandement, not onely was the presence of God (ioy|full
to him before) terrible now, but hee became such a
erour to himselfe, that it vvas a death to him to liue in
that state of life. Oh that alway we could remember this,
that vvee cannot offend the Lord, vnlesse wee slay our

selues: all our rebelling against the Lord, is but a kicking
of our heele against the pricke, the losse is our owne, vve
depriue our selues of life, but cannot spoyle the Lord of his
glorie.
It is written of the Sidonians,Hovv foolish man is when he entertaines inimitie with God. that when Herode inten|ded
warre against them, they made friendship with Blastus
Herods chamberlaine, and besought him to make peace
for them: the reason is because their lands were nouished
by the king, therefore they were not able to beare his ini|mitie.
Alas that wee cannot bee as wise in a greater matter,
both our lands and our selues are nourished by the king of
heauen, vve are not able to endure his anger: if hee please
he can make the heauen aboue vs as brasse, and the earth be|neath
vs as iron; if he take his breath out of our nosthrils we
fall like clay to the ground and are turned into dust: hovv
then is miserable man so bewitched, that hee dares liue in
that state of life which is inimitie with God?1 Cor. 10. 22 Doe yee prouoke
the Lord vnto anger, are yee stronger than hee? No, no assu|redly
if thou walke on in thy sinnes, the Lord shall crush
thee with a scepter of iron, and breake thee in peeces like
a potters vessell,Psal. 2. 9. so vnequall shalt thou finde the match, if
thou contend with thy maker: Oh consider this yee that forget
God,Psal. 50. 22. least hee teare you in peeces and there bee none to deliuer.
Shall the Sidonians intreate for peace when Herod pro|claymes
warre, and shall man continue in inimitie, when
God from heauen proclaymes his peace? farre be it from
vs, that we should so doe. Away with this wisedome of the
flesh, which is inimitie with God.
Perceiue againe,No good in mans nature before it be re|nued, against the Semipela|gians of our time. how the spirit of God in such sort de|scribes
the nature of man vnrenued by Grace, that no good
is left in it, out of vvhich the Semipelagians of our time, may
draw their vvorkes of preparation or merits of congruitie,
for vvhere as in the Soule of man there are but two facul|ties:
the Vnderstanding and the Will, the spirit of God so
describes his Vnderstanding, that not onely hee saith, the
naturall man vnderstands not the things that are of God,

but as if that were not suffcient to expresse mans miserable
estate,A minde that neither sees nor can see. hee addeth, neither indeed can he vnderstand them, be|cause
they are spiritually discerned. And againe, his will hee
so describeth it, that it is not subiect vnto the Law of God,
and he addeth this (neyther indeed can it bee) what more
can be said to abase the naturall pride of man,1 Cor. 2. 14. he hath such
a mind as neither vnderstands nor can vnderstand the things
of God;A will that nei|ther is subiect to God nor can bee. he hath such a will as neyther is subiect, nor can be
subiect to the Law of God. This is the iudgement of gods
spirit concerning the corruption of our nature, vvee set it
against the vaine opinion of all those, vvho to magnifie
the arme of flesh, and the merits of man, dreames of a
good in our nature without grace, which cannot be found
in it.
Neyther let any man inferring more of the Apostles
speach then himselfe concludes,The praise of Gods power  grace is the gre|ter because it reforms nature it being so farre peruerted. think it impossible that our
rebellious vvill should be made obedient: the Apostle takes
not away this hope from man, onely he denyes that nature
is able to doe it. Nature without grace may increase the ini|mitie,
but cannot make reconciliation, but that vvhich is
impossible to man, is possible to God. The nature of beasts,
birds and creeping things hath beene tamed by the nature
of man (saith Saint Iames) but the tongue of man,Iam. 3. 7. though
the smallest member in the body yet so vnuly an euill, that
no man is able to tame it. Wee cannot change one haire of
our head,Mat. 5. 36. to make that vvhite vvhich is blacke, far lesse can
we change our hearts to make them holy vvhich are vn|cleane.
What then shall wee be out of all hope? that vvhich
vve are not able to doe, shall vvee thinke it shall neuer bee
done? Let vs not so conclude, though no man can tame the
nature of man, the Lord can Paul who vvas a rauening
Wolfe in the Euening, the Lord made a peaceable Lambe
in the Morning. Naturalists haue written that the bloud of
the Goat causeth the hard Adamant to breake, but the
holy Scripture hath more surely taught that the bloud of
Iesus hath vertue to turne a stony heart into a soft, where it

pleases the Lord of stones to raise vp children vnto Abra|ham.
There is nothing colder than ice, yet sayth Augustine,
it is melted and made warme by the help of fire. A thornie
ground (sayth Cyrill) being vvell manured becomes fertile,Ciril. catec. 2
and the Lord (sayth the Psalmist) turneth a barren wildernes
into a fruitfull land:Psal. 107. hee rayses the dead; he makes the blind
to see;Psal. 103. and the lame to vvalke; he causes the Eagle to renue
his youth; shall we then close his hands, and thinke it im|possible
for him to make the sinner, conceiued and borne
in sinne, to cast the olde slough of nature, and become a
new creature?
And this haue I marked to keepe vs from that presump|tuous
iudging as to conclude any mans reprobation,Iudge not rash|ly of any mans reprobation. be|cause
of his present rebellion, thou knowest not vvhat is in
the counsell of God, though in regard of his conuersation
for the present hee be a stranger from the life of God. And
againe for our selues, that vve may magnifie the mercie of
the Lord our God, vvho hath done that vnto vs by grace,
vvhich nature could neuer haue done, that is, hath made our
rebellious harts subiect vnto his holy law, and vve are sure
hee vvill also performe that good worke which hee hath
begunne in vs.
The word which the Apostle vseth here to expresse
mans naturall rebellion ,The rebellion of the wicked against God, exempts them not from his dominion. noteth such a re|bellion
of mans corrupt nature, as is not subiect according
to order: we are not to thinke that any rebell vvere he ne|uer
so stubborne, can exempt himselfe from subiection; doe
vvhat he can he bides vnder the Lords dominion; but a na|turall
man (saith the Apostle) giueth not orderly subiecti|on
vnto God. Ieroboam shooke off the yoke of his lawfull
Lord, and Rehoboam vvas not able to controll him. But
let man repine as he vvill, can hee cast off the yoke of the
Lord? No, no if man refuse to declare his subiection by an
humble submission of his spirit to the Lords obedience, the
Lord for all that shall not lose his superioritie, but shall de|clare
his power vpon man by controlling him; he shal bruise



coutrary to Gods most holy will,Isal. 45. 9. Woe be to him that stri|ueth
with his maker. If the will of God be not done by vs,
assuredly it shall bee done vpon vs,Miserable is that man who maintaines a contrary to Gods. de his qui faciunt quae
non vult, facit ipse quae vult, the Lord (saith Augustine) in a
meruailous manner doth his will on them, who doe that
which hee will not; and therefore woe shall bee vnto all
which are opposit to God his most holy will.Aug. de cor.  gra. ca. 14 Quid tam pae|nale
quam semper velle, quod nunquam erit,  semper nolle
quod nunquam non erit? what greater punishment can there
be then this, euermore to desire that vvhich neuer shall be,
 alway to dislike that which foreuer shal be: a wicked man
shall neuer obtaine that vvhich hee desires, but shall suffer
for euer that vvhich he dislikes. For remedy of this rebelli|on
our Sauiour hath taught vs daily to pray, thy will be done
in earth as it is in heauen: so we pray, and the Lord giue vs
grace that vve may practise it, that in euery action of our
life, denying our selues, vve make looke to our heauenly
Father, enquire for his will and follow it, saying vvith our
blessed Sauiour,Mat. 26. 39. not my will O Lord, but thine be done.


Verse 8.
So then they that are after the flesh, cannot
please God.
_HEre the Apostle concludes the miserable estate
of them who walke after the flesh:He concludes the miserable estate of them who walke af|ter the flesh. affirming
that doe what they vvill they cannot please
God. To be in the flesh, sometime is taken in
a good part, for it is all one with this (to liue in the body,)
but here it is taken in an euill part: for to bee in the flesh,
and to be in Christ, are opposit one to another, so that to
be in the flesh, is to be in the state of nature vnregenerate,
a stranger from the grace of Christ: and the phrase is very
significant, for it imports an vniuersall thraldome of mans
nature vnto the lusts of the flesh. That speach of the Apo|stle
to Simon Magus,Acts. 8. 23. I see that thou art altogether in the

gall of bitternesse, signifies much more than if he had said, the
gall of bitternesse was in him: and the spirit of God, when
he sayes that man is in his sinne,What it is to be in the flesh. or in the flesh, doth there|by
expresse a farre greater corruption of his wretched na|ture,
then if he did say that sinne and fleshly corruption is
in him.
Syricius Bishop of Rome expounds this place of married
persons,Syricius ex|pounds this of the state of marriage wrongfully. affirming that they are in the flesh, and so cannot
please God, flatly against the Apostles owne commentarie,
for hee wrote this Epistle to the godly Romanes, among
whom vvere many married persons, such as Aquila and
Priscilla, whom afterward he commends for godlinesse, and
of whom hee sayes, verse 9. yee are not in the flesh, because
the spirit of God dwels in you: so doth the Apostle expound
it himselfe, and therefore the Pope is but a peruerse interpre|ter
of the Apostles minde, and his fauourers are but sedu|cers,
who vvill haue vs to seeke out of the boxe of his breast
the true sence and meaning of all scripture.
Alwayes leauing them,The best acti|ons of wicked men please not God. let vs marke againe here the mi|serable
estate of such as are strangers from Christ. What
an vnhappy condition is this, that a man should liue in that
state of life, wherein doe what hee vvill hee cannot please
God?Gen. 4. 5. Let Cain sacrifice with Abel, the Lord shall not ac|cept
it;Gen. 27. 38. let Esau his teares seeking a blessing from his father,
be shed as aboundantly as Iacobs were,Heb. 12. 17. when hee sought a
blessing from the Angell,Gen. 32. 26. yet shall he not preuaile, he shall
not be blessed;Hos. 12. 4. let the Pharise pray in the Temple with the
Publicane,Luk. 18. 11. he shall not goe home iustified; and for worldly
glory let him be neuer so high among men,Luk. 16. hee is but ab|homination
vnto God, yea oftentimes worldlings to whom
waters are wrung out of a full cuppe, are counted blessed and
happie, yet is it but ignorance that makes men account much
of them that are despised in the eyes of God.Aug. in Ioan. cap. 7. tra. 28 Ideo malus
foelix putatur, quia quod sit foelicitas ignoratur, for this cause
is an euill man counted happie, because men know not what
happinesse is. But what euer men be thought of by others,

eyther for his shew of Godlinesse, or his shew of worldly
glory: vnder which two shadowes, the most part of men de|ceiue
the emanent; it is certaine that hee onely is blessed,
with whom the Lord is pleased. If the tree bee not good,
it cannot bring forth good fruite, and if the person bee not
Godly, his actions cannot bee acceptable vnto God. It is
in Christ Iesus onely that the Father is well pleased,
except wee be in Christ neyther can our persons nor acti|ons
please the Lord. The Lord translate vs yet further out
of this vnhappy estate of nature, the Lord roote vs and
ground vs in Christ Iesus, and stablish vs to abide in him
for euer.


Verse. 9.
Now ye are not in the flesh,The second part of his ap|plication con|tains consolati|on for the god|ly  that two|fold. but in the Spirit,
because the Spirit of God dwelleth in you: but if any
man hath not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his.
_THE Apostle hauing discoused of the mise|rable
estate of them who walke after the flesh,
 doth now turne him toward the godly,Consolation a|gainst the rema|nents of carnal corruption that are in vs. to com|fort
them, least they should bee discouraged
with that remanent canall coruption which they finde
within themselues, he shewes them, that what he hath spo+ken
of the vnhappy condition of carnall men, doth no way
concerne them, for they are not in the flesh, but in the Spi|rit.
In this verse the comfort is first set downe, and then a caution
annexed vnto it; the comfort is for the weake Chri+stian:
the Caution for the presumptuous professor: the A|postle
so terrifies the vvicked, that he reserues comfort for
the Godly, and he so comforts the Godly, that he confirmes
not the wicked in their sinnes. No sort of men are sooner
moued with the sharpe speaches of the word of God, then
are the children of God. He hath said before, they who are
in the flesh cannot please God, least this should terrifie the
Godly, he subioynes: But as for you, yee are not in the flesh,

for the Spirit of God dwelleth in you Againe no sort of me
are more ready to appropriate vnto themselues the com|forts
of God, then they to whom they belong not, and there|fore
for their sakes the Apostle subioynes the Caution: If
any man haue not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his.
Where first vvee may learne that the word of God
ought so to be handled and receiued,The word of God should so be handled, that it be ap|plyed. that it should be appli|ed
to the comfort of those who are the sonnes of consola|tion,
and to the conuiction of others: the Apostle doth now
yee see apply his former doctrine, letting them to whom he
writes see the comfort and admonitton which out of it ri|seth
vnto them: so ought wee alway to handle and heare the
word of God, as considering what is our part and interest
in it, for this word is written for vs, and doth so neerely
concerne vs, that as Moses saith, It is our life: it giueth sen|tence
eyther with or against euerie man that heares it, be|ing
to the one the sauour of life, to the other the sauour of
death. When Iohn the Baptist preached that word of iudge|ment,Math. 3. 10.
Now the axe is laid to the roote of the tree, euery tree
that bringeth not out good fruit, shall bee hewen downe and cast
into the fire, his hearers so receiued it, as a word which tou|ched
them neerely, and therefore both People, Publicanes,
and Souldiers came to him and asked,Luk. 3. 10. 12 14. What shall wee doe
then? So the Iewes in like manner asked Peter being pric|ked
in their hearts at the hearing of his Sermon,Act. 2. 37. What shall
wee doe then? the same was the voyce of the Iaylor to Paul
and Silas, and it should be the voyce of euery man as oft as
hee heares the word of God condemning his sinnes,Acts. 16. 30. What
shall I doe then, that I may be saued? As meate brought to
the table cannot nourish vnlesse it bee applyed to the
mouth, and from thence sent downe into the stomacke: so
the word of God cannot profit vs vnlesse we so heare it: vt
traijciatur in viscera quaedam animae nostrae,Bernard.  transeat in af|fectiones
nostras, that it be sent into the bowels of our soule,
and enter into our affections. If in this manner thou receiue
the word of God, out of doubt thou shalt be saued by it, but

in this part most part of men heares the word of God, as
they would heare an Indian storie, or some other such dis|couse
as did not concerne them: whereof it comes that
at this day, after long planting and watering, there is so
small a spirituall growth in grace and godlinesse among vs,
Now or the words,How the Apo|stle giues iudge+ment of others that are spiri|tuall. yee are not in the flesh, but in the spirit,
that is, as yee heard it before expounded, ye are not carnall
men, but spirituall. Here it is to be inquired seeing no man
knowes the things of a man but the spirit of a man, hovv
could the Apostle know that these Romanes were spiritu|all?1 Sam. 1.
Was not Eli deceiued in iudging of Anna? she sought
the Lord in the affliction of her spirit, and hee iudged that
she had beene a wicked woman: and may not godly men
be deceiued on the other extremitie, to thinke well of them
vvho are euill indeede? I answere, the Apostle doth here
write vnto a Church and a publique fellowship or com|pany
of men, seperate from the remanent of the world by
the heauenly vocation, called to be Saints, and therefore might
vndoubtedly write vnto them as vnto Saints, and spirituall
men, it being alway most sure that where the Lord gathers
by his word a Church, he hath alway in the middest thereof
a number that belong to the election of grace.
But to proceed further,A threefold iudgement, first of our selues by faith, secondly by fruits, third|ly by reuelatio~ and to see how farre vve may goe
in iudging of a priuate man, we must know that first there
is a iudgement of faith; secondly a iudgement of fruits;
thirdly a iudgement of extraordinarie reuelation. By the
first we can onely iudge our selues, and know our owne sal|uation,
according to that of the Apostle, proue your selues if
yee be in the faith,2 Cor. 13. 5 know yee not your owne selues, how that
Christ is in you, except yee be reprobates? By the iudgement of
fruits we may also proceed and iudge of others, according
to that rule of our blessed Sauiour, Yee shall know them by
their fruits,Math. 7. 16 no man gathers grapes of thornes or figges of thistles.
Euery good tree bringeth forth good fruit, and a corrupt tree
bringeth forth euil fruit. These first two are common to euery
Christian, the iudgement of fruits being helped by the

iudgement of Charitie. Concerning the third, Simon Peter
knew by extraordinarie reuelation,Acts. 8. that Simon Magus was a
reprobate, a child of perdition: by it the Apostle Paul knew
that the same vnfayned faith dwelt in Timothie,1 Tim. 1. 5 which dwelt
before in his grandmother Lois, and in his mother Eunice:
and by it Iohn the Euangelist knew that the Lady,2 Iohn. 1. 1 to whom
hee wrote vvas an elect Lady; but as for vs we are not to
presume the election or reprobation of any man by such
extraordinary reuelation.
Againe wee haue to mrke for our comfort,Comfort that the Lord cals them spirituall in whom re|mained carnall corruption. how the
Apostle calles them spirituall men, in whom notwithstand|ing
remained fleshly corruption. The iudgement of the
Lord and Sathan are contrary: there is in you (saith the de|ceiuer
to the weake Christian) fleshly corruption, therefore
yee are carnall: there is in you (saith the Lord through my
grace) a spirituall disposition, therefore yee are spirituall.
Sathan is so euill that his eye sees nothing in the Christian,
but that which is euill: the Lord is so good, that hee sees
no transgression in Israell,The Lord e|steemes of hi his children |cording t his new  in them,  after their corruptio~ hee iudges not his children by
the remanents of their old corruption, but by the beginnings
of his renuing grace in vs. One dram of the grace of Christ
in the soule of a Christian, makes him more pretious in the
eyes of God, than that any remanent corruption in him
can make him odious: therfore is it that the Lord giues vnto
them the names of his beloued, his seruants, his Sonnes, his
Saints,1 Ioh. 3. 9 who are so onely in part and by a beginning. Both
these are true,1 Ioh. 1. 8 hee that is borne of God sinneth not, and againe,
if we say we haue no sinne we deceiue our selues:Augustine. Illud ex primi|mitijs
noui hominis, istis ex reliquijs veteris, the one wee haue
of the first fruits of the new man, the other of the rema|nents
of the old man. Let vs therefore be so continually dis|pleased
with our inhabitant corruption, that we dispaire not,
nor be discouraged, neither let vs so complain of our sins that
wee become false witnesses against the grace of God which
is in vs. If there were nothing in vs but that wee haue by na|ture
our estate were most miserable, but seeing beside nature

thee is in vs a new workmanship of grace, fom the which
the Lord accounts vs new and spirituall men, wee haue
(thanks be to God) matter of comfort.
As Sathan is a lyer in denying the name of spirituall men
to men regenerate,Papists wil haue none called spi|rituall men but their Cleargie. so his supposts, aduersaries of the truth
of Christ, are lying deceiuers and vniust robbers, when they
restraine this name to such as are of their Cleargie,
which here the Apostle makes competent to euery man
in whom the spirit of Christ dwelleth,Fers. Spiritualem non facit
vestis, locus, officium, opus, sed Spiritus, it is neyther garment
(sayes one of their owne) nor place, nor office, nor exter|nall
work, that makes a man spirituall, but the holy Spirit,
dwelling in him.
Because the Spirit of God dwels in you.The spirit of God where hee dwels, workes; wher he works he workes not in vain, therfore they cannot but e spirituall in  he dwels. He subioynes here
the confirmation of his former comfort, hee hath said vnto
them: yee are not in the flesh, hee proues it, the Spirit of God
dwels in you, therefore yee are no in the flesh, not carnall,
but spirituall. The necessitie of the consequence depends
vpon this middest, that the spirit of God where hee dwels,
is not idle but workes; where he workes, he workes not in
vaine, but effectuates that which he intends, he transforms
them, in whom he dwels into the similitude of his owne I|mage,
hee is compared to fire that giues light euen to them
who are farre of, and heate to them who are neere hand,
but transchangeth those things into the nature of fire, which
are cast into it, with so meruailous a vertue, that yron which
is cold by nature being put into the fire becomes hot and
burning: so doth that holy Spirit illuminate euery one who
comes into the world, but hee changeth all those in whom
hee dwelleth, hee transformeth them into his owne simi|litude,
and endueth them with an holy and heauenly dis|position,
then his argument is sure, the Spirit of God dwel|leth
in you, therefore yee are not carnall, but spirituall.
In the end of the last Chapter the Apostle said,Strange that two guests of so co~trary naturs, as sin and the holy spirit should dwell in one man. that
sinne dwelleth in the man regenerate, it is not I but sinne
that dwelleth in me, and here hee sayes that the spirit of God

dwelleth in the man regenerate: this is strange that two guests
of so contrary natures, should both at one time haue their
dwelling in man. I compare the soule of man regenerate to
the house of Abraham,Rom. 7. 17 wherein there was both a free wo|man
Sarah,The soule of man regenerate compared to the house of Abraham. and a bond woman Hagar, vvith their children,
Ismael the sonne of the bond woman borne after the flesh,
is older and stronger then Isaac, the sonne of the freewo|man
borne after the spirit, that is, according to the promise;
hee disdaines little Isaac as weaker, and persecutes him, yet
the comfort of Isaac is, that though Ismaell dwell in the
house of Abraham for a while, hee shall not remaine: the
sonne of the bondwoman shall be cast out, and shall not
inherit the promise with the sonne of the free woman: such
a house is the soule of a Christian, there dwelleth in it at one
time both old nature and new grace, with their children, the
old man at the first being older and stronger than the new
man, doth persecute him, and seekes by all meanes to op|presse
him, but at the last hee shall be cast out.
This metaphor of dwelling,Meruailous that the inhabi|ter is larger tha~ the habitation. doth also yeelde vnto vs ex|ceeding
great comfort: in all other habitations the lodging
is larger than the inhabiter, but this is maruailous that the
lodging here is so little and the inhabiter so great: that infi|nite
maiestie, vvhom the heauen of heauens cannot contain,
vvho hath the heauen for his throne, and the earth for his
footestoole, hath chosen for his dwelling and place of rest,
the soule of him that is poore, contrite, and trembles at his
word A wonderfull mercy, that the highest maiestie should
so farre dimt the selfe, as that passing by all his other crea|tures,
hee should make choyse of man to be his pleasant
sanctuary.
From this it is euident that this dwelling doth designe
some speciall presence of God with his own children,The speciall glory of a Christian is that God dwels in him. which
he shewes not vnto others, it is true hee is present in euerie
place, bounded within no place; he containes all things, vn|contayned
of any; where hee dwelleth not as a Father, there
hee sits as a Iudge, and is a terrour: which manner of way

the damned are continually vexed with his presence, but in
the Christian hee dwels as a maister in his owne familie,
as a Father with his children, quickning, ruling and pre|seruing
them,Worldlings may exceede him in woridly gifts, but can not match him in this. Worldlings may
match the Christian in externall gifts, but cannot compare
with him in this internall glory, though without hee be but
an earthen vessell, yet hath hee within an heauenly treasure,
for hee is the habitation of God, in whom the Lord dwels
by his spirit. It was Beniamin his glory, that the Lord should
dwell betweene his shoulders;Deut. 33. 12. and the glory of Ierusalem,
that there the Lord dwelt between the Cherubins; but most
of all the glory of a Christian, that the Lord dwelleth be|tweene
the secrets of his soule: let worldling reioyce in their
outward priuiledges, and in their presumptuous minds leap
like the mightie mountaines, esteeming themselues high as
mount Basan, yet this is the glory of a Christian, that God
delights to dwell in him.
Let vs therfore make much of them who feare the Lord,They should be honoured in whom Christ dwels.
though in regard of their outward estate, they were neuer
so base, we should not be ashamd to doe them honour for
his sake who dwelleth in them.Dan. 6. Daris preferred Daniell be|cause
the spirit was excellent in him; and Pharaoh honoured
Ioseph because the Spirit of God was in him,Gen. 41. 42 yea the An|gels
are content to be Seruants and Ministers to them who
feare the Lord, they honoured Shepheards for Christs sake
with their presence, which they did not vnto King Herod
for all his glory, and shall not wee delight in Gods excellent
ones vpon earth?Psal. 15. surely hee shall dwell in the Tabernacle of
God, in whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but hee honou|reth
them who feare the Lord. Hereby wee know that wee are
translated from death to life, because wee loue the brethrn.
Not onely doth this Metaphor of dwelling import a fami|liar
presence,The Metaphor of dwelling im|ports a conti|nuance of gods presence with his children. but also a continuance thereof, for he soiourns
not in vs as a stranger that lodges for some dayes, or Mo|neths
in a place, but hath setled his residence, to dwell in
vs for euer, howeuer by temporall desertions he humble vs,

yet shall he neuer depart from that soule, which once hee
hath sanctified to be his owne habitation,Three argume~ts to proue that the regenerate are sure of per|seuerance in Grace. and this comfort
is confirmed to vs by most sure arguments. The first is ta|ken
from the nature of God, Hee is faithfull (saith the A|postle)
by whom wee are called to the fellowship of his Sonne
Iesus Christ our Lord, hee will confirme vs to the end, that we
may bee blamelesse in the day of our Lord Iesus.Fro~ the nature of God who begets vs. And againe,
(saith hee) I am perswaded that hee who hath begunne this
good work in you will performe it, vntill the day of Christ. That
word which the Lord spake to Iacob, stands sure to all his
posteritie,Phil. 1. 5. 6. I will not forsake thee till I haue performed that
which I promised thee. The couenant of God is perfect and
euerlasting, and therefore with Dauid will wee giue this
glory vnto God, that he will performe his promise toward
vs,Fro~ the nature of that life communicated to vs. and bring forward his owne worke in vs to perfection.
The second argument is taken from the nature of that life
which Christ communicateth to his members, it is no more
subiect vnto death, We know that Christ being raised from the
dead,Rom. 6. 9. dyes no more, this life I say is communicated to vs, for
it is not we that liues, but Christ that liues in vs. And the
third is taken from the nature of that seede whereof we are 
begotten,Fro~ the nature of that seede whereof w are begotten. for as the seede is, so is the life, that comes by it,
now the seed (saith the Apostle) is immortall, wee are borne
of new not of mortall seed, but immortall, our life therefore is
immortall.1 Pet. 1. 23.
But against this is obiected,How the spirit of God is said to depart from Saul. that the Spirit of the Lord
departed from Saul, and that which Dauid prayes, take not
thine holy Spirit from me. To this I answere, that the spirit is
taken sometime for the common and externall gifts of the
spirit,1 Sam. 16. 14. such as are bestowed as well vpon the wicked as vpon
the godly,Psal. 51. 11. as the gift of Prophecie, gouernement, work|ing
miracles, and such like, and these once giuen may bee
taken againe: in this sense it is said, that God tooke the spi+rit
that was vpon Moses and gaue it vnto the seauentie El|ders,
and so also it is said that the spirit of God departed
from Saul, there it is put for the gift of gouernement: some|time

againe it is taken for the speciall and internall gift of
sanctification: this spirit once giuen is neuer taken away,
for this gift and calling of God is without repentance, that
is, they neuer fall vnder reuocation.
To the second,How Dauid prayeth that God would not take from him his holy Spirit. when Dauid saith, take not thine holy spi|rit
from me, and restore me againe to the ioy of thy saluation,
this impos not a full departure of Gods spirit from him,
otherwise he could not haue prayed; but that his sinne had
diminished the sense and feeling of that operation of the
spirit in him, which he was wont to feele before: and so is it
with others of Gods Children, that eyther the neglect of
the spirituall worship, or the commission of some new sins
doth so impayre the sense of mercy in them, that to their
iudgement the spirit of God hath iustly forsaken them. This
I confesse is a very heauie estate, and more bitter to them
that haue felt before the sweetenesse of Gods mercy than
death it selfe, yet euen in this same estate wherein no com|fort
is felt,In spirituall de+sertio~s we must distinguish be|tweene that which is, and which we feel. let patience sustaine men, let them learne to put
a difference betweene that which they feele, and that which
is, and remember that this is a false conclusion, to say, the
spirit of grace is not in thee, because thou canst not feele
him, for as there is a substance in the Oake or Elme, euen
when it hath cast the leaues,Esa. 6. 13. so is there Grace in the heart
many times when it doth not appeare, and these desertions
which endure for a while, are but meanes to effectuate a
neerer communion,Chri. in Mat. hom. 14. , c. hee tur|neth
away from thee (saith Chrysostome) for a short while,
that he may haue thee for euer with himselfe.
Now it remaines that wee consider of these benefits wee
haue by the dwelling of Christs Spirit in vs,What great be|nefits comes to the soule by the dwelling of Christs spirit in vs. and of the du|ties
which we owe againe vnto him. The benefites are ma|ny
and great, Si enim tanta sit vis animae in massa terrae susti|nenda,
mouend, impellenda, quanta erit vis Dei in anima,
quae natura agilis est mouenda? for if the soule be of such force
to giue life and motion to this body which is but a masse of
earth, what shall the spirit of God doe vnto our soule which

naturally is agill? the wonderfull benefits that the bo|dy
receiues by the dwelling of the soule in it, may leade
vs some way to consider of those great benefits which are
brought vnto the soule, by the dwelling of the spirit of
God in vs.
But of many we will shortly touch these two onely:He repaires the whole lodging of soule and body. the 
first is, that where this holy spirit comes to dwel, he repaires
the lodging; man by nature being like vnto a ruinous pal|lace,
is restored by the grace of Christ. This reparation of
man is sometimes called a new creation, sometimes rege|neration,
and it extends both to soule and body: as to the
soule, the Lord strikes vp nevv lights in the mido, restores
life to the heart, communicates holinesse to the affections,
so that where before the soule was a habitation for vncleane
spirits,Isai. 13. 21. lying vnder the curse of Babel, the Iim and Zijm
dwelling in it,What vgly guests dwelt in vs before hee came to pos|sesse vs. the Ostriches lodging, the Satires dauncing,
the Dragons crying within her pallaces, that is, defiled with
all sorts of vile and vncleane affections, the Lord Iesus hath
sanctified it, to be a holy habitation vnto himselfe. And as
to the reparation of our bodies, it consists partly in making
all the members thereof weapons of righteousnesse in this
life, and partly in deliuerance of them from mortalitie and
corruptibilitie, which shall be done in the day of resurrecti|on;
which for the same cause is called by our Sauiour the
day of regeneration, for then shall hee change our mortall
bodies, and make them like vnto his owne glorious body:
thus by his dwelling in vs haue we the reparation both of
our soules and bodies.He prouides all necessaries where hee dwels.
The other benefit we enioy by his dwelling in vs, is the
benefit of Prouision; where hee comes to dwell, hee is not
burdenable after the manner of earthly Kings, but his re|ward
is vvith him: for he hath not chosen vs to be his habi|tation
for any neede hee hath of vs,Iren. cont. val lib. 4. cap. 28. sed vt haberet in quem
collocaret sua beneficia, but that he might haue some on whom
to bestow his benefits, non indiget nostro ministerio vt domini
seruorum, sed sequimur ipsum vt homines lumen squuntur,

nihil ipsi praestantes, sed beneficium a lumine accpientes, he hath
no need of our seruice, as other Lords haue neede of their
seruants, but we follow him as men follow the light, giuing
nothing to it, but receiuing a benefit from it.
It falles commonly out that where men of meane estate
receiue to lodge those that are more honourable,Not like kings of the earth who oft times are burdenable to them with whom they lodge. they dis|ease
themselues to ease their guests, but if thou receiue this
rich spirit of the Lord to lodge, non angustaberis sed dilata|beris,
thou shalt not be straited but shalt be enlarged, sayth.
Augustine: hee knew the comfort hee reaped by this pre|sence
of God,Ang. de verb Apost. ser. 15 and therefore could speake the better thereof|vnto
others; quando hic non eras angustias patiebar, nunc im|plesti
cellam meam,  non meam exclusisti, sed angustiam
meam, when thou Lord dwelst not in me, much anguish of
minde oppressed mee, now thou hast filled the cellers of my
hart, thou hast not excluded mee but excluded that anguish
which troubled mee. In a word, the benefits wee receiue
by him, doe not onely concerne this life, but are stretched
out also to eternall life. Dauid comprises all in a short
summe, the Lord is a light and defence, hee will giue grace
and glory,Psal. 84. 11. and no good thing shall be withholden from them that
loe him.
The greater benefits we haue by the dwelling of Christ
in vs,What duties of thankfulnes we owe to our Lord who  in vs. the more are we obliged in our dutie to him. O how
should that house be kept in order, wherein the King of
glory is resident? what daily circumspection ought to bee
vsed that nothing be done to offend him? not without cause
are these watch-words giuen vs,Eph. 4. 30. grieue not the spirit, quench
not the spirit.1 Thes. 5. 19 There are none in a familie, but they discerne
 the voyce of the master thereof,That we dis|cerne the voyce of our Master and obay it. and followes it, they goe
out and in at his commandement: if he say vnto one Goe,
he goeth, if to another Come, he commeth: if the Lord be
our master, let vs heare euery morning his voyce, and in|quire
what his will is we should doe,Math. 8. 9. with a promise to re|igne
the gouernment of our hearts vnto him; for it is cer|taine
he will not dwell where he rules not: as he will admit

no vncleane thing within his holy habitation, so will he not
dwell with the vncircumcied in hart; the Lord will not take
a wicked man by the hand, no haue fellowship vvith the
throne of iniquitie.Macar. hom. 12 If holy men when they see brothels ab|horre
them, and goes by them, how much more shall wee
thinke that the most holy Lord will despise and passe by
their soules which are polluted, rather like to the filthie
stewes of Sodome, than the holy sanctuary of Sion, for the
Lord to dwell in?
And if hereby the weake conscience be cast downe,That euery day we sweepe and water his cha~|ber with the besome and teares of re|pentance. rea|soning
within the selfe, alas how can my beloued dwel with
me, who am so polluted and defiled; remember that the
more thou art displeased vvith thy selfe, the more thy Lord
is pleased with thee: for thy daily pollutions hee hath ap|pointed
daily washings, in that fountaine which he hath ope|ned
to the house of Dauid for sin and for vncleannesse.Zach. 13. 1. Sweepe
out thy sinnes euery day by the besome of holy anger and
reuenge, and vvater the house of thy hart with the teares of
contrition,Cyprian. quoniam sine aliquo vulnere esse non possumus, me|delis
spiritualibus vulnera nostra curemu, seeing wee cannot
be without some wounds of Conscience, let vs daily goe to
the next remedie, that vvith spirituall medicines wee may
cure them, chastising our selues euery morning, and exami|ning
our selues vpon our bed in the euening.
And againe,That in his Temple there want not mor|ning and eue|ning sacrifice. seeing wee are made the Temples of the
holy Ghost, there should be within vs continuall sacrifices
offered vnto God of prayer and praysing, together with
a daily slaughter of our beastly affections. Among the
Israelites Princes vvere knowen by the multitude of their
sacrifices vvhich they offered vnto God, but now they who
sacrifice most of their vncleae affctions, are most appro|ued
as excellent Israelites of the Lord, who can best dis|cerne
an Israelite. From the time the Lord departed from
Ierusalems Temple, the daily sacrifice and oblation ceased,
and where there is not in man,Macar. hom. 28 neither prayer nor praysing
of God, nor mortification of his beastly lusts, but the

spirituall Chaldeans hath come in, and taken away this daily
sacrifice, it is an euident argument that the Lord dwelleth
not there.
Last of all,Bastard profes|sors lodges this holy spirit in a wrong roome. let vs marke here that the Apostle sayth
this dwelling of the spirit is in vs, it is not without vs, the
kingdome of God is within vs, if hee dwell hee will dwell
in our hearts by faith, for he himselfe requires the heart. As
for them who lodge him in their mouths by professing him,Eph. 3. 17.
in their eyes by aduancing them to heauen, in their hands
by doing some workes of mercy, and not in their hearts, these
are carnall men not spirituall, pretend what they will, hipo|crits
who drawes neere the Lord with their lips, but their
harts are farre from him, accursed deceiuers vvho hauing
a male in their flock, vowes and sacrifices a corrupt thing
vnto the Lord: vvhich I doe not speake as if I did con|demne
the outward seruice done in the body to the Lord,
prouided it flowe from the hart. Ye are bought with a price,
therefore glorifie God in your body,1 Cor. 6. 20. and in your spirit, for they
are Gods.
And this also is to be marked for the amendment of two
sorts of men among vs,Humble ge|stures of the bodie in pub|like exercises of diuine wor|ship prophanly scorned by some. who are in two extremities: vve haue
some who are become scorners of the grace of God in o|thers,
neither can they be humbled themselues in the publike
assemblies of the Saints, nor be content to see others ex|presse
their inward motion by outward humiliation, they
sit downe in the throne of God, and condemnes others for
hipocrisie, not remembring that sinne is to be reserued to
the iudgement of God, vvho onely knowes the hart, and
that those same things vvhich they mislike in their brethren,
the Lord hath allowed in others. The Apostles precept
commaunds vs to lift vp to the Lord pure hands in prayer.
Dauids practise teaches vs to aduance our eyes to the Lord:
shall not thy brother lift vp his hands and his eyes to the
Lord? shall he not sigh to God, nor mourne in his prayers
like a Doue, as Ezekiah did, but thou incontinent wilt taxe
him of hipocrisie? Wee read that Iacob sought a blessing

from the Lord with tearrs, and obtained it, Esau sought a
blessing from his father with teares and crying, and obtained
it not: were the teares of Iacob the worse, because Esau
also shed teares? Iudge not least thou bee iudged, the iudge|ment
of Hypocrisie (as I haue sayd) belongs to the Lord.Superstitiously abused by o|thers.
On the other extremitie are they who thinke they haue
done enough when they haue discharged some outward
exercises of religion, though they take no paine to sancti|fie
the heart to works of diuine seruice. On the Saboth they
come to the house of God, they bow their heads like a
bulrush with the rest, they pray and praise the Lord in the
externall formes with the rest of the congregation, but con|siders
not whether or no they come into the temple by the
motion of the Spirit as Simeon did, if they pray and praise
the Lord with prepared hearts as Dauid did; neyther tye
they when they goe out, whether or no they haue met with
the Lord, found mercy, and returneth home to their houses
iustified as the Publican did. It is true wee are to glorifie
God with ou bodyes because they are his, but most of all
with our spirits, because God is a spirit, he loueth truth in the
inward affections, and delights to bee worshipped in spirit
and truth.
Wee are called by the Apostle,Seeing we are the temples of God we should be more beau|tifull within, then without. the Temples of God,
Salomons Temple the further it was, the finer: in the out|ward
Court stood an Alter of brasse, whereupon beastes
were sacrificed: in the inward Court was an Altar of gold,
whereupon incense was sacrificed; but the Sanctuarie or
most holy place did farre exceed them both, in it was no|thing
but fine gold, in it the Lord gaue out his oracles from
betweene the Cherubins, in it stood the Arke of the co|uenant,
wherein was the Tables of the Law. And so indeed
the Christian ought to bee holy without, his lookes, his
words, his wayes should all declare that God dwelleth in
his heart, hee should haue ingrauen, as it were, on his fore|head,
Holinesse to the Lord,Exod. 28. 36 as Aaron had, but much more
should hee bee holy within: betweene the secrets of his

Soule should the Lord haue his residence, and in his heart
the testimonie of God, which is the word of God should
dwell plentifully.
But as for the wicked,But the wicked are compared sometime to o|pen, and some|time to panted Sepulchers. they are eyther compared to open
sepulchers, their mouth being like that gate of the Tem|ple
called Shallecheth, out of which was carryed all the filth
of the temple, the abhomination of their heart being made
manifest by their mouth, or then in their best estate they
are compared to painted Sepulchers,Mat. 23. 27. beautifull without but
within full of rottennesse,Psal. 32. 2. hauing a shew of godlinesse, wan|ting
the power thereof, But the man is blessed in whose heart
there is no guile,Ioh. 1. 47. hee is a Nathamell indeede, a true Israelie
who is one within,Rom. 2. 29. whose praise is not of men but of God.
But if any man haue not the Spirit of Christ,The secondary great question in religion is this, who are Christians. the same is
not his. The Comfort being ended, now followes the Cau+tion.
Euery man (saith Salomon) boasts of his owne good|nesse,
but the Lord (saith the Apostle) knoweth who are
his. As the first great question in Religion is concerning
the Sauiour of the world,Mat. 11. 3. Art thou hee who is to come, or
shall wee looke for another? so the second is concerning them
who are to bee saued: if the iudgement be referred to man,
now euery man among vs accounts himselfe a Christian: If
iudgement be sought from the Lord, here hee giues one an|swere
for all: If any man haue not the Spirit of Christ the
same is not his.
Albeit among men there be an allowable difference of
estates,A soueraigne rule whereby Christians of all estates must be tryed. yet concerning Christianitie, both King and Sub|iect,
rich and poore, learned and vnlearned comes all to be
tryed by one rule. It is a common thing among men to e|steeme
somewhat more of themselues for the priuiledge
of their estate, wherein they excell others, but the Apostle
destroyes the pride of all their glory with one word, If any
man, so hee speakes without exception, bee what thou wilt
beside; were thou neuer so noble, neuer so rich, neuer so
learned, if thou hast not the Spirit of Christ thou art none
of his, all the priuiledges of men without Iesus are nothing,

that which is high among men is abhomination to God.
Man in his best estate is altogether vanitie, the glory of
flesh is but as the floure of the field: the Spirit of the Lord
iudgeth of all the glory of man as of the pompe of Agrip|pa,Acts. 25. 23.
he came downe saith S. Luke, ,
it is all but phantasie and vanishing shewes: nothing com|mends
vs to God, but this one, to haue the spirit of Christ
dwelling in vs.
Againe wee see here that Christ and his Spirit cannot
bee sundred,Christ and his Spirit are not sundred. except men will crucifie againe the Sonne of
God. Let no man therefore say that he hath Christ, vnlesse
hee haue the Spirit of Christ. As hee is not a man who
hath not a Soule, so hee is not a Christian, who hath not
the spirit of Christ: no man counteth that a member of his
body, which is not quickned by his Spirit; no more is hee
a member of Christ,1 Iohn. 4. 13 who hath not the spirit of Christ: here|by
wee know that wee dwell in him, and hee in vs, because he
hath giuen vs of his Spirit. And as Christ and his spirit are
not sundred, so cannot the spirit be sundred from the fruits
of the Spirit:Gal. 5. 22. 23 now the fruites of the Spirit, are Loue, Ioy,
Peace, Long Suffering, Gentlenesse, Goodnesse, Faith, Meek|nesse,
Temperance. If the Spirit of Christ dwell in vs, and
if wee liue in the Spirit,24 let vs walke in the Spirit: this is the
conuiction of carnall professors, that while they say the spi|rit
of Christ is in them, they declare none of his fruites in
their conuersation, but to insist somwhat more in this same
purpose.
Wee are to know,Operations of the spirit are two-fold. that the effects and operations of the
Spirit are twofold: the one is a generall and common ope|ration
which he hath in the wicked, for hee illuminates euery
one who commeth into the world.Externall com|mon to al men. Neyther can any man say,
that Iesus is the Lord but by the Spirit: euery spark of light,
and portion of truth bee it in whom it will,Iohn. 1. flowes (out of
doubt) from this holy Spirit.1 Cor. 12. 3. That Caiaphas and Saul can
Prophecie, that Iudas can Preach, all is from him: but of
his manner of operation is not here meant, for this way he

 vvorketh in the wicked,Internall and proper to the godly. not for any good to them, but for
the aduancement of his owne worke. The other kinde of
the holy Ghosts operation is speciall, and proper to the
godly, by the vvhich hee doth not onely illuminate their
mindes, but proceeds also to their harts, and workes this
threefold effect in it, Sanctification, Intercession, and Con|solation.
First he is vnto them a spirit of Sanctification,Three effects wrought by the speciall o|peration of the spirit in the godly. renuing
their harts by his effectuall grace, hee first rebukes them of
sinne, he wakens their conscience with some sight of their
iniquities, and sense of that wrath which sinne hath deser|ued:
whereof arises heauinesse in their harts, sadnesse in their
 countenance,Sanctification. lamentation in their speech, and such an al|teration
in their whole behauiour, that their former plea|sures
become painefull vnto them, and others who knevv
them before wonders to see such a change in them. From
this he proceeds and leads them to a sight of Gods mercie
in Christ, hee inflames their harts with a hunger  thirst
for that mercie, and workes in their hearts such a loue of
righteousnesse, and hatred of sinne, that now they become
more afraid of the occasions of sinne, then they were before
of sinne it selfe: this resistance made to the entations, this
care to eschew the occasions of sinne, is an vndoubted token
of the spirit of Christ dwelling in thee.
This is the first operation of the spirit, but it is not all,
he proceeds yet further by degrees: for the kingdom of God
is as if a man should cast seede into the earth, which growes
vp and vve cannot tell how, first it sends out the blade, se|condly
the eares, and then the cornes; so proceeds the
 kingdome of God in ma by degrees.Intercession. In the second place
the holy spirit becomes to the godly a spirit of Intercession,
so long as vve are bound with the cords of our transgressi|ons
we cannot pray, but from the time hee once loose vs
from our sinnes, hee openeth our mouth vnto God, hee
teacheth vs to pray not onely with sighes and sobbes that
cannot be expressed, but also puts such words in our mouths

as we our selues who spake them are not able to repeat
againe.Consolation.
And thirdly hee becomes vnto them the spirit of Con|solation,
if he be vnto thee a sanctifier, and an intercessor,
hee shall not faile at the last to be thy comforter: If at the
first after that thou hast sent vp supplications, thou find not
his consolation descending vpon thee, be not discouraged,
but be the more humbled; for alas our sinnes shortens his
arme, and the hardnesse of our harts holds out his comforts:
we must fall downe vvith Mari,Math. 26. and lye still washing the
feet of Christ with our teares, before he takes vs in his armes
to kisse vs with the kisses of his mouth and if wee finde
these effects of his presence going before, humiliation of
our hart, and the grace of prayer, wee may be out of all
doubt that his consolations shall follow after.
Of this it is yet further euident against all those who
deny that the Christian may bee sure of his saluation,That a Chri|stian who hath Gods spirit knowes that he hath him.
that hee vvho hath the spirit of Iesus knowes that hee hath
him, as he who hath life feeles sensiblie that he hath it, and
is able truely to say I liue: o he who hath the spirit of Iesus
knowes by feeling that hee hath him, and is able to say in
truth,Gal. 2. 20. Christ liueth in mee Know yee not: (saith the Apostle)
that Christ Iesus is in you,2 Cor. 13. 5. except yee be reprobates?
This shall bee further confirmed by considering those
three names which are giuen to the holy spirit,And therefore may be sure of saluation, is proued by three names giuen to the holy spirit. from his ope|ration
in vs: hee is the Seale, the Earnest the witnesse of
God: the vse of a Seale is to confirme and make sure. One
of these two therefore must the Papists say, that yther none
are sealed by the holy Spirit, or else they must confesse, that
they who are sealed are sure.1 He is Gods Seale. If they say that none are sea|led
by this Spirit, they speake against the manifest truth of
God, grieue not the holy spirit, by whom yee are sealed against
the day of redemption.Eph. 4. 30. And if they deny that they who are
seled by him are sure of that saluation which God hath
promised,  he hath sealed, they blaspheme, calling him such
a seale as makes not them sure who are sealed by him: hee

who hath the seale of a Prince rests assured of that which
by the seale is confirmed to him, ad shall not the seale of
the  God, the Spirit of promise, confirme that man
in the assurance of saluation, who hath receiued him? Nei|ther
 is he onely the seale of God,Gods earnest. but hee is also the earnest
of our inheritance and the witnesse of God, he that beleeueth in
the sonne hath a witnesse in himselfe:1 Ioh. 5. 10. what vvill the aduersarie
of Christian comfort say to this? if yee say that there are
none to whom Gods spirit witnesses mercie, from God ye
speake against the Apostle, the spirit beares witnesse to our
spirit,Rom. 8. 16. that we are the sonnes of God: or if yee say that those
vvho haue this testimonie of the spirit are not sure of mercy,
 ye blaspheme as of before,Gods witnesse.  speakes yet manifestly against
the Apostle, who sayes that the witnessing of this spirit
vnto our spirit, makes vs to cry Abba father. But wee will
speake more of this hereafter.
But now to conclude this verse:Sinne causes the Lord deny his owne crea|ture. seeing hee who hath
not the spirit of Christ, is none of his, whose then shall
hee be? certainely he is the vassall of Sathan, the Lord shall
deny him, the Lord shall disclaime him, as not belonging to
him,Luk. 13. 27. depart from mee yee workers of iniquitie, I know not
whence you are. O the bitter fruit of sinne! which causes the
Lord to deny that creature to be his, which once he made
to his owne image. Let vs therefore hate our sinne vnto
death, let vs in time make hast to depart from iniquitie,
which shall at the last draw on that sentence vpon the wic|ked,
depart from me. The Lord deliuer vs from it through
Iesus Christ.



Verse. 10.
And if Christ be in you, the body is dead,
because of sinne: but the Spirit is life for righteous|nesse
sake.
_HItherto hath the Apostle comforted the Chri|stian 
against the remanents of sinne:Consolation a|gainst the fruite of sin, specially against death, whereunto we are subiect. now hee
comforts him against the fruites and effects of
sinne which he findeth in himselfe. The godly
might haue obiected, ye haue said before the fuite of car|nall
wisedome is death, are wee not subiect vnto death, and
so of the fruites and effects of sinne? what can wee iudge
but that wee are carnall? To this hee answeres, first by a
confession, it is true that the body is dead because of sinne,
but if Christ be in you, the spirit through his righteousnesse
is endued with life: yee are not therefore to conclude, that
yee are carnall because death through sinne is entred into
your bodies, as to confirme your selues in this, that life
through the righteousnesse of Christ is communicated
to your soule; and so the summe of his comfort will bee
this,The death whereunto we are subiect is neither totll nor perpetuall. the death whereunto you are subiect, is neyther totall
nor perpetuall: that it is not totall, he declares in this verse, for it strikes not vpon the whole man, but vpon the weakest
part of man, which is his body, as for his most excellent
part, which is his soule, it is pertaker of a life that is not sub|iect
vnto death. That it is not perpetuall he declares in the
next verse, our bodyes shall not bide for euer vnder the
bands of death, the spirit of Christ that now dwels in them
shall at the last raise them vp from death, and cloth them
with immortalitie and incorruptibiliie.
If Christ be in you.The Comforts of God are not common to all men indiffe|rently. Before the Apostle bring in his com|fort,
hee premits a contion, to teach vs, that the comforts
of God belong not indifferently vnto all men, hee who is a
stranger from Christ, hath nothing to doe with these com|forts.Mat. 10. 12. 13.
When our Sauiour commaunded his Disciples to

proclaime peace vnto euery house they came to, hee fore|told
them, it should abide onely with the sonnes of peace:
he fobad them in like manner to giue those things which
were holy vnto dogs,Mat. 7. 6. or to cast pearles before Swine. This
stands a perpetuall Law to all Preachers, that they presume
not to proclaime peace to the impenitent and vnbeleeuing,
but as Ieh spake to Iehorams horseman, What hast thou to
doe with peace:2. Kin. 9. 18. so are wee to tell the wicked, who walke
still on in their sinnes, that they haue nothing to doe with
that peace preached by the Gospell.
Secondly,Christ dwelling in vs is by his spirit: no carnal presence requi|red to make our vnion with him. if wee compare the former verse with this, we
shall see that the manner of Christs dwelling in his children
is by his Spirit. To make vp our vnion with Christ, it is
not needfull that his humane nature should bee drawne
down from heauen, or that his body should be euery where,
as the Vbiquitaries affime; or that in the Sacrament the
bread shold be transubstantiate into his body, as the Papists
imagine: his dwelling in vs is by his spirit, and our vnion
with him is spirituall; neyther yet by so saying, doe wee di|uide
his two natures, for they are inseperably vnited in one
personall vnion, which vnion doth not for all that import,
that his humane nature is extended ouer all, as his diuine na|ture
is,Act. 3. 21. The heauens must containe him, till hee come againe,
Noli dubitare,Aug. epist. 57 ad Darn. ibi esse hominem. Christum, vnde venturus est:
Put it out of doubt, that the man Christ Iesus is in that
place, from which hee shall come: Keepe faithfully that
Christian confession, He is risen from the death, ascended vn|to
Heauen, and sits at the right hand of his Father, and that
hee shall come from no other place, but from Heauen to iudge
the quicke and the dead: and hee addeth that which the An|gell
said to his Disciples,Act. 1. 11. this Iesus who is taken vp from you
into heauen, shall so come as ye haue seene him goe into heauen,
that is (saith Augustine) in eadem carnis forma, at substan|tia,
cui profecto immortalitatem dedit, naturam non abstulit:
that is, in that same forme and substance of flesh, to the which
hee hath giuen immortalitie, but hath not taken away the

nature thereof, Secundum hanc non est ptandem, quod vbi
est diffusus, vbi per id quod Deus, in colo autem per d quod
hom, according to this nature wee are not to thinke
that he is in euery place, it is true that as God, he is euery
where, but as man he is in the heauens: and this for the con|dition.
Now to the comfort:The comfort of Ethnikes a|gainst death, not compara|ble to ours, and our courage in|ferior to theirs. wee haue by Iesus Christ a three|fold
comfort against death, whereof two onely here are
touched. The first that the death whereunto we are subiect
is not totall. The second, that the nature and qualitie of our
bodilie death is changed. The third that it is not perpetuall,
the body shall not for euer lie vnder death. The Ethnicks
had also their owne silly comforts, but nothing comparable
to ours. Nazianzen records that Cleopatra Queene of Ae|gypt,
demaunding of certaine learned men, what kinde of
death was without the bitter sense of paine, receiued this an|swere:
there is no death without dolour, but that death was
most gentle which was brought on by the Serpent Aspis,
and namely that kinde thereof which is called Aypnale, be|cause
they whose flesh is enuenomed with the poyson ther|of,
doe incontinently sleepe vnto death: for which cause also
shee made choyse of it. And Senea being by Nero to bee
executed to death, got it left to his owne pleasure, (as
great fauour shewed vnto him) to make choyse of any death
hee pleased, he chose to bleede to death in hote water: others
among them that offered themselues to most fearefull
deaths, such as Curtius, Regulus, and others had no comfort
to sustaine them, but a silly hope of immortall fame of their
affection to their country. It was (saith Augustine) the silly
comfort of the Gentiles against the want of buriall, Coelo
tegitur, qui non habet vrnam, and as comfortlesse is the com|fort
of many bastard Christians, which stands onely in a
fayre Sepulcher, prouided before hand for themselues, in an
honourable buriall commanded  expected of them before
death, and in abundance of worldly things which they leaue
to theirs behinde them, all which as saith the same Father,

viuorum sunt solatia non mortuorum, are comforts to them
that liue behinde, but no help to them who are dead. I note
this, that considering the magnanimitie of these Ethnicks
in suffering of death, notwithstanding the weake and small
comforts which they had to sustaine them, we may be asha|med
of our psillanimitie, who hauing from Christ most
excellent comforts against death, are afraide at the smallest
remembrance thereof.Tit. 1. 16. An euident argument that albeit
many professe him, yet few are pertakers of his power, life,
and grace, and that many hath him dwelling in their mouths
in whose harts he dwelleth not by his spirit.
The body is dead.Our bodies are not onely mor|tall but dead. Hee sayes not the body is subiect to
death, but by a more significant manner of speach, he sayth
the body is dead. There is a difference betweene a mortall
body and a dead body: Adams body before the fall was mor|tall,
that is, subiect to a possibilitie of dying, but now after
the fall, our bodies are so mortall, that they are subiect to a
necessitie of dying: yea, if wee will here with the Apostle
esteeme of death by the beginning thereof, our bodies are
dead already. The officers and sergeants of death, which
are dolours,The officers of death hath bou~d vs alredy infirmities and heauie diseases, hath seased al|ready
vpon our bodies, and marked them as lodgings, which
shortly must be the habitation of death, so that there is no
man, who is not presently dead in some part or other of his
body. Not onely is the sentence giuen out against vs, thou
art dust,Gen. 3. 19. and to dust thou shalt returne, but is begun to bee
executed: our carkasses are bound with cords by the officers
of death, and our life is but like that short time which is
graunted to a condemned man, betweene his doome and his
execution; all which the Apostle liuely expresses when he
sayes the body is dead.
 Whereof there arises vnto vs many profitable instructi|ons:Therefore should we liue in the body vnder feare.
and first, what great neede wee haue (as wee are com|maunded)
to passe the time of our dwelling here in feare, work|ing
out our owne saluation in feare and trembling: seeing our
sinnes haue cast vs into the hands of the first death,1 Pet. 1. 12. shall wePhil. 2. 12.

not cry without ceasing, that we may be deliuered from the
power of the second? Alas it is pittifull that man should so
farre forget himselfe, as to reioyce in the time of his mise|ry,
to passe ouer the dayes of his mortall life in vanitie and
wantonnesse, not considering how the first death is already
entred into his carkasse, nor foreseeing how hee may bee
deliuered from the second,The pittifull securitie of car|nall professors. but liues carelesse, like to the
Apostates of the old world, who in the middest of their
sinfull pleasures were sodainly washed away with the waters
of the wrath of God, and their spirits for disobedience sent
vnto the prison where now they are: and like those Phi|listims,
who banquetting in the platforme of the house of
Dagon their God, hauing minde of nothing but eating,
drinking, and sporting, not knowing that their enimie was
within, were sodainely otherthrowne, and their banquetting
house made their buriall place: so shall it be with all the
wicked, who liuing in a dead body cares for nothing but how
to please themselues in their sinne: the piller of their house
shall be pulled downe,Psal. 58. 9. destruction shall come vpon him like a
whirlewinde,Psal. 73. 19. and in a moment shall sodaine desolation ouertake
them.
And let this same meditation represse in vs that poyson 
of pride,Death entred into the body should represse our naturall pride. the first sinne that euer sprung forth of our na|ture,
next to infidelitie, and last in rooting out. Wilt thou
consider O man, that thou art but dead, and that thy body
be it neuer so strong or beautifull, is but a lodging of death?
and what cause shalt thou haue to waxe proud for any thing
that is in the flesh?Bernard. quid u superbis terra  cinis? si superbi|entibus
Angelis non pepercit deus, quanto minus tibi putredo
 vermis? what hast thou to doe to be proud O dust and
ashes? if God spared not the Angels when they waxed
proud, vvill he spare thee who art but a rotten creature? yea
Vermis crastino moriturus,Aug ser. 21. a worme that must dye to mor|row.
If so was done to an Angell (saith Bernard) what
shall become of me? ille intumuit in coelo ego in sterquilinio,
he vvas puft vp in heauen, and therefore was cast downe

from the place of his habitation, if I waxe proude lying in
a doug-hill, shall I not bee punished and cast downe into
hell? So oft therefore as corrup nature stirreth vp the heart
of man to pride, because of the flowers of beautie  strength
that grow out of it: let this humble thee; thy flowres O man,
cannot but wither, for the roote from which they spring is
dead already.
 And lastly, is the body dead? then learne temperance and
sobrietie,Should learne vs temperance and sobrietie. what auaileth it to pamper that carkasse of thine
with excessiue feeding which is possessed by death already?
if men tooke the tenth part of that care to present their
spirits holy and without blame vnto the Lord, which they
take to make their bodyes fat and beautifull in the eyes of
men, they might in short time make greater progresse in
godlinesse then they haue done: but herein is their folly,
Carnem pretiosis rebus impinguant,Bernard c. they make fat their
flesh with delicate things, which within few daies the woms
shall deuoure, Animam vero non adornant bonis operibiu,
but beautifies not the Soule with good works, which short|ly
is to bee presented vnto God. Let vs refraine from the
immoderate pampering of this flesh, Meates are ordained for
the belly,1 Cor. 6. 13. and the belly for meates, but God will destroy them
both.
We haue here moreouer discouered vnto vs,Sathans shame|lesse impuden|cie discouered. the shame|lesse
impudencie of Sathan, who daily tempting man to sin,
promiseth vnto him some good by committing of it, as bold|ly
as if hee had neuer falsified his promise before. He pro|mised
to our Parents in Paradise, that if they did eate of the
fruite of the forbidden tree, they should become like vnto
God but what performed he? in stead of making man like
vnto God, hee made him like vnto himselfe: yet as I sayde,
so shamelesse is that lying Spirit, that hee dre as boldly
promise vantage by committing of sinne this day, as he did
the first day to Adam in Paradise, notwithstanding that
wee see through miserable experience, that death because
of sinne is ened into our bodyes. Is hee not a deceiuer

indeed? that did first steale from vs our birth-right, and now
would also take from vs the blessing, all those benefites wee
got by our first creation, he hath stollen them from vs with
his lying words, and now hee goes about by lyes also to
steale from vs that blessing of restitution by Christ offered,
and exhibited vnto vs.Gen. 31. 7. Iacob iustly complayned of Laban,
that hee had deceiued him, and had changed his wages
seauen times, but more iustly may we complaine of Sathan,
who innumerable times hath beguiled vs, hee hath changed
our wages, how oft hath hee promised vs good things, and
behold what euill is come vpon vs?
Happy were wee if in all our tentations we did remem|ber
this and reply to Sathan in this manner.A good answer to be giuen Sa|than in all his tentations to sinne. The Lord re|buke
thee, thou shamelesse Lyar from the beginning, with
what face canst thou speake that vnto mee, wherein thou
hast beene so oft conuinced by so manifold witnesses to be
a manifest Lyar. Of the fruites of sinne, which wee haue
seene, wee are to iudge of the fruits of sinne which are not
seene: if sinne hath made vs so miserable in this life, how
miserable shall it make vs in the life to come, if wee continue
in it? This is that wisedome which the Apostle recommends
to vs in that worthy sentence, happy were wee if it were
sounded continually in the eares of our minde, as oft as we
are tempted vnto sinne,Rom. 6. 21. What fruit haue yee then of those sins,
whereof now yee are ashamed? He that will search within him|selfe
the fruit of his fomer transgressions shall easily per|ceiue
there is no cause,Seeing he hath deceiued vs so oft, let vs be|leeue him no more. why hee should commit sinne vpon
hope of any better fruit in time to come. It was Samsons de|struction,
that notwithstanding he found himselfe thrie de|ceiued
by Dalilah,Iudg. 16. yet the fourth time he hearkned vnto her
deceitfull allurements: and it shall in like manner be the
destruction of many, who notwithstanding they haue found
themselues abused by Sathan in time past, yet wil not learne
to resist him, but giues place vnto his lying entisements, and
are carryed headlong by him into the wayes of death: hee
was a lying Spirit in the mouth of Achabs Prophets,1 King. 22. to

draw him forward in a battell, promising him victory, in
the vvhich he knew assuredly that he should dye: so is hee
a lying spirit in the harts of all the vvicked, promising vnto
them gaine, glory or pleasure, by doing those works of sin,
whereof he knowes well inough they shall reape nothing
but shame and euerlasting confusion.
Againe,How they who liue in sin are murtherers of themselues. that vve may yet see hovv foolish they are who
liue still in their sinnes, vve may marke here that they are
murtherers of themselues, the mallice of the wicked shall slay
themselues,Psal. 34. 21. his owne sin which he hath conceiued, brought
forth and nourished shall bee his destruction. Euery man
iudges Saul miserable that dyed vpon his owne sword, but
what better are other wicked men? are not their sins the wea|pons
by vvhich they slay themselues? Thus are they twise
miserable: first because they are subiect to death: secondly,
because they are guiltie of their owne death. Oh the pitti|full
blindnesse of men, albeit in their life they feare nothing
more then death, yet doe they entertaine nothing better
than sinne which causes death. In bodily diseases men are
content to abstaine euen from ordinary foode, vvhere they
are informed by the Phisition that it will nourish their sick|nesse,
and this they doe to eschew death, onely herein they
are so ignorant that notwithstanding they abhorre death, yet
they take pleasure in vnrighteousnesse, which brings on
death.
And lastly,Strange death and diseases commeth vpon men through the groth of their sinnes against God. seeing vve are taught here that sinne brings
death vpon the body, vvhat meuaile the Lord strikes the
bodies of men by sundry sorts of diseases, and sundry kindes
of death, seeing man by sundry sorts of sinnes pouokes
the Lord vnto anger? he frameth his iudgement proporti+onable
vnto his sinnes. If yee walke stubbornly against me, and
will not obey mee,Leuit. 26. 25 I will then bring seauen times more plagues
vpon you, according to your sinnes. Hee hath famine to punish
intemperance, and the abuse of his creatures; hee hath the
deuouring sword to bring low the pride of man; hee hath
burning feuers and vncleane consuming goutes, to punish

the fierie and vncleane lusts and concupiscence of man. If
now the Lord after that hee hath striken vs vvith famine
and pestilence, come among vs to visit vs also with vnaccu|stomed
diseases, what shall vve say? but the despising of his
former fatherly corrections, and our stubborne walking a|gainst
the Lord our God hath procured this vnto our selues.
Quid mirum in poenas generis humani crescere iram dei,Cypri, ad Demet. cum
crescat quotidie quod puniatur? what meruaile the wrath of
God increase euery day to punish men, seeing that increases
among men, vvhich deserues that God should punish it?
But there are two impediments which suffers not these
vvarnings of God to enter into the harts of men.Delay of iudge+ment confirms the wicked in euill, and it is the first impe|diment which stayes them fro~ repenting at Gods threat|nings. The one
is albeit they finde within themselues sinnes condemned by
the word of God, yet the plagues threatned against those
sinnes hath not light vpon them. This is that roote of bitter|nesse,
whereof Moses vvarned Israell to beware: that they
should not blesse themselues in their harts, when God doth
curse them, thinking they shall escape iudgement, notwith|standing
they doe those things vvhich God hath forbidden
them.Deu. 29. 18. Salomon marked this to be a great cause of iniquitie,
because iudgement is not executed speedely vpon the wicked,Eccles. 8. 11.
therefore the hart of the children of men is set within them to
doe wickedly. But O man doest thou not know that the
iudgement of God is according to truth against all that
commit such things?Rom. 2. 4. Why despisest thou the riches of his boun|tifulnesse
and patience? because the Lord holds his tongue
and spares thee for a while, thinkest thou that he will spare
thee for euer?
Euery iudgement of God executed vpon another male|factor,But they who are spared should learne wisedome by iudgements excuted vpon others.
may tell thee that thou shalt not escape, dies poenae
nondum aduenit, the day of punishment, of iudgement, of
retribution is not yet come: though in this life the Lord
should not come neere thee, yet thy iudgement is not farre off,
and thy damnation sleepes not. Interim plectuntur quidam, quo
caeteri corrigantur,2 Pet. 2. 3. tormenta paucorum exempla sunt omnium:
In the meane time some are punished that the rest may beCyp. de lapsis serm. 5.

corrected, the torments of a few are the examples of all. As
the Lord Iesus set those eighteene men, on whom the tower
of Siloam fell,Luke. 13. for examples to all the rest of the people:
so euery one punished before vs stands vp to vs as a prea|cher
of repentance, and an example to warne vs, that vnlesse
wee repent,Aug. de ciuit. wee shall perish in like manner: Si nunc omne
peccatum manifesta plecteretur poena,Dei. cap. 8, nihil vltimo iudicio re|seruari
putaretur,  si nusum nunc peccatum puniret Deus,
nulla putaretur esse prouidentia;Why some wic|ked men are punished in this life and not o|thers. If in this life euery sinne were
punished with a seene iudgement, nothing should be reser|ued
to the last iudgement, and if no sinne were punished in
this life, it might bee thought there were not a prouidence
to regard it. The Lord therefore punisheth some sinnes in
this life,Psal. 58. 11. to tell there is a God who iudgeth righteously in
the earth, other sinnes againe in his wise dispensation hee
punisheth not in this life to assure all men that there is a
iudgement to come.
And least yet the wicked man should flatter himselfe
by his escaping of present iudgement,It is a great iudgement not to be corrected by God. let him remember
that a sinner walking in his sinnes, is sore punished when he
is spared: for I pray thee, is not this a iudgement threatned
against the apostate Israelites?Hos. 4. 14. I will not visite your Daugh|ters
when they are Harlots, nor your Spouses when they are
Whores.Ber. in Cant. hom. 42. Certe tunc magis irascitur Deus, cum non irascitur:
Certainely then is God most angry, when hee seemes not
to be angry at all. Misericordiam hanc nolo, for my owne part
(saith Bernard) I will not haue such a mercy. Insignis poena
est,Philo. lib. de confus. lin|guarum.  vindicta impietatis conniuere Deum, ac indulgere peccan|tibus,
 non solum impunitatem, sed  longam concedere pro|speritatem:
It is a notable punishment and reuenge of vn|godlines,
when God wincks, and ouersees sinners, not onely
graunting vnto them impunitie, but also long prosperitie.
It was good for me (saith Dauid) that the Lord afflicted mee,Psa. 119. 71
The wicked because they haue no changes feare not God,Psal. 73. 4. And the
prosperitie of fooles destroy them.Prou. 1. 32. Hee is happely conquered
and ouercome (saith Augustine) from whom the libertie

of sinning is taken away,Aug. Mar|cellino epist. 5 Nihil enim infoelicius foelicitate pec|cantium,
qua poenalis nutritur impunitas,  mala volunt as
velut interior hostis roberatur; There is nothing more vnhap|py
then the happy estate of a sinner, whereby penall im|punitie
is nourished, and their wicked will as an inward and
domestike enimie is strengthened, thus are the wicked fear|fully
plagued, when they are most spared, when they are
giuen vp to their owne hearts desire, and their iniquitie hath
dominion ouer them; when the Lord hedges not in their
way with thornes, but giues them loose reynes to go where
they will to their owne destruction, this is terribilis lenitas
 parcens crudelitas: from which vnhappy condition the
Lord deliuer vs.
The other impediment that stayes the Atheists of our 
time from profiting by the threatnings of God,Impediment. Wicked men repent not be|cause they see the Godly sub|iect to the same outward euils which come vpon them. is because
they see the same condition befalleth to the Godly, which
is threatned to the wicked. Daniell goes with the rest into
captiuitie; Iosias no lesse then the greatest sinners among
the people, is slaine with the sword; Ezekias also stricken
with pestilence; and many Godly ones among our selues
fall vnder the same externall plagues, which are threatned
against the wicked, therefore doe they dispise Religion, and
harden their hearts against the iudgements of God. But
herein also are they pittifully blinded; for the Godly
and wicked differs farre one from another,The actions  pasons of the  and wic|ked different in one and the self same thing. euen when they
are both doing the same externall actions. Cain and Abel
sacrificing together; the Publicane and the Pharisee praying
together, yet are as farre vnlike one another, as light and
darknesse: so when they suffer the same externall crosses,
yet there is a wonderfull difference betweene them, non id|circo
vobis aequales sumus,Cyprian ad Dmet. quia in isto adhuc mundo constituti,
carnis incommoda vobiscum pariter incurrimus. A very good
answere for men of this world, who thinck they are in no
worse case then the Children of God: thinke not that wee
are in as euill case as ye are, because that so long as we are in
this world we are subiect to the same bodily inconueniences,



because hee was made to rule ouer them; and in respect of
his soule, hee is a companion to the Angels: for this cause
the Naturalists called man a little world; and Augustine
counted man a greater miracle than any miracle that euer
was wrought among men: where other creatures were
made by the simple commandement of God, before the
creation of man the Lord is said to vse consultation, to de|clare
saith Basile,Basil. hexam. hom. 10. that the Lord esteemes more of man, than
of all the rest of his creatures: neither is it said that the Lord
put his hand to the making of any creature, saue onely to the
making of man;Tertull. de resur. carnis. and this also saith Tertullian, to declare his
excellencie.
Yet is not man so meruailous in regard of his two substan|ces,As also of their meruailous coniunction.
as in regard of their coniunction. Among all the works
of God the like of this is not to be found againe, a Masse
of clay quickned by the spirit of life, and these two vnted
together to make vp one man. Commonly sayes Bernard,
the honorable agrees not with the ignoble, the strong ouer
goes the weake,Bern. in die natal. dom. serm. 2. the liuing and the dead dwels not together:
Non sic in opere tuo domine, non sic in commixtione tua, it is
not so in thy work O Lord, it is not so in thy commixtion.
This is a doctrine commonly talked of,This doctrine knowne but not considered that man consists
of a soule and a body, but is not so duely considered, as it
should. It is a fearefull punishment which by nature lyes
vpon the soule, seeing shee turned her selfe willingly away
from God, she is so farre deserted of God, that she regards
not her selfe: though it be a very common prouerbe in the
mouthes of men, I haue a soule to keepe, yet hast thou such
a soule as can teach thee to keepe any other thing better
than it selfe: a fearefull plague, that because as I haue said
the soule continued not in the loue of God, it is now so far
deserted, that it regards not the owne selfe. This haue I
touched onely to waken vs, that we may more deepely con|sider
of that doctrine which men thinke they haue learned
and know sufficiently already, namely, that man is a com|pound
creature, consisting of a soule and a body.

But to returne,How that har|mony which was betweene the soule and body by creati|on is now tur|ned into disa|greement. seeing at the first these two, the soule and
body, were conioyned together by the hand of  creator,
and agreed together in one happy harmony among them|selues,
whence comes this disagreement, that the soule being
pertaker of life, the body should be possest by death? I an|swere
wee are to consider these foure estates of mans soule
and body vnited. The first is their estate by creation, wher|in
both of them concurred in a happy agreement to serue
their maker.Foure estates of mans soule  body vnited. The second is the estate of Apostasie, wherein
both of them in one cursed band conioyned, fell away from
God, the faculties of the soule rebelling against God, and
abusing all the members of the body as weapons of vnrigh|teousnesse
to offend him. The third is the estate of grace,
wherein the soule being reconsiled with God by the medi|ation
of Christ, and quickned againe by his holy spirit, the
body is left for a while vnder the bands of death. The fourth
is the estate of glory, wherein both of them being ioyned to|gether
againe, shall be restored to a more happy life than
that which they enioyed by creation As for the first estate,
we haue lost it; as for the second, the reprobate stands in it,
and therefore miserable is their condition; as for the third, it
is the estate of the Saints of God vpon earth; as for the
fourth, it shall be the estate of the Saints of God in heauen.
Let not therefore the children of God be discouraged,Comfort, our estate in this life is neither our last nor best estate.
by looking either vpon the remanents of sin in their soule,
or the beginning of death in their body, for why? this estate
wherein now we are, is neither our last, nor our best estate:
out of this we shall be transchanged into the blessed estate
of glorious immortalitie, our soules without all spot or
wrinckle shall dwell in the body, freed from mortalitie and
corruption, made like vnto Christs owne glorious body;
which the Lord our God who hath translated vs out of our
second miserable estate into this third, shall not faile to ac|complish
in his time.
Againe it comes to bee considered here, seeing by Iesus
Christ life is restored to the soule presently, why is it not



Last of all,Comfort, wee  which no deth can extinguih. there is here a notable comfort for all the
children of God, that there is begun in vs a life, which no
death shall euer bee able to extinguish, albeit death inuade
the naturall vitall powers of our bodies, and suppresse them
one after one, yea though at the length he breake in vpon
this lodging of clay, and demolish it to the ground yet the
man of God who dwels in the body shall escape with his
lif: the Tabernacle is cast downe (that is the most our eni|mie
can doe) but he who dwelt in it remoues vnto a better:
as the Bd escapes out of the snare of the Fowler,The prison of the body being broken the soule that was prisoner escapes so the
soule in death flightes out and flies away with ioy to her
maker: yea the dissoluing of the bodie to the man of God,
it is but the vnfolding of the net, and breaking open the
prison, wherein hee hath beene detayned, that hee himselfe
may be deliuered.Phil. 1. 21. The Apostle knew this well, and therfore
desired to be dissolued, that he might be with Christ As in
the battell betweene our Sauiour and Sathan,Gn. 3. Sathans head
was bruised, and hee did no more but tread on the heele of
our Sauiour, so shall it be in the conflict of all his members
with Sathan: by the power of our Lord Iesus we shall be
more then conquerours, The God of peace shall shortly tread
downe Sathan vnder our feete:Rom. 16. 20. the most that Sathan can doe
vnto vs,Amb. de poem lib. 1. cap. 13. Manducet terram meam,  dentem carni infigat, con|terat
corpus, let him lick the dust, let him eate that part of
mee which is earth, let him bruise my body; this is but to
tread vpon the heele, my comfort is that there is a seede of
immortall life in my soule, which no power of the enimie is
able to ouercome.
It is true that so long as wee inioy this naturall life with
health of body,Wicked men dye eyther vn|certaine of comfort, the losse that comes by the want of the spi|rituall
life is not perceiued, no more then the defects of a
ruinous house is knowne in time of fayre weather; but when
thy naturall life is wearing from thee, if thou want the o|ther,
how comfortlesse shall thy condition bee, when thou
shalt finde in thine owne experience, thou haddest neuer
more but a silly naturall life which now is to depart from

thee? In this estate the wicked eyther dye, being vncertaine
of comfort, or then most certaine of condemaation. Those
who are strangers from the life of God,Eph. 4. 18. through the ignorance
that is in them, hauing no more but the light of nature, the
best estate wherein they can dye, is comfortlesse, if for want
of light they know not that wrath which is prepared for
the wicked, and so are not greatly terrified, yet farre lesse
know they those comforts which after death sustaines the
Christian, that they should bee comforted. The Emperour
Hadrian, when hee dyed made this faithlesse lamentation,
Animula, vagula, blandula, quae nunc abibis in loca? O silly
wandring Soule, where away now wilt thou goe? and that
other Seuerus proclaiming the vanitie of all his former glo|rie
cryed out, : I haue
beene all thing and it profits me nothing: the one saith, he
found no comfort of things that were before him; the other
saith, hee found no comfort of things that were behinde,
thus the wicked dye comfortlesse, good things to come they
neither know nor hope for, good things past profit them
not.Or most cer|taine of con|demnation. Or if they haue beene such wicked men, as by the light
of the word, haue knowne the will of their master, and yet
rebelled against their light, they go out of the body, not one|ly
comfortles, but certain of condemnation, hauing receiued
sentence within themselues, that they shall neuer see the face
of God; and such was the death of Iudas: let vs not therefore
rest contented with the shadow of this vanishing life; let vs
prouide for that immortall seede of a better life within vs,
which receiues increase but cannot decay, it waxeth stron|ger
the weaker that the bodily life is, but cannot be weakned,
far lesse extinguished by bodily death. He that finds it with
in himselfe shall reioyce in death, hee shall dye in faith, in
obedience,1 Pet. 4. 19. and in spirituall ioy, Committing his Soule vnto
God, as vnto a faithfull Creator, hee rests in him whom hee
hath beleeued, being assured that the Lord will keepe that,
which he hath committed vnto him. The Lord worke it
in vs for Christs sake.



is that which the Lord promised to Iacob, when hee bad
him goe downe to Egypt, Feare not to go, for I will go downe
with thee,Gen. 46. 4. and I will bring thee vp againe. He forewarned him
that hee should dye in Egypt, and that Ioseph should close
his eyes, but he promiseth to bring vp againe his dead body
vnto Canaan. O what a kindnes is it,O what a kind|nes. that the Lord will ho|nour
the dead bodyes of his Children. The prayse of the
canuoy of Iacobs corps, the Lord will neither giue it to Io|seph,
nor to Pharaohs Seruants with their Chariots, who
in great number accompanied him, the Lord takes it vnto
himselfe, I will bring thee vp againe (saith the Lord,) the like
kindnesse and truth doth the Lord keepe for all the rema|nent
of his seruants. Is thy body consecrated, is it a vessell
of honour, a house and temple, wherein God is dayly ser|ued?
he shall honour it againe, hee shall not leaue it in the
graue, neither cast off the care thereof, but shall watch ouer
the dust thereof, though it tast of corruption, it shall not pe|rish
in corruption.
The holy Spirit who dwelt in the body,He is a holy balme wherby the body shall be preserued immortall. shall be vnto it
as a balme to preserue thee to immortalitie, this same flesh
and no other, for it (though it shall bee dissolued into in|numerable
pickles of dust) shall be raised againe and quic|ned
by the omnipotent power of this Spirit. It is a pittie to
see by what silly meanes naturall men seeke the immortall
conseruation of their bodyes, and cannot obtaine it: there is
no helpe nature may yeeld to prolong the death of the
body but they vse it, and because they see that death cannot
bee eschewed, their next care is how to keep it in the graue
longest from rottennesse and corruption, and how when
themselues are gone, to preserue their names in immortall
remembrance with the posteritie: thus by the very instinct
of nature,Worldlings seeke immorta|litie the wrong way. are men carried away with a desire of eternitie,
but herein are they foolish, that they seek it the wrong way,
they lay out their siluer but not for bread, they spend their la|bour,Esay. 5. 2.
and are not satisfied, immortalitie and life is to bee
sought there where the word of the Lord directs vs, let the

Spirit of Christ dwell in thee, and thou shalt liue, other|wise
though thou wert the greatest Monarch in the world,
though all thy meate were soueraigne medicines, though
thy body were laid in graue with as great externall pompe
as worldly glory can afford to any creature, and thy flesh
were embalmed with the costliest oyntments; these are but
miserable comforts, perishing preseruatiues, thou shalt lye
downe in dishonour, and shalt be raised in greater dishonor
to euerlasting shame and endlesse confusion.
Now as wee haue these three degrees of eternall life by
the Spirit dwelling in vs,Life is first re|stored to the soule and then to the body. so are wee to marke the order by
vvhich hee proceedes in communicating them vnto vs, first,
hee restores life to the soule, and secondly, he shall restore
life vnto the body (saith the Apostle) where the one is done,
bee assured the other shall bee done, the one is the proper
end of his first comming, therefore his Heraulds cryed be|fore
him;Iohn. 1. 29. Behold the Lambe of God who taketh away the sins
of the world: In his second comming shall bee the redemp|tion
of our bodyes,Phil. 2. 21. when hee shall appeare hee shall change
our vile bodies, and make them like to his owne glorious bodie.
Let this reforme the preposterous care of men; art thou de|sirous
that thy body should liue? be first carefull that life be
communicated to the soule: for surely the redemption of
thy body shall not follow vnlesse the restitution of thy soule
goe before.Ber. de adue~. dom. ser. 4. Oportet cor nostrum conformari humilitati cordis
Christi, priusquam corpus conformetur glorioso corpori eius, our
heart must first bee conformed to the humilitie of Christs
heart, before that our body be configurated to his glorious
body, this is the first resurrection, blessed are they that are
pertakers of it, for vpon such the second death shall haue no
power. But it is out of doubt qui non resurgit in anima, resur|get
in corpore ad poenam, hee that riseth not now in his soule
from his sinnes, shall rise hereafter in his body to iudge|ment.
But now leauing the condition, to come to the comfort,
he that raysed vp Christ from the dead, saith the Apostle, shall

also quicken your mortall bodies.What necessity is here that hee who raysed Christ shall also raise vs? What necessitie is there here
that he who raysed Christ shall raise vs? yes indeed the
necessitie is great, the head and the members of the misti|call
body cannot be sundred: seeing the head is raysed from
the dead, no member can be left vnder death: the Lord
workes in euery member according to that same mightie
power,Ephe. 1. 29. by which hee wrought in the head; his resurrection
necessarily imports ours, seeing hee arose not as a priuate
man, but as the head of all his members, full of power to
draw the body after him, and to communicate that same life
to euery member, which he hath declared in himselfe: Christ
in risen from the dead,1 Cor. 15. 20 and is made the first fruits of them that
sleepe: the first fruit is isen, the after fruit shall in like man|ner
follow. Vexit in coelum carnem nostram tanquam arha|bonem
Tertul. de resur. carnis. pignus totius summae illuc quando redigendae: the
Lord Iesus hath carryed our flesh into heauen, as an ear|nest
and pledge of the whole summe, which afterward is to
be brought thether; hee hath not thought it inough to giue
his spirit vnto vs here on earth, as the earnest of our inhe|ritance,
but to put vs out of all doubt hee hath carryed vp
our flesh into heauen, and possest it in the kingdome, in the
name of all his members.
Who raysed vp Iesus from the dead.Seeing our Lord was a|mong the dead let vs not feare when God cals vs to lye down among them also. Then we see that our
Lord was once among the dead, but now is risen from them;
let vs not then be afraid when God shall call vs to lye down
among the dead also: shal the seruant be ashamed of his Ma|sters
condition? or will the patient refuse to drink that poti|on
which the phisition hath tasted before him? No, we must
follow our Lord through the miseries of this life, through
the dolours of death, through the horrours of the graue,
if wee looke to follow him in his resurrection, in his ascen|sion,
to be amongst those hundred fortie and foure thou|sand
in mount Sion, who hauing his fathers name written in
their foreheads,Re. 7. follow the Lambe wheresoeuer hee goeth,
singing that new song which none can sing but they whom
hee hath bought from the earth.

When those women came to seeke the Lord Iesus in the
Sepulchre,What comfort Christs reur|rection giues vs against death. all the feare they had conceiued concerning
Christs death, the Angels remoues it by sending them to
meditate on the resurrection,Mat. 28. 5. 6 Why seeke yee him that liueth
among the dead? hee is not here but hee is risen. Wee are not
yet laid downe among the dead, but or euer we goe to the
graue we haue this comfort, that the Lord by his power
shall raise vs out of it; where the head growes through the
members will follow. Per angustum passionis foramen transiuit
Christus, vt latum praeberet ingressum sequentibus membris:
Our Lord is gone through the narrow passage of death,
that he might make it the wider and easier to all his mem|bers,
who are to follow him. We see by experience the bo|dy
of a man drownes not though it be vnder the water, as
long as the head is borne aboue: many of the members of
Christ are here in this valley of death, tost too and fro in this
sea of tribulation, with continuall tentations, yet our com|fort
is we cannot perish, for our head is aboue and a great
part of the body liuing, and raigning with him in glory,
there is life in him to draw forth out of these miseries, all his
members, and hee shall doe it by that same power, by which
he raised himselfe from the dead.
For we are taught here,Resurrection is a work of God and not of man. that our resurrection is a worke
not to be done by man, nor the power of nature, but by
the power of God: we are not therefore to hearken to the
deceitfull motions of our infidelitie, which calles in doubt
this article of our Faith: wee must not consider the imbecil|litie
and weaknesse of nature, neither measure heauenly and
supernaturall things, with the narrow span of naturall rea|son,Rom. 4. 19.
but as it is Abrahams praise the father of the faithfull,
that when God promised him a sonne in his old age, he was
not weake in the faith, hee considered not his owne body,
which was dead, neither the deadnesse of Sarahs wombe,
but was strengthned in the faith, and gaue glory to God,
being fully assured that he who had promised was also able
to doe it: so should we sanctifie the Lord God in our harts,



Of these figures shadowing the resurrection many more
are to bee found in holy scripture.
As for examples,Examples of the Resurrectio~ in euery age of the world, the Lord
hath raised some from the dead, to be witnesses of the resur|rection
of the rest.Gen. 5. Before the flood, hee carryed vp Henoch
aliue into heaen, and hee saw no death: vnder the law,
Elias was transported in a fierie chariot:2 Kings. 2. and in the last age
of the world, not onely hath our Lord, blessed for euer, risen
from th lead and ascended into heauen, as the first fruits of
them, which rise from the dead, but also by his power hee
raised Lazarus out of the graue, euen after that stinking
rottennesse had entred into his flesh: and vpon the Crosse,
when hee seemed to bee most weake hee shewed himselfe
most strong; hee caused by his power many that were dead
to come out of their graues, and to enter into the citie. Yea,
his seruant Peter by the power of the Lord Iesus, raised the
damsell Dorcas from death,Acts. 9. 40. and in the name of the Lord Ie|sus
made him that was lame of his feete to arise and walke:Acts. 3.
when we see such power in the seruant of Christ working in
his name, shall we not reserue the praise of a greater power
to himselfe?
 And lastly, as for the practises of God in nature, we are
not to neglect them,Gods working both in our selues and the creature co|firmes the Resurrection. for the Apostle himselfe brings argu|ments
from them to confirme the resurrection. Hee first
propones the question of the Atheist, how are the dead rai|sed
vp, and with what body come they forth? and then subioynes
the answere,1 Cor. 15. O foole that which thou sowest is not quickned ex|cept
it dye, it is sowen in the earth bare corne, and God rai|ses
it with another body at his pleasure: seeing thou behol|dest
this daily working of God in nature, why wilt not
thou beleeue that the Lord is able to doe the like vnto thy
selfe?Aug. de verb. Qui illa reparat quae tibi sunt necessaria, quanto magis
te reparabit,Apost ser. 34 propter quem illa reparare dignatus est? Seeing
the Lord for thy sake repaires those things which are neces|sary
to maintaine thy life, will he not much more restore thy
selfe, and raise thee vp from death vnto eternall life?

And to insist in these same confirmations,A two-fold me|ditation to co~|firme the resur|rection. which we may
haue from the working of God in nature, both in our selues
and in other creatures: if eyther with Iustin Martyr, wee
consider of how small a beginning, or then with Cyrill how
of nothing God hath made vp man, we shall see how iustly
the Apostle calleth them fooles who deny the resurrection
of our bodyes. The Lord (saith Iustin Martyr) of a little 
drop of mans seede,How of a litle drop God mad vs that which now wee are. which (as Iob saith) is powred out like
water, buildeth vp daily this excellent workmanship of
mans body: who would beleeue that of so small a beginning
and without forme, so well a proportionate body in all the
members thereof could be brought forth?Iust. Mart. pol. 2. ad Senat. Rom. nisi aspectus fidem
faceret, were it not that daily sight and experience confir|meth
it; why then shall it be thought a thing impossible to
the Lord to reedifie the same body, after that by death it
hath beene dissolued into dust and ashes? And againe, if with 
Cyrill wee will search out our beginning and consider what
vvee vvere this day hundred yeare,How God hath made vs of no|thing to be that which now wee are. wee shall finde that vvee
vvere not: seeing the Lord of nothing hath brought out so
pleasant and beautifull a creature as thou art this day, shalt
thou thinke it impossible to him an hundred yeares after
this, or longer or shorter, as it pleaseth him, to restore thee
againe,Ciril catech. 4 and raise thee from the dead? qui potuit id quod non
erat producere, vt aliquid esset, id quod am est, cum ceciderit,
restituere non poterit? he that could bring out that which was
not, and make it to be something, shall wee thinke that he
cannot raise vp againe that which now is, after that it hath
fallen?
Which of these two I pray thee,It is easier to restore one that hath been, then to make one that neuer was is the greatest and most
difficult worke in thy iudgement, (for vnto the Lord euery
thing, that he will is a like easie,) whether to make one who
neuer was, or to restore againe one who hath beene? Doubt|lesse
to make a man in our iudgement is a greater thing
then to raise him. In the worke of creation the Lord made
that to bee which was not, in the worke of resurrection the
Lord shall make that to bee which was before; the one thou



honourable manner in this life, seeing they are to bee ray|sed
vp as vessels of honour and glory in the life to come.
Againe, when the Apostle saith,Ou bodes shall be raised with new qua|lities. that the Lord shall raise
vp our mortall bodyes, wee are to know that so hee calleth
them in respect of that which they are now, not in respect
of that which they shall bee then. For in the resurrection the
Apostle teacheth vs in another place, that our bodies shall
bee raised immortall, honourable, glorious, spirituall and
impassionable. First, I say the body shal be raised immortal,
not subiect any more to death, nor diseases, nor standing
in neede of these ordinary helps of meat, drinke, and sleepe
by which our naturall life is preserued.
 Secondly,They shall bee honourable. our body shall bee raised honourable, now
it is layd downe in dishonour: for there is no flesh were it
neuer so beautifull, or beloued of man, but after death it be|commeth
loathsome to the beholder; so that euen Abra|ham
shall desire that the dead body of his beloued Sarah
may be buryed out of his sight: but in the resurrection they
shall be raised more honourable then euer they were, they
shall bee redeemed from all their infirmities, euery blemish
in the body that now makes it vnpleasant shall bee made
beautifull in the resurrection,Members lame shalbe restored and euery defectiue member
thereof shall be restored to integritie: Membri detruncatio
vel obtusio nonne mors membri est,Tertul. de resur. carnis. si vniuersalis mors resur|rectione
rescinditur, quanto magis portionalis? for the perish|ing
of the member is no other thing but the death of the
member, if the benefit of resurrection cut off the vniuersall
death of the body, shall it not also take away the portionall
death of a member in the body? if the whole man shall bee
changed to glory, shall hee not much more bee restored to
health? Out of all doubt the bodyes of Gods Children
shall be raised perfect, comely, and euery way honourable;
hoc est enim credere, resurrectionem integram credere.
 Thirdly,They shall be glorious. the body shall be raised a glorious body, When
hee shall appeare, hee shall change our vile bodyes, and make
them like,Phil. 3. 2. to his glorious body. They who conuert many to

righteousnesse shall shine like the stars in the firmament:
yea, the iust saith our Sauiour, shall shine like the Sun in the
firmament. A shadow of this glory we haue in Christs trans|figuration
on mount Tabor,Mat. 17. his face shined as the Sunne,
and his clothes were white as the light. Moses after fortie
dayes talking with God on the Mount, came downe with
so bright a shining countenance that the Israelites might
not behold him; what then may we thinke shall be the glo|ry
of the children of God, when they shall be transchanged
with the light of Gods countenance shining vpon them, not
fortie dayes onely, but for euer and euer. And if euery one
of their faces shal shine as the Sun in the firmament, O how
great light, and glory shal be among them all?  if their bo|dies
shal be so glorious, what shal be the glory of their soule?
surely no hart can conceiue it, no tongue is able to expresse it.
Fourthly, our body shall bee raysed spirituall, which is
not so to bee vnderstood as if our bodies should loose a 
corporall substance,They shall be spirituall. and receiue a spirituall substance,
but then shall our bodies bee spirituall, as now our Spi|rits
by nature are carnall: which are so called because
they are subiect to carnall corruption, pressed downe and
carryed away after earthly and carnall things: so shall
our bodies then be spirituall, because without contradiction
they shall obey the motions of the spirit: the body shall be
no burthen, no prison, no impediment to the soule, as now
it is; the soule shall carry the body where it will without
resistance: where now it is earthly, heauie, and tends down|ward,
it shall then be restored so lightsome and quick, that
without difficultie it shall mount from the earth, to meet our
Lord in the aire. As our head ascended on the mount of
Oliues,Acts. 1. 11. and went through the cloudes into heauen, so shall
his members ascend, that they may be with the Lord, they
shall follow the Lambe where euer he goes. Let vs beleeue
it, and giue glory vnto God, for hee who is the worker of
our resurrection, is also the worker of our ascension. If the
wit of man be able to frame a vessell of sundry mettels that



our Resurrection is put betweene the Article of the remis|sion
of sinnes,Resurrection is a benefit when remission of sin goes before it, and eternal life follows after it and that other Article of eternall life; to each
vs that then onely the Resurrection of the body is a bene|fite,
when remission of sinnes goes before it, and eternall
life followes after it, whereof the Lord of his great mercy
make vs pertakers through Iesus Christ.


Verse. 12.
Therefore Brethren wee are debters not to the flesh,Exhortation. to liue after the flesh:
_AS it is true concerning vs,What fruit wee should gather of the Apostles former doctrin that a necessitie lyeth
vpon vs to preach, and woe will be to vs if we
preach not, so it is true concerning you, that a
necessitie lyeth vpon you to heare, and woe will
bee to you if you heare not. It is commaunded to vs that
when wee speake wee should speake as the oracles of God,
and it is also required of you, that ye receiue this word, not
as the word of man, but as it is indeede the word of God:
therefore take heede how yee heare, for as Moses said to
the Israelites, so say wee vnto you; It is no vaine word con|cerning
you, it is your life. Ye haue heard that maine propo|sition
of Comfort, there is no condemnation to them which are
in Christ: yee haue heard it confirmed, explaned, and ap|plyed:
the miserable estate of them who walke after the flesh
hath beene shewed vnto you, as likewise the happy estate of
them who walke after the Spirit, and what comforts the god|ly
haue both against the remanents, as also against the fruits
of sinnes, hath beene declared vnto you. Examine your
selues, and see how far forth these comforts belong vnto you.
If yee bee such as thinke with those scornefull men in Ie|rusalem,
that yee haue made a couenant with death, and it
shall not come neere you, then goe on in your securitie, and
doe that which is good in your owne eyes: but if yee finde
by experience that death is already entred into your mor|tall
body, bee wise in time, see that thou haue this onely

soueraigne comfort against death, the spirit of Christ dwel|ling
in you: otherwise (flatter your selues in your securitie
as you will) miserable shall your end be.
Now the Consolation being ended,Consolation  exhortation both necessary for vs. the Apostle sub|ioynes
the Exhortation, both these two, consolation and ex|hortation,
are needefull for vs in the course of this life: the
one to keepe vs that wee faint not through the remanents
of sinne left in vs, and beginnings of death, which already
haue seased vpon vs: exhortation againe to stir vs vp when
wee linger in the way of godlinesse. For it fareth with vs as
it did with Lot in Sodome, the Angels warned him of the
imminent iudgement, and exhorted him to escape for his
life, yet hee delayed and lingred, hee could not bee gotten
out of Sodome, till they (as it were) violently thrust him
out. And allbeit the Lord admonish vs earely and late by
his messengers of that wrath which is to come vpon the
children of disobedience, and warne vs in time to flye to the
mountaine of his saluation, yet alas so loath are wee to for|sake
our old finnes, that the Lord is forced to double his
exhortations vnto vs, all which yet shall not auaile vs, if the
Lord lay not the hands of his grace vpon vs, and by his
holy Spirit make vs obedient to the heauenly vocation. Let
vs therefore take heede to the exhortations made vs by the
Lord, and that so much the more, because it is most cer|taine,
that the sweetnesse of Gods consolation shall not bee
felt of them who are not moued with his exhortation, Con|templationis
enim gustus non debetur,Ber ser. 46. in Cant. nisi obedientiae manda|toru:
the tast of Gods mercy by contemplation is onely due
to them who make conscience of the obedience of his com|maundements.
Therefore.Euery benefite of god is a new obligation b|ding vs to serue him. This particle is relatiue to the words prece|ding:
seeing it is so that by the Spirit of Christ dwelling
in vs, wee haue such excellent benefits, wee are debt bond
not to liue after the flesh but after the Spirit. Of this wee
haue first to learne, that euery benefit wee receiued from
God is an Obligation binding vs debters of seruice to God,



Debters.Christ hath freed vs from all other seruice that we might be bound to his owne. Of this it is euident that the doctrine of grace
proclaimes not liberty to men to liue as they will, but rather
bindes them to liue godly: there can be no higher con|tempt
done to the Lord, than to turne his grace into wan|tonnesse.
Certainly the iniquities of Pagans doth not hale
so much offend him, as the licentiousnesse of bastard Chri|stians,
who will sinne the more freely because Christ hath
suffered for sinne: they heare that a man is not iustified by
good workes, and therefore being deceiued by Sathans so|phistrie,
they cease to doe well, not considering that good
workes must proue wee are sanctified, and sanctification
must proue that wee are iustified. In the second verse, the
Apostle said that Christ hath freed vs from the Law of sinne;
and here he sayth, that hee hath made vs debters to righteous|nesse:
these are not contrary, they agree very well together,
hee hath loosed vs from the seruice of all other Masters,
that he might binde vs the more straightly to serue himselfe.
And indeede if Christ commaund vs,He is a seruant of seruants, who is not the seruant of Christ Iesus. as hee ought, no
other thing shall commaund vs beside him; otherwise if we
be not seruants to him, we shall be slaues to euery thing be|side
him. O quam multos dominos habet qui vnum non habet?
O how many Lords hath that man who hath not Christ
to be his Lord? assuredly there is no thing which will not
vsurpe superioritie ouer thee, who liues not as a bound ser|uant
to Iesus Christ: either thy belly shall become thy God,
and for a mease of pottage with Esau, thou shalt sell thy
birth-right and blessing, or a wedge of gold shall become
thy confidence, and thou shalt not care for gaine to loose a
good conscience: or then some other vncouth Lord who
hath no title to thee shall tyrannize ouer thee. Thus wee
see that the Christian libertie we haue by Christ, makes vs
free from the seruitude of sinne, as the Apostle teacheth vs,
and not free to commit sinne, as the carnall Atheist con|ceiues
it.
But seeing we are debters, let vs see with what bondes
wee are bound, surely the obligations are many, by which

we are bound debters to the Lord,We are bound to do God ser|uice by two great bands especially. but specially now wee
will shortly consider these two, Creation and Redemption.
It is a principle receiued among all men, that the fruit and
vantage of a mans owne workmanship should redound to
himselfe: Who planteth a vineyard, and eates not of the fruit 
thereof?Creation. or who feedeth a flocke, and eates not of the milke of
the flocke?1 Cor. 9. 7. No man begets sonnes and daughters but he will
be honoured of them, hee that hyreth seruants, requires ser|uice
of them;It is a shame that man craues that of his in|feriours, which he giues not to his superiour. yea Balaam will be offended if his beast serue
him not according to his pleasure: this is the measure wher|with
men mete vnto themselues, what reason then is ther, we
should refuse to doe that dutie vnto the Lord our Supe|riour,
which wee craue to our selues from our Inferiours.
The Lord hath made vs, wee made not our selues; his hand
hath formed and shaped vs; the life we haue wee hold it of
him; we can not abide a moment longer in this house of our
earthly tabernacle, than the Lords thinkes expedient, his
will makes the last day: yea as we said before all our neces|sarie
maintenance for this mortall life, is furnished out of
his hand: seeing wee our selues craue seruice of those to
whem we giue the smallest things, shall wee not much more
giue seruice vnto GOD, from whom wee receiue the
greatest?
The other is the bond of Redemption.Redemption: here consider first, that we are bought seruants. Wherein we are 
to consider these three things: first, that vve are bought:
secondly, that we are sworne: thirdly, that we haue receiued
wages before hand; all for this end, that vve should serue
him. Ye are bought (saith the Apostle) with a price, therefore
glorifie God in your bodies, and in your spirits, for they are Gods.
And againe, wee are redeemed, not with corruptible things, as
gold and siluer, from our vaine conuersation, but with the pre|tious
bloud of Christ, as of a Lambe vnspotted and vndefiled:
we should not therefore liue as seruants of men, farre lesse
as seruants of Sathan and sinne,That which cost Christ full deare, men sels good cheape. but as seruants of that Lord
who hath redeemed vs. Of all fooles those are the greatest
who sels their life for the silly shadowes of sinfull pleasures,

which Iesus Christ hath bought with the greatest price that
euer was payed.
Not onely are we bought to be Christs seruants,Secondly, Swor seruants but also
we are sworne, for baptisme as on the part of God, it is a
seale of the couenant of grace, to confirme that promise of
remission of sinnes, which God hath made to vs in the blood
of Iesus Christ: so on our part it is a solemne resignation
of our selues, and our seruice to the Lord, wherein we giue
vp our names to be enrolled among his souldiers  seruants,
swearing, binding, and oblieging our selues to renounce the
seruice of the Diuell, the World, and the Flesh: and this
oath of resignation we haue renued so oft as wee communi|cated
at his holy Table. Whereof it is euident that they
who hath giuen their names to Christ, and yet liues licenti+ously,
walking after the flesh, are for-sworne Apostates,
guiltie of perfidie, and of foule apostasie and desertion from
Iesus Christ.
And thirdly,Thirdly, wee haue receiued wages before hand for ser|uice to be done not onely are we bought and sworne, but
we haue receiued wages and payment in hand, which should
make vs ashamed if we haue so much as common honestie,
to refuse seruice to the Lord, vvhose wages we haue receiued
already. It may be said to euery one of vs, which Malachie
in the name of the Lord,Mal. 1. 10. spake to the Leuiets of his time,
who among you shuts the dore of my temple, or kindles a fire vpon
my alter in vaine:  who among vs can stand vp and say that
hee hath done seruice to the Lord for nought? Consider it
when ye will, for euery peece of seruice ye haue done to the
Lord, ye haue receiued wages, more then ten times? who hath
called aright on his name,  hath not been heard? who hath
giuen thanks for benefits receiued,  hath not found Gods
benefits doubled vpon him? who hath giuen almes in the
name of the Lord, and not found increase? I speake not
now of rewards which God ath promised vs, I speake only
of that we haue receiued already, the least of Gods mercies
shewed vpon vs already doth farre exceede all that seruice
that we poore wretches haue done vnto him: as therefore

we are content to receiue the Lords pay, let vs neuer refuse
to giue the seruice of our bodyes and spirits vnto him.
But alas,But many re|ceiue that from the true God, which they re|turn no to him but sacrifice to Idols. is not this the common sinne of this generation,
to receiue good things out of the hand of God, and with
them to sacrifice vnto other Gods, to whom they owe no
seruice at all. A horrible sacriledge, a vile idolatry: for this
the Lord complaines of the Iewes, they haue receiued my
gold, and my siluer, and made vp Baal to themselues: and the
same complaint stands against the prophane men of this
age.Hos. 2. 8. The couetous man as riches encrease doth hee not set
his heart vpon them, though with his tongue hee denie it?
doth he not say within himselfe, that which Iob protested
hee would neuer say to the wedge of Gold, thou art my con|fidence?
The glutton when hee hath receiued from God
abundance of Wheat, Oyle, and Wine, though hee know
the commandement,Eph. 5. 18. be not filled with wine wherein is excesse,
but be filled with the Spirit, yet how oft takes hee in super|fluous
drinke, and spares not for loue of it to grieue the
Spirit, sacrificing to his belly as vnto God those things, which
bindes him to doe seruice vnto the Lord? thus neither are
the benefits of God returned to doe honour vnto him from
whom they come, but sacrilegiously also abused to the ma|king
vp of Bal, or some other Idoll abhominable to God,
for which it it most certaine that the moe wages these Ahe|ists
haue receiued for doing seruice to God, which they ne|uer
did, the more feareful plagues  stripes from God shall
be doubled vpon them.
Againe wee marke here that there is a double debt lying
vpon vs,A double debt lying vpon vs, the one the debt of sinne which e must seeke to be for|giuen, the other the debt o obe+dience, which we must seeke to performe. the debt of sinne, and the debt of obedience: wee
are freede of the one by a humble seeking and crauing of
the remission thereof through Iesus Christ, for the debt of
sinne the Lord Iesus hath taught vs daily to seek Gods dis|charge,
Lord forgiue vs our debts: and indeed as euery day
wee contract some debt, so it is great wisedome by daily
repentance to sue the discharge of it; for they who neglect
to do it, their debt multiples vpon them, it stands vncancelled

in the register of God, written as it were with a pen of iron,
and the poynt of a Diamond, and they shall at length be
cast into that prison for non-payment, wherin will be wee|ping
and gnashing of teeth for euer. But as for the debt of
obedience, whereof the Apostle here speakes, wee cannot
with a good conscience desire the Lord to discharge it, nor
exempt vs from it, but wee must in all humilitie craue
Grace of God, that wee being enriched by him, who of our
selues are poore, may be able in some measure to pay and
performe it.
Where if the weake Children of God obiect and say,A three-fold comfort for the godly for the debt of obedi|ence.
how then can wee but drowne in this debt, seeing no day
of our life wee can pay to the Lord that debt of obedience
which we owe vnto him? To this there is giuen a three-fold
 comfort,The Lord to whom we owe it, giues vs wherewith to pay it. first the Lord dealeth with vs as a louing liberall
man dealeth with his debter, who knowing that he hath no|thing
of his owne, wherewith to pay him, and not willing
to put him to shame, stops priuately into his hand, that
which publikely againe he may giue vnto him, so the Lord
conuaies secret grace into the hearts of his children, where|by
they are in some measure able to serue him: but as Da|uid
protested,1 Chron. 29. 14. so may wee all, whatsoeuer wee giue vnto the
Lord, wee haue it of his owne hand. Secondly, the Lord
 our God is so gracious that hee is content to accept part of
payment at our hand,He accepts for a time part of payment. till wee bee able to doe better, if our
faith bee but like the graine of Mustard seede, yet if it bee
true, the Lord will not despise it; though our repentance be
not perfect and absolute; though our prayers bee weake;
though wee cannot doe the good that wee would, yet the
good that wee doe is accepted at his hands through Iesus
 Christ. And thirdly, wee haue this comfort, that the more
wee pay of this debt of obedience,The more wee pay of this debt the more we are able to pay. the more wee are able
to pay. In other debts it is not so: for if the more be payed
out by him that is indebted, the lesse remaines behinde vnto
himselfe, but here the more wee pay, the richer wee are; the
doing of one good worke of seruice vnto the Lord makes

vs both more willing, and able to doe an other, the talents
of spirituall Graces being of that nature, that the more
they are vsed the more they are encreased, and these should
worke in vs a delight to pay that debt which wee owe vnto
the Lord.
Last of all,Good works are debts, ther|fore not merits wee marke vpon this word, that the good
wee doe is debt and not merit. When one of your seruants
(saith Iesus hath done that which hee is commaunded, will
one of you giue him thanks because hee hath done that
which was commaunded him?Luke. 17. 7. 8 9. 10. I beleeue not; hee applyeth
the Parable to his Disciples and in them to vs all: so like|wise
when you haue done all those things which are com|maunded
you, say that yee are vnprofitable Seruants. Our
Sauiour commaunds vs plainely to doe well, but as plainely
forbids all presumptuous conceit of our merit, when vvee
haue done well. To speake against good works is impietie,
and to presume of the merits of our best works it Antichri|stian
pride.No penman of the holy Ghost did euer vse the word of merit. No man led by the Spirit of Iesus did euer vse
this word of merit; it is the proud speech of the spirit of An|tichrist,
search the Scripture and ye shal see, that none of all
those who spake by diuine inspiration, did euer vse it: yea,
the Godly Fathers who haue liued in darke and corrupt
times, haue alway abhorred it.
If a man could liue (saith Macarius) from the dayes of
Adam to the end of the world,The Fathers thought it smel|led of presump|tion and fight neuer so strongly
against Sathan, yet were hee not able to deserue so great a
glory as is prepared for vs,Mac hom. 15 how much lesse then are we able
to promerit it (that is his owne word) who so short a space
are militant here vpon earth:Ber in Psal. qui habitat. Praetendat alter meritum, su|stinere
se dicat aestus die, ieiunare his in Sabbatho, mihi adhae|rere
Deo bonum est;Ser. 1. let another man (saith Bernard) pretend
merit, let him boast that hee suffers the heat of the day, and
that he fasts wise in the Sabboth; it is good for me to draw
neere the Lord,In Cant. ser. 61. and put my hope in him: Meritum enm
meum miseratio Domini, non sum plane meriti inops, quamdiu
ille miserationum non fuerit: for my merit is Gods mercy

I shall not altogether want merits as long as he wants not
compassion:Serm. 66. And againe, sufficit ad meritum scire quod non
sufficiant merita, this is sufficient merit, to know that merits
are not sufficient: this he makes more cleare in that Sermon
of his, de quadruplici debito: wherein hee declares how man
is so many wayes debter to the Lord, that hee cannot doe
that which hee ought, why then shall any man say that hee
hath done enough,De quadru|plici debito. cum nec millissim, imo nec minimae parti
debitorum suorum valeat respondere, seeing he is not able to
answer the thousand part, no, not the least part of that debt
which hee oweth vnto God?
To liue.Our life should declare whose Seruants and debters we are. Wee haue heard that wee are debters: now haue
wee to see wherein wee are debt-bound. Wee owe to the
Lord not onely these things which are ours, but (as sayeth
Paul to Philemon we owe him our selues also Euery mans
life must declare who it is whom hee acknowledgeth
for a Superiour,Philem. v. 19. and vnto whom hee submitteth himselfe a
debter.Iam. 2. 18. Shew me (saith Saint Iames) thy Faith by thy workes,
shew mee (saith Malachie) thy Father by thy Sonly reue|rence
toward him,Mal. 1 6. let me know thy master by thy obedi|ence
and the attendance thou giuest him. As Caesars money
is discerned by his image and superscription, so the Chri|stian
is knowne by his conuersation; hee vvalkes after the
Spirit, and by his deedes more then by his words, hee dis|claimeth
the gouernement of the flesh. But surely as Chri|sostome
complained of bastard professors in his time, so may
wee in our time of many to whom wee are ambassadours
in Christs name,An accusation of the carelesse Christians of our time. we haue more then cause to feare we haue
bestowed labour vpon you in vaine: for I pray you, vvhat
part of your liues giues sentence for you and proues that ye
are Christians? shall wee iudge by the place vvhich ye de|light
most to frequent? are there not many among you oft|ner
in the Tauerne then in the Temple, filling your belly
intemperately at that same time vvherein the Sonnes and
Daughters of the liuing God, are gathered together into
their fathers house, to be refreshed with his heuenly Manna?

shall we iudge you by your garments? doe they not in many
of you declare the vanitie of your minds? if we estimate you
according to your companions, what shall wee thinke but
that ye are such as those are with whom ye delight to resort?
ye sit in the seat of scorners, if thou seest a theefe thou must
with him, and art pertaker with the adulterers. If wee try
you by your language, yee shall be found vncircumcised
Philistims, and not holy Israelites: for yee haue learned to
speake the language of Ashdod,Nehe. 13. 24. ye speake (as Micah com|playned
of the wicked in his time) out of the corruption of
your soule,Micah. 7. 3 making your throat an open sepulchre, yee send
out the stinking breath of your inward abhominations, by
your euill and vncleane speaches, ye corrupt the minds of the
hearers. And thus seeing euery part of your life giues sen|tence
against you, as a cloud of many vvitnesses testifieng
that yee are vncleane: what haue yee to speake for you, to
proue that yee are Christians? shall your naked word be suf|ficient
to doe it? no certainely, for against it the Lord Iesus
hath made exception before hand,Math. 7. 21. Not euery one that sayth
Lord, Lord, shall enter into my kingdome: your workes must
be your witnesses, and your deedes must declare who it is
to whom ye acknowledge your selues seruants and debters.
Not to the flesh.Is is a difficult thing so to nou+rish the body, that we nourish not sinne in the body. Sometime the flesh signifies the body,
and in that sense wee are debters vnto it: for the couenant
(sayth Bernard) which the Lord hath bound vp betweene
the soule and the body, is not to be broke at our will, but
at the Lords will; and in the meane time wee are bound to
nourish it: but the flesh here is put for the sinfull lusts of
the flesh,Rom. 13. 14. and so we are not debters vnto it: Take no thought
for the flesh to fulfill the sinfull lusts thereof. But alas the cor|ruption
of our nature is so great that without great circum|spection
we cannot nourish the body, vnlesse we also nou|rish
sinne in the body: many vnder pretence of doing dutie
to the one failes in the other; so they pamper the body, that
they quench the spirit, ouercome with gluttony they are not
able to pray. Wee are with the godly to keepe a meane



of a shaking sword,Not like that Cherubin a mi|nister of iustice to hold Adm out of paradise. to keepe Adam from the way of the
tree of life, so the Apostle stands here betweene vs and
death, with a sentence like a two edged sword in his mouth,
to keepe the sonnes of Adam as farre as hee can from the
way of death: the one stood as a minister of Gods iustice,
the other stands as a messenger of mercy. The Lord hath
sworne by himselfe,Ee. 18. 32. as I liue I desire not the death of a sinner,
but that he should returns  liue: he iustifies his word by his
deed,Both the word and deed of the Lord declares that he craues not the death of a sinner. in that in all ages of the world hee hath sent out mes|sengers
to warne them to goe by the way of death: so that
novv if any man perish it is because hee stoppes his eares,
at the warning of the watchman of God: for thou canst not
say but Moses and the Prophets, Iesus Christ and his Apo|stles
and Preachers, haue met thee in the way of thy sin, and
warned thee many a time, by the vvord of the Lord, that if
thou vvalke on that vvay, thou shalt assuredly dye, vvhere
thou passing by them all, rushest headlong after the lusts
of thy flesh, and so thou perishest, and thy blood shall be
vpon thine owne head.
As the Apostle to the preceding exhortation annexed
an argument a debito, from that which we are bound to doe,
so now hee subioynes another argument, partly a damno,
from the losse wee incurre if we doe it not, in these words,
if yee liue after the flesh yee shall dye, and partly a commodo,
from the vantage we shall reape if we do it, in these words,
if yee mortifie the deedes of the bodie by the spirit, yee shall liue.
If wee vvere such men as wee should be,That the spirit of God vseth threatnings is an argument of our rebelli|ous nature. the former exhor|tation
taken from honestie and dutie were sufficient to
moue vs, but in that the spiit of God doth also threaten vs
with death, is an euident argument of the froward rebellion
of our nature. The word of God is compared not onely
to milke, but also to salt: we haue neede of the one because
of our infancy, that being nourished therewith wee may
grow,The word should be vsed as milk to some as salt to others and because of our corruption wee haue neede to be
seasoned with the other, to both these ends should Prea|chers
vse the word of GOD, to some as milke for their

nourishment, to others as salt for their amendment.
But these are the times foretold by the Apostle,But now men cannot abide the rebuke of Gods word. wherein
the itching eares of men cannot abide wholesome doctrine,
they hate him that rebukes in the gate, as Achab hated Mi|caiah
to the death,2 Tim. 4. 3. because hee prophecyed no good vnto
him,Amos. 5. 10. that is, hee spake not according to his phantasie, but
warned him faithfully of the iudgement which afterward
came vpon him:1 King. 22. 8 so the hearers of our time can abide no
teachers but such as are after their owne lusts; but alas, they
are foolish,Micah. 2. 7. for are not my words good to him that walkes vp|rightly
(sayth the Lord.Aug. ser. 1.) Aduersarius est nobis, quamdiu su|mus
 ipsi nobis, quamdiu tu tibi inimicus es, inimicum ha|bebis
sermonem Dei; the word of God is an aduersarie to
none, but such as are aduersaries to themselues, neither doth
it condemne any but such as assuredly shall be condemned
of the Lord,Zach. 7. 11. vnlesse they repent. Stop thine eare as thou
wilt from hearing of the threatnings of the word, yet shalt
thou not stop that iudgement which the word hath threat|ned
against thee. There is a cry that will come at midnight,
and will waken the dead, but blessed are they who in time
are wakened out of the sleepe of their sins, by the cryes of
the watch-men of God, for vndoubtedly a fearefull and
painefull consumption shall torment them for euer, who
now cannot suffer that the salt of the Word should bite
their sores to cure them.
The opposition made here by the Apostle vvarnes vs
that a necessitie lyeth vpon vs to mortifie our sinfull lusts,Either we must slay sin, or sin shall slay vs.
it stands vpon our liues, vnlesse wee slay sinne, sinne shall
not faile to slay vs. It is like a Serpent in our bosome, which
cannot liue but by sucking out that bloud vvherby we liue:
here is a vvholesome preseruatiue against sinne, if at euery
occasion vvee vvould carry it in our minde, vve would make
no doubt to put sinne to the death, that our selues might
liue. For alas, what pittifull folly is this, vvee hate them that
pursues our bodily life,Aug. de temp serm. 29. vvee eschew them by all bodily
meanes, vvee hate the oppressours that spoile vs of worldly

goods: onely vvee cannot hate Sathan to the death, who
seekes by sinne to spoyle vs of eternall life.
That same Commaundement which vvas giuen to A|dam
and Euah,Euery sin is to vs the forbidde~ tree. if yee eate of the forbidden tree yee shall dye,
is in effect here giuen to vs all: if ye liue after the flesh ye shall
die, let vs not make an exception where God hath made
none: euery sinne to vs is as that forbidden tree to Adam,
if vvee meddle with it, vvee shall finde no better fruite then
that which Adam found on it before vs;Men seeke on it that fruit which they shall not finde, and finde on it that fruit which they would not haue. there is a fruit which
man seekes vpon the tree of sinne, and hee shall not finde it,
to wit, profit, or pleasure, and there is another fruit which
God hath threatned, and Sathan saith it growes not on the
tree of sinne, but man assuredly shall finde it. Bitter death
growes vpon the pleasant tree of sinne, for the vvages of
sinne is death, albeit there came no vvord from the Lord to
teach this, former experience may confirme it: for what
fruit haue vve this day of all our former sinnes, but a guiltie
conscience, which breeds vs much terror, accusing thoughts,
and anguish of Spirit.
It is therefore a point of great wisedome to discerne be|tweene
the deceit of sinne,Great wisdome to discerne be|tweene the de|ceit of sin, and fruit of sinne. and fruit of sin: before the action,
Sinne is Inimicus blandiens, a flattering and laughing enimie:
in the action, it is dulce venenum, sweet poyson, but after the
action, it is Scorpio pungens, a pricking and biting Serpent.
Hee that vvould rightly discerne the face of sinne, when it
stands before him to tempt him, let him looke backe to the
taile of a sinne which hee hath committed alreadie, and of
the sting which that sinne hath left behind it, let him learne
to beware of the smiling countenance of the other, which
wil no lesse vvound him the second time vnto death, if so be
he embrace it.Sinfull lusts compared to the streame of Iordan. Most properly may the pleasures of sin bee
compared to the streames of the riuer Iordan, vvhich car|ryeth
away the fish swimming and playing in it, delighted
vvith such pleasures as are agreeable to their kind, euen til it
deuolue them into the salt sea, where incontinent they die:
euen so in the wicked inordinate concupiscence is as a

forcible streame which carryeth away with it impenitent
men, playing and delighting themselues in their lusts, till
at length they fall into that lake, which burneth with fire
and brimstone, out of the which there is no redemption for
them.
The perishing pleasures of sinne are payd home with
euerlasting perdition,And to the lo|custs with wo|mans hair, lions teeth, Scor|pions taile. it is done in a moment, but when it is
finished it bringeth out death, and breedes the worme that
will neuer dye: paruum ad horam peccatum, longaeua autem
est ex eo,Basil in verb.  aeterna verecundia: it is the deuoring Locust
of the bottomlesse pit,Mos. attende tibi. which hath haire like a woman, teeth
like a Lyon, and a tayle like a Scorpion: miserable are they
who are blinded with it,Cirill. catech. 2. they may sleepe in their sinne, but
their damnation sleepes not, though their heads bee laid
downe, like the Kine of Bashan to drinke in iniquitie like
water, yet their iudgement is not farre off, and they are but
like vnto Oxen fed for the slaughter.
Wee perceiue here further, that euery mans state and
condition in this life, is a prediction of that state and condi|tion
which abides him when this life is gone: He that sow|eth
to the flesh,Gal. 6. 8. of the flesh shall reape corruption, but hee that
soweth to the Spirit,This life is a thorow-way or middle passage, eyther to hea|uen or hell. shall reape immortalitie and life. As no
man commeth eyther to a Pallace, or a Prison, but by the
entry thereof, so no man goeth eyther to heauen or hell,
but by the way thereof. A wicked life is as a thorow-way
to that prison and place of darkesse; hee who goes on in it
without returning, shall out of all doubt, when hee hath
passed the path-way enter into the prison: and a godly life
is the very way to heauen, hee that walkes in it, perseuering
to the ende, shall enter at last into that Pallace of Glory,
which is the paradise of God.Eccles. 11. 3. Salomon saith that where the
tree fals there it lyes, and experience teacheth vs that it fals
to that side on which the branches thereof grow thickest,
if the greatest growth of our affections and actions spring
out after the Spirit, out of doubt vvee shall fall to the right
hand, and shall be blessed: but if otherwise thy affections

grow downeward, and thou vvalke after the flesh, then assu|redly
thou shalt fall to the left hand, and die in sin vnder the
cuse of God.
But seeing they vvho vvalke after the flesh are dead al|ready,They who liue in sin are dead, and yet a worse death abides them in hell.
how sayth the Apostle they shall dye? To this I
answere, both are true, presently they are dead, and yet a
more fearefull death abides them. That they vvho liue in
their sinnes are dead already vvee shewde before: for sinne
is that vnto the soule of man, vvhich fire and water are to
the body, that is to say, an vnkindely Element, in the which
it cannot liue, but certainely a more fearefull death abides
them, which the spirit of God calleth the second death,
wherin they shal not onely liue depriud of life, wanting all
sense, yea  all hope of the mercy of God, but shal also feele
the full measure of his wrath due to their sinnes powred out
vpon them. Now albeit they bee dead in sinne, and depri+ued
of the fauour of the Creator, yet the vaine comforts of
the creatures doth so bewitch and blinde them, that they
know not how vvretched and miserable they are, but vvhen
the last sentence of damnation shall bee pronounced vpon
them, they shall not onely bee banished from the presence
of God into euerlasting perdition, where the fie of the
Lords indignation shall perpetually torment them, but also
the comfort of all Gods creatures vvhich now they haue
shall forsake them. The least degree of their punishment
shall bee a fearefull famine of vvorldly comforts,The least degree of their punish|ment shall be a feareful famine of all worldly comforts. The Pome|granat
Tree, the Palme Tree, the Apple Tree shall wither, The
Apples after which now their soule lusteth shall depart from
them, they shall finde none of them: yea, if a cup full of colde
vvater might comfort them it shall not be giuen vnto them:
thus you see how they are dead,Ioell. 1. 12. and yet a more fearefull
death abideth them.Reu. 18. 14.
Therefore the spirit of God to expresse the fearefulnes
of that second death,Why that seco~d death is called a wrath, and a wrath to come. he calleth it a vvrath, and giues it these
two ules: first, hee calleth it a vvrath prepared by God.
Salomon saith the vvrath of a king is the messenger of death,

vvhat then shall we say of the wrath of God? Secondly, hee
calles it a wrath to come, to teach vs that it farre exceedes
all that wrath that we haue heard of seene. The drowning
of the originall world, the burning of Sodome a great wrath,
but nothing comparable to the wrath which is to come.
Beside this,The place of the damned shews the great+nesse of their iudgement. both the place, the vniuersalitie  the eternitie
of their punishment, serues to let vs see, if we looke to them
how horrible this death is, which here is threatned against
them vvho liue after the flesh. As for the place, it is called
the winepresse of the wrath of God,Reu. 21. 8. the lake that burnes with
fire and brimstone,Esa. 30. 33. Tophet prepared of old, deepe and large, the
breath of the Lord, like a riuer of brimstone, doth kindle it. It
is that great deepe which the damned spirits themselues ab|horre,
they know it to be the place appointed for their tor|ment,
all that they craue was onely that the Lord vvould
not send them thether to be tormented before the time. It
it is called , a place wherein is no light to see, therefore
Iude called it blacknesse of darknesse,Iude verse 6. and our Sauiour called
it vtter darknesse,Mark. 9. 48. there is in it a burning fire, but without
light,1 Pet. 3. 19. a gnawing worme without rest. Saint Peter calles it
a prison,Math. 5. 22. and our Sauiour calles it Gehenna, for the horrible
scrieches of them who are brunt in it, and the vile, and
stinking filthinesse vvherewith it is replenished.
And as for the vniuersalitie of their paine.The vniuersali|tie of it: No|thing in man shall be with|out paine,  all Gods plagues shall concur to punish him. It is certaine
that as euery thing in them sinned, so euery thing in them
shall be punished. No power of their soule, no member of
their body shall bee free from that wrath: Surely it should
astonish man to consider this; for if now any one of Gods
ordinary plagues inflicted vpon any one member of the
body, be so insufferable, hovv intollerable vvill that paine
be? he vvho novv is payned vvith the tooth ach, takes some
comfort when he sees another tormented vvith the collicke,
and hee also if hee see another burnt vp with Anthonies fire,
beares his owne crosse the more patiently, because he sees a
greater laid vpon another. No man in this life suffereth all
things, one cryeth with the Shunamites sonne for exces|siue

dolour, alas my head, my head: another with Antiochus,
my belly: the third with Asa, my feete, my feete: but what are
all these comparable to that paine vvherein head and belly
and feete, yea the whole man shall be racked vpon the tor|ments
of Gods wrath, and that not vvith one plague onely
but with manifold: for as all the waters of the earth runne
into the great Ocean, so all the plagues of God shall con|curre
and meete together in hell for punishment of the
damned.
But yet the eternitie of that paine doth still increase the
horrour thereof,The eternitie of it. their shall be no end of their punishment,
their fire shall neuer bee quenched, their worme shall ne|uer
dye, they shall seeke death as a benefite, and shall not
finde it. The fire of Sodome vvas ended in a day, the deluge
of water that drowned the originall world, lasted but a yeere,
the famine that plagued Aegipt lasted but seauen yeeres,
the captiuitie of Israell was ended in seauenty yeeres, but this
wrath of God vpon the damned shall endure for euer and
euer. Thus wee see what a horrible death the Apostle
threatneth here, vvhile hee sayth, if yee liue after the flesh yee
shall dye. The Lord giue vs wise and vnderstanding hearts,
that we may ponder it according to the waight therof, and
it may be to vs a liuely voyce of God, to prouoke vs to flee
from that fearefull wrath vvhich is to come.
But if yee mortifie,In the most re|generate there is some thing that needes to be mortified. c. Here followes the other member
of the argument, taken from the great vantage wee receiue
by mortifying the lusts of the body, if wee doe so wee shall
liue. Here also we haue first to consider that albeit the Apo|stle
affirmed before verse 9. that these godly Romanes were
not in the flesh, yet now he exhorts them to a further mor|tification
of the lusts of the flesh, which were superfluous if
there vvere nothing in them that needed to be mortified:
then we see clearely, vvhich we may also feele in our selues,
that so long as we liue in the bodie, there is euer some re|manent
life of sinne, vvhich vvee haue neede to mortifie and
put out. In this battell we must fight without intermission,

till we haue gotten the victory: for vvho can say that he hath
in such sort cut away his superfluities, that there remaynes
nothing in him, which hath need of reforming: beleeue me
when they are cut off they spring,For out of the stony rocke springeth noy|some weedes. when they are chased
away they returne, when they are once quenched they kindle
againe, except thou dissemble, thou shalt alway finde with|in
thy selfe something that hath need to be subdued. There
is nothing harder (sayth Cyrill) than the Rocke,Cyrill. yet in the
seames and clifts thereof the noysome weede fasteneth her
roote, and springes out: and albeit there be no man in the
vvorld stronger than a Christian, yet is hee oftentimes buf|feted
by Sathan and sinne, which hath fastened their roote
in him, sends out her inordinate motions and affections, a|gainst
vvhich hee hath neede to fight continually.
But here it is inquired,That which God works in vs he calles it our worke. how doth the Apostle require
this of them, that they should mortifie their lusts? lyeth it
in the power of man to doe it? To this I answere, first that
as man gaue life to sinne, so is hee bound to put out the life
thereof vpon no lesse paine than condemnation, and there|fore
iustly is it required of him. Secondly, these same good
workes vvhich the Lord vvorkes in vs, hee is content to as|scribe
them to vs, and calles them ours. Of our selues vve
must say with the Apostle,Phil. 2. 12. we are not sufficient of our selues
to thinke so much as a good thought,Therefore vve should be hum|ble and giue God the glory our sufficiencie is of God,
and it is hee who worketh in vs both the vvill and the deed:
so hee workes in vs that he makes vs through his grace vvil|ling
vvorkers vvith him, through him that strengthens vs
vve are able to doe all things, and therefore the praise of
all the good wee can doe should be ascribed vnto God.
When Dauid had offered to God aboundance of siluer and
gold, and other mettels vvhich hee had prepared for the
house of God, hee concludes in the humilitie of his heart,
What am I O Lord,1 Chro. 29. 14 and what is my people, that wee should be
able to offer willingly after this sort? for all things come of thee,
and of thine owne hand haue wee giuen thee. But much more
vvhen vve doe any worke of sanctification, for the building

of our selues vp into a spirituall Temple to the Lord our
God, we may say, O Lord all the good wee can doe is of
thee, and of thine owne hand wee haue giuen backe vnto
thee, for except thou Lord hadst giuen vnto vs grace, vve
should neuer haue giuen to thee obedience.
Let therefore the presumptuous conceit of Merit yet
againe be farre from vs,Presumptuous opinion of Me|rit damned. seeing the good which vve doe is
debt, and is done also by the spirit of the Lord in vs, let vs
reserue the glory thereof vnto him.Aug. de verb. Quare dona mea, non
merita tua,Apost. serm. 2 quia si ego quarerem merita tua, non venires ad
dona mea: seeke my gifts (saith Augustine, speaking in the
name of the Lord) not thy merits, for if I should seeke
thy merits, thou shouldst neuer bee pertaker of my gifts.
When the Apostle Saint Paul had reckoned out how hee
had laboured more aboundantly in the worke of the
ministerie,1 Cor. 15. 10 then all the rest of the Apostles, hee subioynes
as it were by correction, yet not I but the grace of God in me:
learning vs when vve haue done all the good we can to be
humble in our selues, and giue the glory to God: if he pro|mise
vs a crowne,Aug. hom. 14 nihil aliud coronat nisi dona sua, he crownes
no other thing but his owne gifts, if by promise hee bindes
himselfe a debter vnto vs to giue vs a reward,Aug. de verb. debitor factus
est nobis,Apost. ser. 14. non aliquid a nobis accipiendo, sed quod ille placuit
promittendo, he is become a debter vnto vs, not by receiuing
any thing from vs, but by promosing freely to vs that which
pleased him: and therefore when we are exhorted to mor|tifie
the deeds of the body by the spirit, let vs first turne this
and the like of the precepts into prayers, that the Lord
would enable vs by grace to doe that which he commaunds
vs, and then when in some measure we haue done it, that we
returne the praise and glory to the Lord.
Mortifie,A tryall of our Mortification. c. Seeing the first part of our sanctification
is called mortification, vve are to consider hovv in this word
there lurkes a rule, vvhereby euery man may try hovv farre
forth he hath profited in sanctification, vve see by experi|ence
that the neerer a man drawes to death, the lesse motion

is in him, but after hee is once dead hee moues not at all;
present him pleasant obiects, they delight him not, praise
him, yet he is not puffed vp, speake euill of him, yet he is
not offended: euen so is it with the spirituall man, the grea|ter
progresse he makes in sanctification, the motions of sin
are euer the weaker in him, the pleasures of the world moues
him not, as they were wont, if thou praise him, the breath
of thy mouth cannot lift him vp, if thou offend him, the
more he is mortified, the lesse he is grieued. As a man (saith
Basile) being dead is seperate from those with whom he was
conuersant before, so hee who is mortified is instantly sun|dred
in his affections from those who before were his fami|liar
companions in sinne: yea those actions wherein he de|lighted
before, are a griefe vnto him now, it is a vexation
of his soule to heare and see the vnrighteous deedes of the
wicked, which were wont to be vnto him the matter of his
sport and laughter.
Therefore doth he wish,Death to sinne takes not life away but re|stores it. and so should we, that we might
alwayes die this kind of death, foelix mors quae alienum facit
hominem ab hoc saeculo, certainly it is a happy death which
alienates, and turnes away the hart of man from the loue
of this world. Bona mors quippe vitam non aufert, sed trans|fert
in melius, for it is a good kinde of death, which doth
not take life away, but changes it into a better. But alas how
farre are we from this spirituall disposition? doth not the an|gry
countenance of one in wordly authoritie terrifie vs?
the disdainfull words of men doe they not put vs out of the
state of patience? if the world flatter vs are we not puft vp?
if she frowne vpon vs, are wee not cast downe? and this
our great weakenesse proceeds onely from the strength of
sinne in vs: this lets vs see what cause we haue to bee hum|bled,
considering that hauing liued long in this time of grace,
yet haue we profited little in the mortification of our sinfull
lusts and affections.
Againe, out of this same word of Mortification, wee
learne that the worke of our Sanctification is a worke of

difficultie,Sanctification is a work of difficultie, for it is a birth, a death, a cir|cumcision, c. not accomplished without labour, paine, and do|lour,
for it receiues these three names, as to bee called, Mor|tification,
Regeneration, and Circumcision. As no birth,
no death, no cutting off the flesh can bee without dolour
and sorrow; so the conuersion of a sinner is not wrought
without inward paine and sorrow. The Infant that hath laid
but nine Moneths in the wombe of the mother, is not deli|uered
without great paine, suppose shee conceiued it with
pleasure: and shalt thou thinke to part with sinne, which
in thee was conceiued with thee, and which since so often
thou hast nourished with pleasure, and not to proue the do|lours
of the New-birth? No assuredly. In the worke of
mans conuersion, there is the contrite spirit, the humbled
heart, the mourning weede, the melting eye, the pale coun|tenance,
the voyce of lamentation; let not such as feele them,
if they find therwith a rending of their affections from their
old sins, be troubled; for these are but the dolors of their new
birth; and for others who know not these inward humilia|tions
and wrestlings of the Children of God, they haue iust
cause to suspect themselues, that they haue not so much as
the beginnings of Mortification, Regeneration, and spiri|tuall
Circumcision.
By the Spirit.The knife by which beastly lusts are slaine to be sacrificed Nature will not destroy our sinfull lusts,
they are mortified by the Spirit of Christ, and therefore vve
are to nourish and entertaine this Spirit, by the meanes be|fore
prescribed. As those Beasts which sacrificed to God
vnder the Law, were first slaine by the knife of the Leuite,
and then offered to God vpon the Altar; so the Lord Iesus
must mortifie our affections by the power of his word and
Spirit,Mac. hom. I. before they can be presented acceptable sacrifices to
the Lord our God.
Yee shall liue.Temporall life is not the re|compense of righteousnesse, and why? As I spake of death which is threatned, so
speake I of life here promised: this temporall life cannot
bee the recompense of righteousnesse, for it is common
both to the Godly and the wicked. If in this life onely we had
hope,1. Cor. 15. 19 of all men wee were the most miserable, but the life here

promised is eternall life, the beginning whereof presently
vve enjoy by the Spirit of our Lord, who hath quickned vs,
so that wee may say,Gal. 2. 20. now I liue, yet not I, but Christ Iesus
liueth in mee, the accomplishment thereof wee looke for
hereafter. Thus hath the Apostle set before vs both life
and death, he hath shewed vs the way how wee may eschew
the one, and attaine to the other: the Lord graunt that
according to his counsell wee may make choyse of the
best.


Verse. 14.
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God,
are the Sonnes of God.
_IN this Verse the Apostle subioynes a Confir|mation
of his preceding argument:He proues the last part of his preceding ar|gument. in the last
part thereof hee hath said, If yee mortifie the
deedes of the body by the Spirit ye shall liue: now
he proues it. They who mortefie the deedes of
the body by the Spirit, or they who are led by the Spirit of
God, (for these phrases are equiualent) are the Sonnes of God,
therefore they must liue; the necessitie of the consequence
is euident of that which followeth, the Sonnes of God are
the Heyres of God, heires annexed with Iesus Christ, and the
heritage whereunto they are borne is eternall life, therefore
of necessitie they must liue.
Here first wee haue to consider what action and opera|tion
of the spirit this is,The operation of the Spirit is eyther vniuer|sall extending to all his crea|tures, which distinguisheth the Sonnes of
God from other men. The operations of the Spirit are di|uers;
hee hath an vniuersall operation, by which he works
in all his creatures, conseruing, leading, and directing them
to his owne determined ends, for in him euery thing that is,
hath the being, liuing, and mouing, as euery creature is made
by God, so is it ruled and led by the Spirit according to his
appointment.
Hee hath againe a more speciall operation in man, and



them backe againe; seauen mightie nations of the Canaanits
are gathered before them to resist them and hold them out
of Canaan, but the shepheard and leader of Israell steps ouer
all these impediments, as if they had not beene in the way,
and places his people in the mountaine of his inheritance:
and afterward when he concluded to bring his people from
Babell homeward to Canaan, he prepared a way for them
in the Wildernesse, he commaunded the mountaines to bee
made low, and the vallies to be exalted, he commanded the
crooked to be straight, and the rough places to become
plaine,Comfort. and it was done. This is for our comfort, the Lord
who hath taken vs by the hand to lead vs into his holy ha|bitation,
shall remoue all impediments that are before vs;
though Sathan like a Lyon spoyled of his pray snatch after
vs, though he double his tentations vpon vs, and with ma|nifold
afflictions compasse vs, though terrible death and the
horrible graue stand before vs, threatning to swallow vs by
the way, yet shall we see the goodnesse of the Lord in the
land of the liuing, and ouer all our enimies shall be more
than conquerors, through him that loued vs, and hath taken
vs into his owne hand, to lead vs to that inheritance which
he hath prepared for vs.
For it is manifest,The beginning progresse and perfection of our saluation is from him. that both the beginning, progresse, and
perfection of our saluation is ascribed to the spirit of God
in holy scriptures: when we were dead in sinne he quickned
vs, when he hath quickned vs, he gouernes and leads vs, and
worketh continually in vs till he perfect vs. Thus is he the
author and the finisher of our faith,Heb. 12. 2. and all the glory of our
saluation is his: as wee cannot begin to doe well without
him, so we cannot continue in well doing without him: if he
lead vs not, we wander from him, and wearie our selues in
the vvay of iniquitie.In that we can not walk with|out a guide, we re warned that we are but babes.
It should serue to humble vs, that wee are pointed out
here to be but babes and children, such as cannot goe by
our selues, vnlesse we be led by another. As that Eunuch an|swered
Phillip,Act. 8. 30. 31 when he asked, vnderstandest thou what thou

readest? how can I (saith he) vnderstand without a guide? so
may we answere the Lord when he commaunds vs to vvalk
in his way,It is good reli|gion to turne Gods precepts into prayers. how can wee O Lord that are but children and
new borne babes, walke in thy way without a guide? It is a
point of good religion, to turne the Lords precepts into
prayers: Send out Lord thy light and thy truth,Psal. 43. 3. let them lead
mee,Psal. 143. 10 let them bring mee into thine holy mountaine, and to thy
tabernacles. Let thy good spirit lead mee vnto the land of righ|teousnesse.
When the Lord threatned that hee would no
more goe before the Children of Israel, to lead them as hee
had done, Moses tooke it so deepely to heart, that he prote|sted
he would not goe one foote further except the Lord
went with him: and certainely if wee knew the manifold in|conueniences,
whereunto wee shall fall if the Lord forsake
vs, wee would neuer enter our feete into that way, wherein
wee saw not the Lord going before vs in mercy to lead vs.
Our life on earth should be ordered as was the life of
Israell in the wildernesse,We ought to follow our guide as Israell did the Lord in the wilder|nesse. the Lord went before them by
day in a cloud, by night in a pillar of fire: when the cloud
remoued, they remoued, what way so euer it went, they fol|lowed,
where the cloud stood, they camped: thus the Lord
led them by two and fortie stations, fortie yeeres in the
Wildernesse, though Canaan was not farre from them, yet
they entred not into it till the Lord directed them. The
Lord hath in like manner (praysed be his name for it)
brought vs out of the land of our bondage; he might if he
had pleased long ere now haue entred vs into our Canaan,
but it pleaseth him for a time to exercise vs, and to haue vs
walking vp and downe this Wildernesse. Let vs possesse
our harts with patience, and reuerence the Lords dispensa|tion:
in the meane time, take heed that the Lord goe before
vs, that his word shine vnto vs, as a lanthorne to our feete,
and that his holy spirit be our guide to lead vs in his righte|ousnesse:
then shall we be sure of a happy end of our iour|ney,
when wee liue not as wee list, but vnder the gouerment
of the holy spirit; when our rising and lying downe, our





Verse. 15.
For yee haue not receiued the Spirit of
bondage to feare againe, but the Spirit of Adoption,
whereby wee cry Abba Father.
_THe Apostle to strengthen his former argument,A three-fold operation of the spirit in the Sons of God.
sets downe a short discription in this and the
subsequent verse, of a threefold operation which
the spirit maketh in them whom he leadeth: for
first, he is vnto them a spirit of bondage, work|ing
feare: Secondly, he is a Spirit of Adoption, working loue
through the sense of Gods mercy, for hee not onely makes
them whom hee leades the Sonnes of God, but intimates
vnto their spirits Gods loue towards them, which otherwise
was vnknowne vnto them: and thirdly, hee is a Spirit of
intercession, making vs to goe with boldnesse to the throne
of grace, and call vpon God as vpon our Father. Of the
which the first part of his argument is made cleare, that they
who are led by the spirit of God are the Sonnes of God,
yea, by the testimonie of the Spirit they themselues know
that it is so, and therefore in most homely and humble man|ner
acknowledge him for their Father. This the Apostle
propones in such a manner that hee applyes it particularly
to the Godly Romaines, vnto whom hee writeth, Yee haue
not (saith he) receiued againe the Spirit of bondage vnto feare,
as yee did in the time of your first conuersion; yee haue
proceeded further, and haue experience of his other ope|rations,
then yee felt him casting you downe with the sight
of your sinnes, but now ye feele him comforting you and
raising you vp with the sense of Gods loue and mercy to|ward
you in Iesus Christ.
The spirit of God is called a Spirit of bondage vnto feare,Why in his first operation he is called a spirit of bondage to fear
not as if hee made them in whom hee worketh slaues or
bond-men, but because in his first operation hee rebukes
them of sinne, in whom hee worketh, and lets them see that
bondage and seruitude vnder which they lye, which works

in them an horrible feare, but in his second operation he is
a spirit of Adoption, making them free who were bound
before; comforting them with the sight of Gods mercy,
whom before he terrified with the sight of their owne sins,
to the one hee vseth the preaching of the Law, which dis|couers
our disease; to the other the preaching of the Gos|pell,By the preach|ing of the Law he discouers sin and wrath due to it, which causeth feare.
which points out the Physition. As the proclayming
of the Law wrought a terrour in their hearts who heard it,
so doth the preaching thereof: for who can heare himselfe
accursed and condemned by the mouth of God and not
tremble? Iohn the Baptist began at the preaching of the
Law,Mat. 3. 10. Now is the axe laid to the root of the tree, euery tree that
bringeth not forth good fruit shall be hewen downe and cast into
the fire: then hee proceeded and poynted out the Lambe
of God that takes away the sinnes of the world; by the first
hee prepared a way to the second: for his auditours being
cast downe in themselues with the threatning, enquired
earnestly what shall wee doe then that we may bee saued? and
were glad to heare of a remedy. It is out of doubt, that they
who are not touched with a remorse for their sinnes, nor a
feare of the wrath to come, and into whose hearts neuer
entred that care, what shall I doe that I may be saued? haue
not knowne as yet so much as the very beginnings of sal|uation.
Wee are not then to thinke here,Hee is not here comparing the godly vnder the Law vvith the godly vnder the Gospell. that the Apostle is
comparing the Godly vnder the Gospell, with the Godly
vnder the Law, but hee is comparing the Godly vnder the
Gospell with themselues; their second experience of the
operation of the Spirit with the first, it is true that once
(sayth hee) yee receiued the Spirit of bondage working feare,
this was his first operation in you, but now yee haue expe|rience
of another, and are made pertakers of a more ex|cellent
operation, hee is become vnto you a Spirit of A|doption,
by whom yee call vpon God as vpon your Fa|ther.
For the Godly vnder the Law were pertakers of this



deny that Sarah was his Wife; made Peter deny that Christ
was his Lord; this feare made Ionas refuse to goe to Niniue,
and made that worthy Prophet Samuel vnwilling to annoint
Dauid, for hee feared least Saul should slay him: yet are
 they so subiect vnto it, that the feare of God at length ouer|comes
in them.A seruile feare. The third sort is seruile feare, the obiect
whereof is the iudgements of God onely: and this is pro|per
to the wicked, they feare the plagues of God, but so
that they loue their sinnes, and hates and abhorres euery
 one that doth snibbe or restraine them in the course of their
sinnes.A filiall feare. The fourth is filiall, so called because it is proper
to the sonnes of God; they doe not onely feare him for his
iudgements,Psal. 130. 4. but loue him and feare him for his mercy: mercy
 is with thee O Lord, that thou mayst be feared. As for the Di|abolicall
feare,A Diabolicall feare. Saint Iames saith the Diuels know there is a
God, therefore they feare and tremble; they haue receiued
within themselues the sentence of damnation,Iames. 2. 19. they know it
shall neuer be recalled, they seeke no mercy, nor shall they
obtaine it: and the seruile feare of the wicked shall at the last
end in this desperate feare of the damned, finding themselues
condemned, without all further hope of mercy, they shall
tremble and feare continually.
Of this it is euident that the feare wherof here he speaks
is the first part of filiall feare,From what sort of feare are we exempted? namely, a feare of that punish|ment
which is due to sinne, and to the godly is an intro|duction,
to worke in them feare of God for his mercies, con|ioyned
with loue: so then his meaning is cleere, albeit in the
time of your first conuersion you were striken with a feare
of that wrath which is the recompense of sinne, yet now the
spirit of adoption hath not onely released you of that feare
of damnation, which you conceiued at the first, through the
knowledge of your sinnes, but hath also made you certaine
of saluation, and assured that God is become your father in
Christ Iesus.
In the wicked the feare of Gods wrath once begunne
encreases daily, till it proceede as I spake, to that desperate

feare of the damned,In the godly feare prepares a place for the perfect loue of God, and then departs it selfe. but in the godly the feare of Gods
iudgements is but a preparation to the loue of God, feare
shall not alwayes abide in their harts, for when God shall
crowne them with his mercies, and his loue in them shall
be perfect, then perfect loue casts out feare: therefore Au|gustine
compares the feare of Gods iudgements in the godly
to a Needle, that goes through the seame, and prepares in
it a place for the thread, which is to remaine: so doth the
feare of Gods iudgements goe through the secret seames
of the hart, and prepares a place for the loue of God, which
shall abide and continue for euer in the godly, when feare
shall bee away. The Lord at the first deales hardly with
his children,Mat. 15. as our Sauiour delt with the woman of Canaan,
whom hee comforted at the last; and as Ioseph entreated his
brethren roughly, whom at the last for tender compassion
hee imbraced with many teares: but all these terrours and
feares wherewith God humbles his owne, are but prepara|tiues
to his consolations; at the length hee shall make it
knowne to them, that hee is their louing father: as for the
wicked, though they haue not suffered from their youth the
terrours of God, it is because they are reserued for them.
Neither are they euen now exempted from their owne
feares,But in the wic|ked feare of wrath once be|gun encreases till it proceede to desprate feare. for albeit there were none to reproue them, their
owne consciences sends out accusing thoughts to terrifie
them; and if at any time they shall heare the word of God
faithfully, and with power deliuered vnto them, then doe
they much more tremble  feare: for the word strengthens
the conscience to accuse and terrifie them, but feare is both
the first and last effect it workes in them; and therefore is
it that being so oft disquieted with hearing of the word, as
Felix was with the preaching of Paul, they are no more de|sirous
to heare it, but rather hates it and abhors it, because
it testifies no good vnto them, more than Micaiah did to
Achab, and so they neuer attaine to his other operation of
the spirit, they are not transchanged by hearing, into the
similitude of the sonnes of GOD, neither receiues that



but , that is, not like the strong bloud of God, but the
blood of man. But as for the Children of God, they can
not be deceiued of their generation, they know that God is
their Father, and with greater homelinesse and more free|dome
of spirit, yea and surer knowledge they call God their
Father, then any son in the world is able to call on his earth|ly
Father.
Whereby we cry.No prayer to God without the spirit of God. The Apostle here doth teach vs that it
is by the spirit of Adoption we pray vnto God: without
that Spirit men may speake of God, but without him they
cannot speake vnto God: Prayer is a proper action of the
sons of God. The Apostle describing them who are Saints
by calling, saith, they are sanctified by Christ; and call vpon
the name of the Lord Iesus: hee ioynes these two together,
to tell vs that they who are not called by God, and sancti|fied
in Christ, cannot call vpon him; as for prophane men
it is certain they cannot pray, though they repeat that prayer
Our Father which art in heauen, what else doe they but mul|tiply
lyes as they multiply words?
Onely the spirit of Adoption teacheth the Children of
God to pray:How the godly sometime are transported in Prayer. Prayer is vnto them like that fire Chariot in
the which Eliah was carried from earth to heauen; by it they
are transported to haue their conuersation with God,2 King. 2. and
speake to him in so familiar a manner, that they know not
those things which are beside them, neyther see they those
things which are before them; being in the body, they are
carried out of the body, they present to the Lord sighs, which
cannot be expressed, and vtters to the Lord such words as
they themselues are not able to repeat againe: and that all
this proceeds from the operation of the Spirit who bends
vp their affections and teacheth them to pray, is euident by
this, that when this holy Spirit intermits or relents his work|ing
in them, they become senselesse and heauy hearted, more
ready to sleepe with Peter,Mat. 26. 38. Iames and Iohn, than to watch
and pray with Iesus, yea suppose it were in the very houre
of tentation.

Wee cry,The godly should cry to|gether, not one against an o|ther. c. The Apostle you see reckons himselfe a|mong
others who cryes by this spirit of Adoption; though
the children of God be many yet seeing they all are led by
one spirit, they should all cry for one thing vnto God: the
assemblies of the Church militant on earth should resemble
as neere as they can, the glorious assemblies of the Church
triumphant in heauen: many are they who followes the
Lambe, their voyce is like vnto the voyce of many waters,
yet they all sing but one song; so should there be among vs
that are Christians, but one voyce, specially when we meet
in the publike assemblies of the Church, though wee were
neuer so many yet our affections and desires should concur
in one,Vnion of de|sires in prayer commended. and all of vs send vp one voyce to the Lord. Wee
see that in nature coniunction of things which are of one
kinde, makes them much stronger; many flames of fire vni|ted
in one, are not easily quenched; many springs of water
if they meet together in one, make the stronger riuer, but
being deuided are the more easily ouercome.Iames. 5. 16. Saint Iames
saith, the prayer of one righteous man auailes much, if it be
powred out in faith, what then shall we thinke of the prayers
of many? Oh what a blessing might we looke for, if wee
could ioyne in one to call vpon God? but now alas, where
one with a contrite hart cryes to God for mercy, how many
by continuance in sinne cryes to him for iudgement? what
meruaile then the arme of the Lord be shortned toward vs,
and hee doe not help vs?
As they who resolue to lift any heauie burthen ioyne
their hands together vnder it,As many hands lift a burthen importable to one, so and so by mutuall strength
makes that easie to many, which were impossible to one: so
when we are assembled together to lift from off our heads,
by vnfayned repentance, that burthen of the wrath of God,
which our sinnes hath brought vpon vs, if there be among
vs no deceiuers, but that euery man in the sinceritie of his
hart, ioyne his earnest supplication with the prayers of his
brethren, what a blessing may wee looke for? Take heede
therefore how you behaue your selues in the holy assemblies



though they should neuer bee brought forth by speach of
the mouth, and this for their comfort, who through extremi|tie
of sicknesse, or otherwise are not able to vse their tongues
in prayer to God.
Father wee learne here,The Parents of Prayer. that the Parent which begets
Prayer is the Spirit of adoption, the mother that conceiues
it is the humble and contrite heart, for no proud, vncleane
and hard heart can pray vnto God,The wings whereby praier ascends. the vvinges whereby it
ascends are feruencie and an heauenly disposition; feruency
is noted in the word of Crying, for as in crying there is an
earnestnesse of the powers of the body to send out the voice,
so in prayer should there bee an earnestnesse of the powers
of our soule to send vp our desires. As incense without fire
makes no smell, and therefore the Lord commaunded it to
bee sacrificed with fire in the Law: so prayer without fer|uencie
sends vp no sweet smell vnto the Lord. Our heauenly
disposition required in prayer is collected out of this, that
hee to whom wee speake is our Father in Heauen, if our
mindes bee earthly, wee can haue no communing with him
that is in heauen; vvee must therefore ascend in our affecti|on,
enter within the vaile, if vvee would speake familiarly
vvith our Father: Prayer this manner of way sent vp, and
presented to our aduocate and intercessor the Lord Iesus,
out of the hand of Faith, cannot but returne a fauourable
answere, if not at the first, as in the very time of Prayer,
Daniell receiued his answer,Dan. 9. 22. 23. yea at the beginning of his sup|plication,
as the Angell Gabriell informed him, the comman|dement
came forth to answere him, yet shall not the Lord
faile in his owne good time to fulfill the desires of them
vvho feare him.
Manifold examples of holy Scripture lets vs see that
Prayer this vvay powred out vnto God is most effectuall.Efficacie of prayer, euery petition returns with profit.
At fiue sundry petitions did not Abraham bring the Lord
from fitie to ten? euery petition returnes to Abraham some
vantage,Gen. 18. faine vvould Abraham had Sodome preserued for
Lots cause: at his first request hee got this answere, that the

Lord would spare it for fiftie righteous mens sake, if they
might be found in it, but at the last from fiftie hee brings
him to ten; as long as Abraham prayed the Lord answered,
and for euery petition hee yeelded something to Abraham:
and most comfortable is it that the Lord ceases not from
answering,Acts. 10. till Abraham ceased from asking any more.
When Peter prayed vpon the house top he fel into a trance,
and saw a heauenly vision;Mat. 17. when Iesus prayed vpon Mount
Tabor he was transfigured; and if at any time the children
of God bee transformed from an earthly disposition to a
heauenly, they finde in their owne experience that it is in
the time of prayer.
Sathan for this cause is a most troublesome enimie to the
exercises of the word,Sathan an eni|mie to the Word and Prayer. and of prayer: because the one is the
mother, the other is the nurse of all the graces of God in vs;
either hee makes men lightly to esteeme the exercise of
prayer, or then doth what he can to interrupt them in it:
as that Pithonisse interrupted Paul while hee was going to
pray,Acts. 16. 16 so hath that aduersary a thousand wiles, whereby ei|ther
before prayer, he seekes to diuert them to some other
businesse, or in the action to trouble them and diuide the
powers of the soule by vncomely and prophane motions:
If Iehoshua stand before the Lord,Zach. 3. 1. Sathan shall stand at his
right hand to resist him.Gen. 15. Vnlesse therefore with Abraham
we driue away the rauening birds from our sacrifice, vnles
with the Israelites we stand on Ierusalems wall, with a wea|pon
ready in our hand to repell the aduersarie as oft as hee
comes to stay the worke of God, it is impossible that our
harts can continue in feruent prayer to God.
Yet the restles opposition of the aduersary should not
make vs to breake off this exercise of prayer, but the more
we finde Sathan angry at our prayers, the more should we
be prouoked to pray; if hee felt not himselfe hurt, and his
kingdome weakened by our prayers, he would not so busily
trouble vs in prayer: yee see hee troubles vs not in such
exercises as troubles not him; speake as long as you will of



taught of God: we cannot saith the Apostle call vpon him
in whom we beleeue not. As for the Angels wee beleeue
that they are, which the Saduces did not, but we beleeue not
in them, and therefore will not pray vnto them. In all the
old Testament we read no prayer made to Abraham,In all the scrip|ture no prayer to Abraham, Moses, c. nor to Cherubin, nor Seraphin. albeit
hee was the father of the faithfull, none to Isaac, or Iacob, or
Moses, or any other of the fathers departed. In a hundreth
and fiftie Psalmes, no prayer is made to Cherube or Sera|phin,
though they in their psalter of the Virgin, haue tur|ned
ouer all the prayses and petitions made to our Lord
into petitions to our Lady,Psal. 6. 1. as if where Dauid saith O Lord
rebuke mee not in thine anger, wee were also to say, O Ladie
rebuke me not in thine anger,Psal. 4. 1. and O Lord thou art my righ|teousnesse,
O Ladie thou art my righteousnesse, and so forth
in the rest: but we may boldly say with Bernard, libenter
certe gloriosa virgo tali honore carebit, the glorious Virgin is
willingly content to want such a honour. The Angell would
not suffer Iohn to prostrate before him, doe it not (saith he)
I am but thy fellow seruant:Reu. 19. 10. this one of those blessed spirits
witnesses to vs in name of all the rest, that it is the will of
the Saints of God in heauen, that we who are vpon earth
should reserue to the Lord his owne worship, and giue no
part thereof to creatures, yea they are offended when that
honour is offered to them which is due to their Lord.
Where if that common obiection be brought which Am|brose
did obuiate in his time,It is not in the court of heauen as in the courts of earthly kings. posse nos per istos ire ad Deum,
sicut comites peruenitur ad regem, that men by such mediators
may goe to God, as they goe to Kings by those who are ho|norable
in their courts; to them we answere with him, hoc
est misera vti excusatione, this is to pretend a miserable ex|cuse:
for men goe to kings by courtiers, because the king is
but a man,  ad Deum autem quem nihil latet promirendum,
suffragatore non opus est sed mente deuota, but as for the
Lord from whom nothing is hid, there needs no such pro|cutor
to make him fauourable vnto vs, onely there is re|quired
a deuout minde, for in whatsoeuer place he who is

truely godly speaks vnto God, the Lord shall answere him.
And lastly,Euery tongue and language is sanctified for prayer if we vnderstand it. that the Apostle here ioyneth two words of
sundry languages, Abba Father, it is to teach vs that euery
tongue is sanctified to the vse of Gods children, and that it
is lawfull for vs to pray in any language, if so be we vnder|stand
it; but to binde people to pray in a language they vn|derstand
not, or for him that should be the mouth of God,
in the exercise of diuine worship, to speake to the people in
a strange language which they vnderstand not, is a sacrile|gious
tyrannie.They are buil|ders of Babell who speake to the people in a language they vnderstand not That which God powred out as a cruse on
the first Babell, that one of them vnderstood not what an|other
said, and the people knew not what the builders cra|ued,
in the second Babell is receiued as a blessing. The Cal|deans
a fierce and cruell nation were sent against the Iewes,
speaking to them in a language which they vnderstood not,
to punish in them the contempt of the voice of God, which
they would not learne nor vnderstand: and now the mes|sengers
of Antichrist, a cruell and mercilesse people, are
come out speaking to the world in an vncouth language,
for punishment of them that receiued not the loue of the
truth. A faithfull seruant of the Lord had he neuer so many
languages, had rather speake in the Church fiue words with
vnderstanding, that others might be instructed, than tenne
thousand otherwaies: he is but an hireling and a false Apo|stle,
that purposely speakes to a people in a language they
vnderstand not. Wee giue thanks to God, who hath deliue|red
vs from this most fearefull captiuitie and confusion of
Babell.



thou art but a lyar against the holy Ghost, and a wilfull
murtherer of thine owne soule, by faithlesse presumption.
The other sort of men are the Children of God,A comfort for weake Christi|ans who are moued by their wants to doubt of this testimo|nie. who
because they finde not alwayes within themselues this te|stimony
of the Spirit in a like measure, are therefore cast
downe and made oftentimes to think they neuer had it: for
as none are more ready to boast of the spirit then they who
haue him not; so none complaines more that they want
him, then they who possesse him. The Children of God in
this being like vnto rich worldlings, who suppose they bee
possessours of much, yet the great desire of more which is
in them, causeth them to esteeme that which they haue as
nothing, and therefore comforts not themselues with the
lawfull vse of that which they haue, but vexes their spirits
with restlesse thoughts for that which they want: euen so
it is customable with the Children of God, albeit they haue
attayned to a good measure of faith and loue of God, and
are euen become rich in the grace of the Lord Iesus, yet are
they so desirous of more, that many a time they esteeme
nothing of that which they haue, but goe about mourning
and complaining that they haue no faith, no loue, no grace,
no life; in which extremitie we see that many in their weak|nesse
offend the Lord their God.A necessary ad|monition so to mourn for that which we wa~t, that wee giue thanks for that mesure of grace which we haue Herein therefore is the
Christian to bee admonished that hee keepe mediocritie;
to lament thy wants and to thirst for more grace, is a sure
token of a spirituall life, but let vs so complaine for that
which wee vvant, that wee bee comforted in God for that
beginning and little measure of grace which wee haue; re|member
that the same mouth of God which commaunds
thee to mourne, commaunds thee also to reioyce, we want
not matter of both; matter vve haue of mourning for which
wee may lament with the Apostle,Rom. 7. 24. O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliuer mee from the body of this death? matter
of ioy wee haue also in our God, for vvhich vvee may re|ioyce
with him and say,Ibid. ver. 25. I thanke God through Iesus Christ:
surely it cannot bee vvithout vnthankfulnesse vnto God so

to mourne for our vvants, that wee giue not praise to God
for the beginnings of grace vve haue.
And for this same effect,This testimo|nie of the spirit is not alway perceiued in a like measure of them who haue it. let vs yet further consider that
this testimonie of the Spirit is not at all times enioyed in a
like measure, for that were to enioy heauen vpon earth. The
Lord therefore doth in such sort dispense it, that sometimes
he lets his children feele it for their consolation, and againe
with-drawes it from them for their humiliation: when they
feele it, they so abound in ioy that all the terrors and threat|nings
of Sathan, all his promises and allurements are despi|sed
of them, and trodden vnder their feete; they sing within
themselues that glorious triumph of the Apostle,Rom. 8. 35. who shall
seperate vs from the loue of God, but this ioy proceeding from
the fulnesse of faith, continues not, the voyce of the Spirit
of adoption waxing somwhat more silent, feares and doubts
succeedes in that same heart which before abounded with
ioy, and this for our humiliation.
But now in this estate least the Children of God be dis|couraged
by the silence of the testimonie,Co~fort against spirituall de|sertions. let them first of
all haue recourse to the forepast working of God in them,
let them call to minde with Dauid the dayes of old, remem|ber
their ioyfull songs by which they haue praised GOD,
their humble prayers by which many a time they haue got|ten
accesse to the throne of grace, and these heauenly mo|tions
which haue replenished their soules with ioy, and so
of the former footesteps of his grace, let them discerne his
presence euen then when they cannot perceiue him. And
next let them consider that the godly in the time of their
desertion, which is their spirituall disease, are euill iudges of
themselues, for they perceiue not that which they possesse:
there may bee an invincible hope of mercy in that soule
wherein for the present there is no hope of mercy; and this
all the Children of God may make in their owne experi|ence;
for whereof I pray thee hath it come, that thou a weak
man hast foughten so long against principalities  powers?



the Lord had reserued mercy for vs, wee should bee made
like vnto Sodome or Gomorrha,Isai. 1. 9. but now the lots are fallen
to vs in pleasant places, and we haue a fayre heritage. Bles|sed
bee the God of our saluation from henceforth and for
euer.
If wee bee Children.The Sons of God cannot but liue because they are the heires of God. As for the Apostles order in these
words, wee are to remember that the Apostle here insists
in the confirmation of that part of his reason, that they who
are the Sonnes of God shall liue. Now hee lets vs see the
necessitie thereof, the Sonnes of God are the Heyres of God,
and the heritage whereunto they are borne is eternall life,
therefore of necessitie they must liue.
Wee haue here first to consider that high preferment
whereunto wee are called in Christ,Gods goodnes is shewed to all his creaturs, but his inheritance is resued to his Sonnes. not onely to bee the
Sonnes of God, but declared also to be the Heyres of God.
The heyre in a familie hath this prerogatiue, that albeit the
hand of his Father bee not closed from giuing good things
vnto others, yet the inheritance is reserued for him. As A|braham
gaue gifts to the Sonnes of Keturah,Gen. 25. but kept his
best things for Isaac, so the Lord our God shewes his great
bountifulnesse,Mat. 5. 45. in that hee makes his Sunne to shine, and
his raine to fall downe vpon the vniust, no lesse than the
iust, yet herein stands the comfort of his children, that hee
reserues his best and most excellent things for them. Ney|ther
is it his creatures that hee giues to them in a portion,
hee giues himselfe vnto them; as he promised to Abraham,
so he perfermes it to all the seed of Abraham; I am thy ex|ceeding
great reward: and therefore doe the godly so craue
him, that without him nothing can content them, O Lord
thou art my portion (said Dauid.Psal. 119. 57) My Soule saith to the Lord,
thou art my portion (said Ieremie.Lam. 3. 24.) But as for them, who can
content themselues with the gifts of God, suppose they ne|uer
inioy himselfe, they declare they are but Seruants, who
are not to bide in the house for euer, and not the Sonnes of
God.

Againe,All the sons of God are his heyres and yet the inheritance is not dimi|nished. wee haue to marke here, that albeit the Lord
haue innumerable sonnes yet are they all his Heyres. No
Monarch in the world can beautifie his children with this
priuiledge, as to make them all his heyres, and not diminish
his Empyre; but the Lord herein declares the riches of his
glorious inheritance, that all his sonnes are his Heyres, and
yet the inheritance inioyed of many is not the lesse. Ney|ther
are wee to thinke this impossible, for seeing the Lord
hath endued the Sunne in the firmament with this proper|tie,
that albeit the light thereof be communicated vnto ma|ny,Aug. de verb dom. in Euan.
yet is it not the lesse in it selfe: plurium oculos pascit, 
tamen tanta est, quanta erat  illi pascuntur,  illa non mi|nuitur:Ioan. ser. 64.
it feedes the eyes of many, they are nourished, and
it is not diminished: may wee not much more thinke that
the heauenly light communicated to many, shall for all that
not be impared? In earthly inheritances it is so the moe be
pertakers of them, the lesse they are, but it is not so in the
heauenly, there needes no strife among the brethren for
diuision of the inheritance, for the rich portion of one shall
be no preiudice to another.
Neyther shall wee that are called to bee the sonnes of
God in this last age of the world,They who wer born in the first age of the world shall not be perfected without vs. suffer any preiudice that
many hundred years before vs, some haue been entred heires
of that kingdome, God prouiding a better thing for vs, that they
without vs should not bee perfected. Adam the first that euer
was made the sonne of God by creation,Heb. 11. 40. and afterward the
first sonne of God also by regeneration, together with the
rest of those faithfull Patriarches that followed him, hath
in regard of years long before vs inherited the promises,
yet shall it not preiudice them who in the last age of the
world are called to the fellowship of the faith of Christ;
yea, hee that shall bee the last borne sonne of God in the
earth by regeneration, shall also bee pertaker of this priui|ledge
of the inheritance. And this should greatly encou+rage
vs to serue our God, considering that how euer many

of our brethren be entred before vs, whose example should
confirme vs, yet the portion prepared for vs, shalt not be
the lesser.
There is also another difference:In earthly in|heritances the father dyes or the sonne in|herit, but here the sonne must dye, or else hee cannot inherit. for in the earthly inhe|ritances
the father must first die, before the son come to the
full possession thereof; but in the heauenly wee our selues
must die, that wee may possesse the inheritance. For our
father is the auncient of dayes: the heauens are the workes of
his hands, they shall perish, but hee doth remaine: they shall
waxe old as doth a garment, but hee is the same, and his yeeres
shall not faile.Psal. 102. 26 Hee is the father of eternitie, in whom there
cannot fall so much as a shadow of change, farre lesse is hee
subiect to death: but as for vs, by suffering death we must
enter into our kingdome; wee cannot see him so long as
wee liue, nor be satisfied with his image, till wee awake:
therefore should the day of death be a ioyfull day vnto vs,
because it is the day of our entrance to our inheritance.
Vnnaturall worldlings reioyce at the death of their Parents,Psal. 17. 15.
because by it they come to the heritage, they carry merri|est
harts within them, when they put on their blackest gar|ments;
but as for vs, wee should reioyce at the day of our
owne death, it is not the day of our sorrow as naturall men
accounts it, but the day of our delight, in the which we en|ter
into the fruition of our heauenly inheritance.
Hee cals vs not onely the Heyres of God,Theophilact. but annexed
Heyres with Iesus Christ, that so he may shew, Nos grandes
futuros haeredes,Christs two-fold right to the inheritance and how in the second on|ly we are an|nexed with him that wee are to be great heyres. The Lord
Iesus hath a twofold right to his fathers inheritance: one by
his eternall generation, and so hee is the heyre of God, in
a manner proper and peculiar to himselfe onely: the other
hee hath by conquest, for by the merit of his death he hath
conquered eternall life for all his brethren: and this right
he communicates vnto vs, whereby we also become heyres,
annexed with him: in the first hee admits no companion,
in the second, hee cals vs to be pertakers with him.

And this serues vnto vs,How all these great mercies should prouoke vs to walke worthy of our heauenly vo|cation. not onely for a speciall comfort
in the houre of tentation, and day of death, as wee marked
before, but should also prouoke vs to answere the heauenly
vocation by a holy disposition: seeing wee are the sonnes
of God, shall wee not resemble his image? seeing wee are
called to be heyres of an heauenly inheritance, shall we any
more minde earthly things? Farre be it from vs, that wee
should be prophane like Esau,Gen. 25. 2 Tim. 4. who sould his birth-right
for a mease of pottage; or like Demas wee should forsake
the fellowship of our brethren,Phil. 3. 8. 9. and imbrace this present
world: but let vs rather with the holy Apostle, account all
things to be but doung, in respect of the excellent knowledge
and fellowship of our Lord Iesus. Seeing Christ must be
our comfort in death, when all other comforts will fosake
vs, let vs make him our ioy and pleasure in life, that so both
in life and death he may be an aduantage vnto vs: for these
things, for which miserable worldlings forsake their God,
shall in the end forsake them. Let a couetous man see in the
houre of his death, those treasures of Gold and siluer which
hee fought in his life more than God, and they shall be no
more pleasure to him, than was those thirty peeces of siluer
to Iudas, which hee tooke in exchange of Iesus Christ.
Present a spoonefull of Wine to the drunkard, whose bellie
was his God in his life time, and hee shall not be able to
receiue it. Let the harlot stand at that time in the sight of the
whoremonger, shee may encrease his sorrow, and terrifie his
conscience, but shall not render him comfort. Yet these are
the strange Gods after which most part of the world goes
a whooring: but let vs not cast in our portion among them;
we are pertakers of the heauenly vocation, called to bee the
sonnes and daughters of the liuing God; blessed shall we be
if we walke worthie of our calling.For Sathans silly offers are not to be com|pared to these high mercies whereunto God hath cal|led vs in Christ
For we see here whervnto we are called, by adoption we
are made the sons of God, and brethren of Christ: of rebels,
we are made the seruants of God, yea more than that, the

friends of God,Ioh. 14. 15. hence forth call I not you seruants but friends,
yea more than friends, he hath made vs brethren, hee that
sanctifieth,Heb. 2. 11. and they who are sanctified are all one, wherefore he
is not ashamed to call them brethren: O wonderfull comfort!
the Father cryes from heauen,Mat. 17. 5. this is my beloued Sonne in
whom I am well pleased, heare him: the Sonne againe speak|ing
to vs on earth saith,Ioh. 20. 17. I goe vp to your Father, and my Fa|ther,
hee that is my Father is also your Father, therefore
goe yee vnto him, and call vpon him as your Father. O
qualis ille dominus, qui omnes seruos suos facit amicos suos, 
quod multo maius est fratres suos: O what a sweet Lord is
hee who makes all his seruants his friends, and which is
much more his brethren. Surely the yoake of Christ is
easie,Mat. 11. 30. and his burthen is light, we are called to be annexed
pertakers with him of all the good that is in him. The Lord
therefore more and more confirme vs, that despysing all
the subtill offers of Sathan, whereby he would steale
vs away from the loue of Christ, and delighting
in that high dignitie, whereunto we are
called, our harts may cleaue to the
Lord for euer, without
seperation.








THE
RIGHT WAY TO
Eternall Glory.
VVherein the counsaile of God con|cerning
Mans saluation is so manifested, that the Chri|stian
effectually called may heare himselfe after the
Crosse ordayned to the Crowne, and read his owne
Name written in the booke of Life.
Being the second benefit wee haue by our
Lord Iesus Christ.
Come and see.
Written by M^r^. William Cowper, Minister of
Gods word at Perth.
LONDON:
Printed by Thomas Snodham for William Firebrand,
and are to be sould at his shoppe in Popes-head
Pallace. 1609.




the welfare of your Highnesse royall children, the terrour of
your enimies, and common benefite of all your Maiesties well
affected subiects. A good so much the more carefully to bee
keept, because Sathan out of all doubt spitefully doth enuie it,
as being the very fountaine, out of which doth flow that great
and common good, both of your royall posteritie, and loyall peo|ple,
the aspect of your Highnesse fauourable countenances loo|king
in loue one of you to another, and both of your maiesties in
coniunct compassion to your people, sweeter than the influence
of the vndiuided Pleiades, bringing to Church and common
wealth, vnder your happy raigne a flourishing spring of innu|merable
blessings. We doe therefore blesse the Lord who hath
confirmed your royall hearts, and set it in the foremost of your
godly cares, how to keep and increase this holy and happy band
of loue which keepeth you both. For the continuance whereof,
as after my weake measure, I stand vp a dayly supplicant vnto
the Lord, among others your Highnesse loyall subiects, so doe I
humbly craue that your Highnesse impute it not to me for pre|sumption,
that I haue conioyned your maiesties in the partici|pation
of this small propine of the first fruits of my labors, whom
I doe wish for euer to be conioyned in the communion of al good
present, and to come: but that rather according to your High|nesse
wonted fauour and clemencie toward me, your maiestie
would graciously accept it, as a testimonie of my ear|nest
and vnfained affection toward your High|nesse
name and honour in this life, and euer|lasting
welfare in the life to come.
Your Maiesties most humble Sub|iect
and dayly Oratour
William Cowper,
Minister at Perth.





THE
RIGHT WAY TO
Eternall Glory.
THE SECOND PART OF THE CHAP|ter,
contayning Comforts against the
CROSSE.

Verse 17.
If so be wee suffer with him, that we may
also be glorified with him.
_THE mortification of a Christian,The mortifica|tion of a Chri|stian consists in two things.
whereunto the spirit of GOD so
frequently exhorts vs, consists in
these two, first in a subduing by
a holy Discipline our inordinate
lustes, which naturally rebell a|gainst
the law of God: secondly,
in a patient bearing of the Crosse
of Iesus. In the first part of the
Chapter, the Apostle hath exhorted vs vnto the one, and
now in the second, by many arguments he strengthens vs
against the other: vnlesse wee make some profit in the
first point of mortification, it is certaine we shall neuer pro|ceed
to the second. For the life of one affection is far lesse



preuailes most to make man impatient, and so driue him to
blaspheme God. And therefore most of all wee are to con|firme
our weakenesse against the crosse, since in it the eni|mie
of our saluation placeth his principall strength. Let vs
hearken to the Apostle, who as a minister of Iesus indeede,
and a heauenly Phisition, sent to vs from the Lord our
God, doth here temper the bitter waters of Marah, and
make them sweet vnto all the Israell of God.
The first argument of comfort is set downe in this lat|ter
end of the 17.The first prin|cipal argument against the crosse is from the end of our afflictions. Verse, and it is taken partly from the
nature of out sufferings, they are sufferings with Christ, and
partly from the end thereof, which is to raigne with Christ
in glory. Here first we learne that suffering must goe before
glory: the husband-man must labour before hee receiue the
fruits,2. Tim. 2. 8. neither is hee that striueth for a maisterie crowned, ex|cept
hee striue as hee ought. The prince of saluation was con|secrated
by affliction, it behoued him first to suffer and then
to enter into his kingdome. All that professe him are de|sirous
with the sonnes of Zebedeus, to sit some at his right
hand, and some at his left, but are not so content to drinke
of his cuppe, and be baptised with his baptisme. Volunt
omnes te frui,Bernard at non ita  imitari, conregnare cupiunt, sed non
compati, they would all enioy thee, knowing that pleasures
for euermore are at thy right hand, but are not content to
follow thee, they all desire to raigne with thee, but not so
to suffer with thee: but this is a preposterous way, it is to
diuide those things which the Lord here hath ioyned to|gether,
except first we suffer with him, we shall not hereaf|ter
raigne with him.
Secondly,Different cour|ses of the Chri|stian  world|ling. let vs marke here the different courses of the
Christian and worldling, the Christian by temporall trou|ble
goes on to eternall glory, the worldling by temporall
glory goes on to eternall shame. If yee goe to the Schoole
of Iesus, the first ABC of religion taught you there, will
bee this,Mat. 10. 38. If any man will be my Disciple, let him denie himselfe
take vp his Crosse and follow mee: if yee goe to the Schoole

of Sathan, the first ABC of Atheisme taught there is this,
All the kingdomes of the world will I giue thee, if thou wilt fall
downe and worship mee. The Lord Iesus through light and
momentanie afflictions, leades his children to an infinite
waight of glory; but Sathan through the present perishing
pleasure of sinne, leades his miserable captiues to euerlast|ing
paine:Mat. 5. therefore it is said of our Sauiour of the one, bles|sed
are yee that mourne for yee shall be comforted, and of the
other,Luke. 6. 25. we bee to you that laugh now, for yee shall waite and
weepe.
As there is no comparison betweene these two,The end of the Christian is better than his beginning, not so with the worldling. so blessed
shall wee be if wee make choyse of the best. Moses estee|med
the rebuke of Christ, greater riches than the treasures
of Egypt; because he had respect to the recompense of re|ward:
and shall not we reioyce in our present afflictions,
considering they are the way vnto our glory? if wee sowe in
teares, wee shall reape in ioy. The end of the godly is better
than their beginning, for the light of the righteous encreaseth
more and more, like the Sunne vnto the noone day, they begin
with teares, and they end with ioy: but the light of the
wicked is like vnto the light of a candle, it shineth for a
while, and incontinent ends in stincking smoake: as Belta|sars
banquet was concluded with a cuppe of wrath, so all
the pleasures of the wicked ends in paine. At that banquet
in Cana, the Lord Iesus brought in the finest wine hind|most,
but Sathan doth with his miserable banquetters, as the
gouernours of that feast speakes, hee presents his best first,
and after when they haue well dronken, brings in that which
is worse; in the entry he presents the deceitfull pleasures of
sinne, but doolefull and lamentable is their end: for what bet|ter
portion can he giue vnto them, than is prepared for him|selfe?
he is reserued to blacknesse of darknesse, tribulation,
and anguish of Spirit, terrour and horrible wrath, shame
and endlesse confusion is prepared for him, and all those
who are portioners with him.



owne bloud, that fruitful Vine which hath sprung out from
that blessed stock Iesus Christ, the more it was cut by the
bloudy knie of cruell persecuters, the more hath it flou|rished.
Againe,The wicked haue crosses, but not Christs Crosse. wee haue here this comfort, that the sufferings
of the godly are sufferings with Christ. There is no man
in the world, who wants his owne crosse; euen they who
haue their fattest portions in earth haue it not without ma|ny
sorrowes, by vertue of that cursse, in the sweat of thy brow
shalt thou eate bread,G. 3. 19. till thou returne to the earth: and herein
they are but miserable,Barn. apol ad Abbat Clun. vae portantibus Crucem  non se|quentibus
Christum, woe is vnto them, who beare the crosse
and follow not Christ; comfortlesse, fruitlesse and endlesse
will their sufferings be But as for the Godly, they are suffe|rers
with Christ, they suffer not alone; if Ioseph goe to the
prison, the Lord shall goe with him; if the three Children
goe to the fire, the fourth like the sonne of God shall goe
with them.The three per|sons of the Tri|nitie are said to suffer with the Godly. God the Father protests that in all the troubles
of his Children hee was troubled, and that he hath such a
tender feeling of their afflictions, that hee who toucheth
them, toucheth the apple of his eye: and the Lord Iesus the
sonne of God, when his Saints at Damascus were persecu|ted,
cryed from heauen to the persecuter, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me.Acts 9. 4. And as concerning the holy Ghost, the
Apostle testifies,1 Pet. 4. 14. Blessed are yee if yee be railed vpon for the
name of Iesus, for the Spirit of God and of glory rests on you:
which on their part is euill spoken of, but on your part is glori|fied.Cir. atec. 16
Thus wee see, quam magnos habeamus commilitones,
how great and strong fellow-warriours wee haue to assist;
the Lord being so present with vs,Cip. lib. 2. epist. 6. non vt seruos suos spectet
tantum, sed vt ipse luctetur in nobis, that hee doth not onely
behold his seruants in their conflicts, but hee himselfe also
doth wrestle in them.
Where for our further comfort,Three things required to make our suffe|rings sufferings with Christ. if any man be desirous to
know, whether if his sufferings be sufferings with Christ, or
not, let him consider these three things: first, how Iesus

receiued the Crosse as a cuppe giuen to him out of his Fa|thers
hand, neither looking to Iudas that betrayed him, nor
to the Iewes that pursued him. Secondly, hee receiued it
not grudgingly nor impatiently, but with an humble sub|mission
of his will, to the will of his Father. Thirdly, hee
suffered for this end, that he might abolish sinne, and destroy
him who had the power of death. If these three concurre in
thy sufferings, thou mayest be sure they are suffrings with
Christ: first, if passing by the instrument of thy trouble,
thou looke to the hand of God, tempering and giuing it
vnto thee: secondly, if thou receiue it with a humble sub|mission
of thy spirit to him who is the Father of Spirits:
and thirdly, if it worke in thee a mortification of thy sinfull
lusts and affections.
And of this we haue to make our vse in all our afflicti|ons
inward,Comfort a|gainst inward Afflictions. or outward: and first concerning inward af|flictions,
if at any time it please the Lord to exercise vs with
fearefull agonies of Conscience, let vs looke vnto GOD,
who killes and makes aliue, who casts downe and raises vp;
let vs for a while beare his indignation, he abides but a mo|ment
in his anger: if we finde that by them wee are more
humbled, wakened out of securitie, and stirred vp more
feruently to pray, and that the life of sinne is weakened in
vs, let vs be out of all doubt, that these inward troubles are
sufferings with Christ; whose soule for our sinnes was hea|uie
vnto the death, and his body did sweat blood, through
the vehement anguish of his spirit.Comfort a|gainst outward Afflictions which wee suf|fer either in name, And as for outward suf|ferings,
they are either such as concernes our Name, our
goods, or our persons. As for those which concerne our
name: it is a singular pollicy of Sathan, to beare downe the
children of God, in the estimation of others, vt qui conscien|tiae
suae luce clarescunt, alienis rumoribus sordidentur,Ambrose. that they
who are glorious in the light of their owne conscience, may
be made filthie by the false reports of others, and so made
vnprofitable to doe others the good that they would: but
let vs in such tentations learne from Dauid, to looke vnto

God, and not to Shimei, vsing the vndesrued contumelis
of men, as profitable meanes to worke in vs that inward
humiliation, which our manfold sinnes, though not against
man, yet against God requireth of vs: so shall we suffer with
him, who being the innocent Lambe of God, sustayned
neuerthelesse great contradiction of sinners, reproched to
be one possessed with a Diuell, notwithstanding that hee
was the very sonne of God, filled in his manhood with the
holy Ghost.
And as concerning the losse of worldly goods,Or in our goods. who
euer bee the instrument, learne thou to take it as a cup out
of the hand of thy heauenly Father, after the example of Iob,
who passing by the Sabeans and the Caldeans, looked to
the hand of God, the Lord hath giuen, and the Lord hath ta+ken,Iob. 1. 21.
(saith hee) blessed be the name of the Lord. It is not for
lacke of loue that the mother withdrawes from the Childe
the vse of the pappe, but that shee may acquaint him with
stronger meat: and if the Lord take from vs these transito|rie
things, it is not because we are not beloued of him, but
that we may set our harts vpon those things which are more
waightie and permanent; which if wee doe then are our
sufferings, sufferings with him, who being rich became
poore, that in all things we might be made rich in him.
And the same are we to doe in those troubles which we
sustayne in our bodyes:Or in our persons. for if (as the Apostles sayth) wee
haue had fathers of our bodies who haue corrected vs,Heb. 12. 9. and
we haue giuen them reuerence, should we not much rather
be in subiection to the father of Spirits, that we might liue?
and if we can yeeld our bodies to phisitions to be cut or burnt
at their pleasure, how much more should wee submit them
to the Lord in all humble contentment to be chastised, as
he will? seeing hee protests himselfe hee doth it not, but for
our singular profit, that wee might be pertakers of his holines.
We shall raigne with Christ.In trouble it is expedient to looke vnto the end thereof. Worldlings wrestles for their
corruptible crowne, as vncertaine whether they shall obtaine
it or no, but it is not so with the Christian, we runne not as

vncertaine, we are sure that if we suffer with Christ, we shall
also raigne with him: though for the present no trouble bee
sweet, yet is the end thereof most comfortable; and we are
by the eyes of faith to looke vnto it, least our present mani|fold
tentations driue vs vnto impatience, for as he that going
through a strong running riuer is in danger to fall  drowne
by reason of the dissinesse of his braine, vnlesse he fixe his
eyes vpon the bancke; so shall we be ready to faint in affli|ction,
vnlesse we looke to the comfortable end thereof. If
we shall looke to Lazarus vpon the dunghill, and Ioseph in
the prison, what can wee iudge them to be but miserable
men? but if we consider their end, we shall see the one in
Abrahams bosome, and the other raigning in great glory
vnder Pharoah in Egipt; then shall wee say, verely there is
fruit for the righteous, and we shall find it true, which here
the Apostle saith, that if we suffer with Christ, we shall also
raigne with him.


Verse 18.
For I count that the afflictions of this pre|sent
time are not worthie of the glory to be reuealed.
_THe Apostle here subioynes an amplification
of his first argument:Amplification of the first prin|cipal argument. wee shall not onely (saith
hee) raigne with Christ, but raigne in such a
glory, as doth so farre surmount all our present
sufferings, that if they be weighed together in
a balance, the one shall bee found but light in regard of the
other.
For I count.He that tasted both of present sufferings and of glory to come, giues his iudgement here of both. The word the Apostle vseth here, imports
thus much, after reasoning I conclude, or, after iust recko|ning
this is the summe which I collect and gather: here then
are two circumstances which greaty amplifies his purpose,
one that hee sets not downe this as an vncertaine opinion,
but as a most sure conclusion gathered out of good reason.
And againe that it is the conclusion of such a one, as by

experience knew both: what experience the Apostle had of
our present suffering, hee telleth vs, 2. Cor. 11. what expe|rience
he had of the glory to be reuealed, he tels vs, 2. Cor. 12.
so that his words wee are to consider this way, let other
men count and reckon as they will, this is my reckoning,
who haue proued them both, there is no comparison be|tweene
them. What knowledge hee had of the weight of
our present sufferings, he tels you by a three-fold vniuersa|litie:
first, that hee had suffered all kinde of crosses, hunger,
thirst, cold, nakednesse, rods, stonings, imprisonnings: se|condly,
that he suffered in all places, in the sea, in the land,
in the citie, in the wildernesse, where euer he came to preach
the Gospell, there was he persecuted, by some one sort of
trouble or other: thirdly, that hee suffered of all sorts of
persons, both of the Gentiles, and of his owne nation, both
of open enimies, and of false brethren. Againe, as for his ex|perience
of the glory to be reuealed, hee tels you how hee
was taken vp into Paradise, and there heard such words as
cannot be reuealed.The one he ta|sted in his iour|nie from Ieru|salem to Illiri|cum, the other in his iourney from earth to heauen. This conclusion therefore is the more
to be esteemed of vs, because he who giues out this iudge|ment
of the excellency of the one aboue the other, is such a
one, as had experience of them both, hee made a iourney
on earth from Ierusalem to Illiricum, all which way prea|ching
the Gospell, he suffered many afflictions; he made
another iourney from earth to heauen, whether in the body
or out of the body hee could not tell, and there he saw that
inutterable glory: and comparing with himselfe these two
together, hee giues out this for a finall sentence, that all our
present afflictions are but light, in respect of that infinite
weight of glory to bee reuealed. As for worldlings wee are
not to stand vpon their testimonie, for as hee cannot giue
ou right sentence between two parties that heares not both
their causes, so cannot the worldling who knows somthing
both of the pleasures and sorrows of this life, but nothing
of the ioyes which are to come, consider how farre the life
to come is to be preferred before this: and therfore albeit in

the conclusions of his heart hee giue out sentence in fa|uours
of the life present, we are not to regard it, because he
hath not heard nor considered, that which tends to the com|mendation
of the other.
Wee see then here,How the cer|taintie of the glory to come mittigates our present trouble. how that our strength in trouble is
greatly encreased by the sight, at least by the certaintie, of
that glory which will be the ende of our trouble: this sight
made the Apostle count light of his present sufferings: let
Stephen haue his eyes in prayer to see the Heauens opened,
and Iesus standing at the right hand of God, and hee shall
not bee moued with the stones which the Iewes violently
throw at him: let Moses see him who is inuisible, and hee
shall not feare Pharaoh; let him see that recompense of re|ward,
and he shall be better contented to suffer rebuke with
the people of God, than to enioy the treasures of Egypt:
this is that which made the Martyres stand exulting and re|ioycing,
euen then when Infidels tormented their bodyes.
If they had beene in the body, they had felt the paine, and
it had disquieted them,Ber. in. Cant. ser. 61. nunc vero non mirum si exules a cor|pore,
dolores non sentiant corporis, but now no meruaile that
being out of the body, they felt not the dolors of the body:
and where thinke yee was then the soule of the Martyr?
certainely in a sure place, euen in Petra, in the rocke of in|uincible,
in the bowels of Christ, non sua sentit, dum Christi
vulnera intuetur, hee feeleth not his owne wounds, while as
stedfastly hee fixeth his eyes vpon the wounds of Christ,
neyther will hee be afraid for the losse of this life, who hath
laid hold vpon eternall life, and is made sure of a better.
Let vs therefore pray vnto God diligently,It should make vs despise both the threatnings  allurements of men. that our eyes
may be opened, to see the riches of that glorious inheri|tance,
that as wee speake and heare of it, so in like manner
wee may see and feele it, for the sight thereof makes all
trouble easie, yea causeth the bitternesse of death to passe
away if: the world threaten vs with her terrours, let vs re|member
they are not comparable to Gods terrours;Mat. 10. 28 let vs
not feare them who killeth the body and are able to do no more,



faint vnder trouble, Can ye not suffer with me one houre? It
was the comfort that Athanasius gaue to the Church in
his time, that Iulian should be but Nubeculo cito transitura, a
stormy little cloud, that vvould quickly passe by; and it is
certainely true both of our troubles, and of all the instru|ments
thereof, let vs waite a while on our God with pati|ence,
and vve shall see them no more,
This shortnesse of our afflictions depends vpon the
breuitie and vanitie of our life,How our life is but the life of a moment. which in the estimation of
Gods spirit is so short and vaine a thing, that he vouchsafes
not the name of life vpon it, without some restriction. In|deed
it bewitcheth vs so, that in our false imagination wee
conceit there is more soliditie and continuance in one
yeere that is before vs, then in tenne that are past by vs;
the time which is past is gone away like a thought, and that
which is to come we thinke it longer, then indeede by ex|perience
wee shall finde it. But the spirit of God, who best
knowes it, giues vnto it the name of life as I said with a re|striction,
hee calles it a momentanie life, it is but a moment
wherein we liue, if we iudge aright we haue no more: for as
for the moments which are past, they are dead to thee, and
thou to them, and as for the moments which are to come,
they are vncertain, and thou canst not be said to liue in them;
so that no more is left to thee wherin thou canst truely say I
liue, but a moment, and this also must shortly goe away and
giue place to another, that so by succession of moments one
vnto another, thy silly life may be prorogued for a while.
But this shall yet better appeare,Sacred simili|tudes, by which the holy Ghost shadowes the vanitie of our present life. if wee consider those
similitudes by which the spirit of God describes the vanitie
of this our mortall life. Patient Iob compares the life of
man vnto the weauers shuttle, which scarce is in at the one
end of the webbe, when it is out at the other, and hee that
lookes vnto it,Iob. 7. 6. can hardly perceiue it. He compares it also
to the winde,Iob. 9. that quickly flyeth by vs; and to the cloud,
which speedely vanishes; to a Post that runnes diligently
and rests not till he come to his end; to an hungry Eagle in

the aire, who seeing her pray a farre off flyeth speedely vpon
it;Iob. 14. to a flower that flourishes at once, but withers inconti|nent;
and last of all to a ship sayling in the sea before the
winde, which for the present is seene, but within short space
appeares no more, yea doth not leaue behinde her any foot|step
or token that any such thing was there; and as it is with
them who saile in her, that how euer they change their
action, yet goe they on in their course toward their wished
hauen: so is it with vs, doe what wee will, whether wee
eate, or wee sleepe, wee are hasting alway toward our ends.
The Psalmist againe compares our life to a spanne or hand
breadth:Psal. 90. to the grasse which groweth vp in the morning,
and is cut downe in the euening: to a sleepe which slippes
away before wee can know what were doing in it: to a
dreame, which of all things is most fickle and vaine: to a
thought, which is not well begunne, when it is ended: and
last of all to a declyning shadow, as is the shadow of the
Sunne in the setting, which a man shall see on the toppe
of a mountaine lesse and lesse, vanishing till it be no more.
The Apostle S. Paul compares our life to a race, and S.
Iames compares it to a smoke or vapour.
Thus we see how little the spirit of God esteemes of that,The pleasures of this life are worme-eaten.
whereof all the sonnes of Adam accounts so much. Our
sinne hath shortened our dayes, and made them miserable;
the pleasures of this life are worme-eaten, and the glory of
flesh is but like the gourd of Ionas, which the one day
growes vp, and the next day is consumed by the wormes.
If Salomon who proued all the pleasures this life could yeeld,
after tryall of them, cryed out all is vanitie; if Iob when
his wealth had worne from him, looking to his forepassed
dayes was compelled to conclude,Iob. 14. 5. I haue had for inheritance
the months of vanitie: what, shall wee looke to finde more
comfort in this wretched life, than those men of God before
vs haue found? let vs not thinke it, if wee seeke our comfort
in her perishing gaine or glory, we shall lament at the last;
we haue fished all night, and haue taken nothing; wee haue



former seauen yeeres of plenty, so shall the endlesse sor|rowes
of the vvicked, make all their former pleasures to be
forgotten: the dayes shall come vpon them, in the vvhich
they shall say, I haue no pleasure in them. Oh that men
could consider this double losse they incurre by continu|ing
in their sinnes; Esau sold his birth-right for a mease of
pottage; and Adam lost paradise for an apple; and thou more
to be lamented, that becomes not wise by their example,
looses like a foole that glory to be reuealed, for a floure: for
what better are the best things of the world, than the floure
of the Rose, vvhich vvanteth not the owne thornes, and
vermine; being plucked in the garden it vvithers in thy hand
before thou canst bring it home to thy house; and yet for
the like of these thou doest forgoe those things which are
aboue, and more then that redeemes those shadowes, by
bringing vpon thy selfe that infinit weight of wrath, vvhich
is to be reuealed vpon all the children of disobedience.
Of the glory. The end of our present sufferings here vve
see it is glory. Yee shall weepe and lament (saith our Sauiour)
and the world shall reioyce,Iohn. 16. 20. yee shall sorrow, but your sorrow
shall be turned into ioy. Sometime God giues his children
notable comfort before trouble,Comfort comes some|time before trouble, some|time in trouble, but alway after trouble, to the godly. as Elias receiued a double
portion before his forty dayes fasting; Peter, Iames and Iohn
saw the glory of Christ transfigured on Mount Tabor, be|fore
they saw his fearefull and bloody sweat in the garden; it
pleased the Lord by the sight of the one to confirme them,
that the sight of the other should not confound them. Some|time
againe the Lord in the middest of trouble giues his
children such comfort, as deuoures all their present sor|rowes;
to Peter in the prison there appeared an Angell,
and a light shining round about him; and Iacob banished
from his fathers house, sees a more comfortable vision at
Bethel, than any that euer he had seene at home: but albeit
the Lord deales not alway with al his children, as he did with
these, yet are they all sure of this comfort, glory shall be the
end of their sufferings.

To be reuealed.Our glory is prepared but not reueled. The Apostle calleth it a glory to be re|uealed,
hee telleth vs in another place, that it is prepared al|ready,
yea, it was prepared before the foundation of the
world,Aug. de San|ctis. ser. 46. but it is not yet reuealed: beatitudo illa comparari hic
potest, possideri non potest, that felicitie may bee obtayned
here, but cannot be possessed here. Ne ita quaeras in via,
quod tibi seruatur in patria, seeke not therefore that in the
way, which is keept for thee, till thou come to thy coun|try:
let vs possesse our Soules in patience, waiting for that,
which in this life is neyther reuealed, nor can be possessed.
Moses besought the Lord to shew him his glory,Exod. 33. 18 and he re|ceiued
this answere, No man can see it and liue: and when
that glory filled the Tabernacle,Exod. 40. 34. it is said, that Moses could
not enter into it. Seeing it is so that our wretched nature can
not abide that glory, and we cannot liue and see the Lord, let
vs prepare our selues with ioy and contentment to dye, that
wee may see him.
And in the meane time,Yet by the glo|ry reuealed we may iudge of that glory which is not reuealed. by that glory which God hath
reuealed in his works, let vs iudge of that which is not re|uealed;
if these workes of God which wee see, bee so beau|tifull,
what shall we thinke of those wee see not? out of all
doubt, among all the workes of God, those which are inui|sible,Aug. de temp. ser. 99.
are most excellent, as the body of man is a beautifull
workmanship, but not comparable to the soule. This glory
I account it the highest degree of eternall life: the first is,
Righteousnesse; the second, Peace; the third, Ioy; the fourth
is Glory: Righteousnesse breeds Peace, and Peace breeds
Ioy, and our Ioy shall be crowned with glory: if the doing
of the workes of righteousnesse bring such comfort to the
minde, as the Godly find in experience, how shall our com|fort
abound when we receiue the reward of righteousnesse,
which is Glory?Ber. in Cant. Ser. 47. Si sic bonus es quaerentibus te, qualis es asse|quentibus?
if thou Lord be so good to them who seeke thee,
what shalt thou bee to them who finde thee?God is good to them who seeke him, much more vnto the~ who finde him. wee may be
assured that these first fruites of the Spirit, and the earnest
of our heauenly inheritance, wherin now stands our greatest



the Lord face to face, and shall in such sort behold his glory,
that wee shall be transformed into it. This change as wit|nesseth
the Apostle, is begun by that sight of God which
we haue in the Gospell, for euen now we beheld as in a mir|rour
the glory of the Lord with open face, and are changed
from glory to glory by the same image, by the spirit of the Lord,
but in heauen this change shall be perfected, and wee shall
be fully transformed into his holy similitude, so that nothing
shall be left in vs, but that which is his owne workmanship.
O how hath the Lord magnified his mercy towards vs!
hee hath raised our honour from the dust, and deliuered our
soules for the lower hell, and hath made vs to sit with him|selfe
in the highest places, where wee shall be filled with
the ioyes which are at his right hand; we shall drinke of the
riuers of his pleasures; in his light we shall see light, and be
transchanged by the light of his countenance.
Moses was fortie dayes with God vpon Mount Sinai,Fortie dayes company with God changed the face of Moses, how much more, c
and his face shined so brightly, that when hee came downe
the people of Israell might not behold him; if fortie dayes
remayning with God did so transchange him, how shall we
be changed, who shall for euer abide with him,  neuer any
more come downe from him? Our Sauiour Christ saith,
that the face of the iust shall shine in that day, like the Sunne in
the firmament. O what glory shall be among them all, when
the glory of one shall be like the brightnesse of the Sunne?
et qualis tunc erit splendor animarum,Aug. ad frat. in Erem. quando solis habebit cla|ritatem
lux corporum? and when the light of their body
shall be like vnto the light of the Sunne, how great thinke
ye shall be the shining light of the soule?If our bodyes shall shine as the Sunne, what shall our soules be? Those three dis|ciples
that were with our Lord vpon Mount Tabor, were
so filled with ioy, at the little glance of his glory which they
saw, that they wished they might bide therefor euer; how
then shall we be rauished, when we shall see that full mani|festation
of his glory? we shall neuer desire to remoue out
of that mountaine of God: another hart shall be giuen vs,
and we shall become other men then we are: so that as a

little drop of water powred into a great vessell full of wine,
looseth both the taste and colour of water, and becomes
wine, or as iron put into the fire takes on after a sort, the
nature of fire, and as the ayre illuminated with the bright
shining Sunne, seemes not so much to be illuminated, as to
be light it selfe: so our soules and bodyes, when the glory
of God shal shine vpon them, shall be so wonderfully trans|changed,
that after a sort, wee shall become pertakers of the
diuine nature.
Beside this the excellencie of that glory shall yet better ap|peare,All the compa|nions in that glory, are fir borne, all nole me~, of sength and dignitie.
if we consider the companions with whom we shal be
glorified: there is the congregation of the first borne, all of them
are men of excellent strength, and dignitie, not of base li|nage,
but noble indeede; for by their second birth they are
the Sonnes of God, and brethren of the Lord Iesus. The
Citizens of Tyrus are discribed by Esau to haue been com|panions
to Princes; but in that heauenly Ierusalem, euery
Citizen is a crowned King, and none but Kings are free|men
of that citie, knit among themselues by the band of one
Spirit, into so holy a communion, that euery one of them
accounts the ioy, and glory of his brethren, an increase of
his owne ioy.The glor of one of them augments the Glory of an|other. It is not there as here vpon earth, where the
ioy of one is the cause of sorrow to another: the light of
the Sun darkneth the Moone, and the light of the Moone
obscureth the light of the Stars; if the one halfe of the earth
be illuminated, the other is left in darknesse: but there the
light of one augments the light of another, the glory of one
shall be the glory of all, euery one of them reioycing, not
onely because the lightsome countenance of God shines vp|on
themselues, but also because they see their brethren ad|mitted
to the fruition of that same glory.
But among all those,Specially the sight of Iesus Lord of that fa|milie shall en|crease our ioy. with vvhom wee shall be glorified,
there is one companion of our glory, who aboue all the
rest shall breede vs exceeding delectation, Iesus Christ the
man: O with what boldnesse and spirituall reioycing, shall
wee stand in among the holy Angels, when wee shall see



seest it replenished with varietie of all necessary and plea|sant
things, no sense wanting innumerable obiects, that may
delight thee; and yet all the beautie and pleasure of this
earth is as farre inferiour to that which is aboue, as it is su|periour
to that which the infant had in the mothers belly.
The firmament which is the seeling of our second house,The seeling of our seco~d house is but the paue|ment of our third house.
beautified with the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, set in it by
the hand of God, and shining more gloriously, than all the
pretious stones in the world, shall be no other thing, but the
neather side of the pauement of our Pallace. Iohn the Bap|tist
sprung for ioy in the bellie of his mother Elizabeth,Luk. 1. 14 when
the Lord Iesus came into the house, in the wombe of his
mother Mary, but afterward when hee saw the Lord Ie|sus
more clearely face to face, and pointed him out with the
finger,Iohn 1. 36. behold the Lambe of God; when he stood by him, as
a friend, and heard the voyce of the Bridegroome, he reioy|ced
in another manner: so in very truth all the reioycing
that wee haue in the house of our pilgrimage, is but like the
springing of Iohn Baptist in his mothers wombe, in com|parison
of those infinite ioyes wherewith wee shall be reple|nished,
when wee shall meete with our bridegroome in our
Fathers house, wherein we shall see him face to face and a|bide
with him for euer.
It is written of Ahashuerus that he made a great banquet
to his Princes and Nobles,Ahashuerus banquet not comparable to our marriae banquet. vvhich lasted for the space of an
hunded and fourescore dayes, and when he had done with
that, hee made another banquet to his Commons, for the
space of seauen dayes; the place vvas the outmost court of
the kings Pallace; the Tapestry was of all sorts of colours,
white, greene, and blew, fastned with cords of fine linnen
and purple, through rings and pillars of siluer, and marble;
the beds were of gold and siluer, the pauement of porphire,
marble, alablaster, and blew colour, the vessels wherein they
dranke were all of Gold; all this hee did, that hee might
shew the glory of his kingdome, and the honor of his maie|stie.
If a worm of the earth hath done so much for declaring

his begged glory, as rauished men into admiration thereof,
how I pray you shall the Lord our God the great King, de|clare
his glory? when hee shall make his banquet, couer his
Table, and gather his Princes, that is, his Sonnes, there|vnto,
not for a few dayes but for euer; not in the outmost
Court, but in the inner Court of his Pallace? Surely no
tongue can expresse it:If the outward court of Gods pallace be so furnished as we see, what is the inner. for seeing hee hath decked this
world wherein wee soiourne, and which I haue called the
outmost Court of his Pallace, in so rich and glorious man|ner,
that he hath ordayned lights both by day and night to
thine in it, and hath prepared a store-house of Fowles in
the ayre, another of Beastes in the earth, and the third of
Fishes in the Sea, for our necessitie; beside innumerable
pleasures for delectation; what glory, and varietie of plea|sures
may wee looke for, when hee shall separate vs fully
from the children of wrath, and assemble vs all into the in|ner
Court of his owne Pallace, into the chamber of his pre|sence?
wee may well thinke with the Apostle, that the
heart of man is not able to vnderstand those things, which
God hath prepared for vs; and therefore will rest with Da|uid,Psal. 65.
Blessed is the man whom thou chusest, and causest to come
vnto thee, he shall dwell in thy Courts, and be satisfied with the
pleasures of thine house.
This being spoken as concerning the excellency of that 
life, in that it is called a life of glory:The eternitie of it. the next thing to bee
considered here, is the eternitie thereof: for there is here a
secret opposition betweene our present sufferings, of which
the Apostle here saith, they are but for now, and betweene
that Glory which 2 Cor. 4. hee cals eternall, but herein wee
insist not, hauing spoken of it before.
The third thing concerning this Glory here touched,The claritie  perspicuity of it Col. 3. 3.
is the claritie and perspicuitie thereof, it shall be reuealed, and
not obscured any more, as now it is. Now our life is hid with
Christ in God. Now are wee the sonnes of God, but it appeares
not what wee shall be.1. Iohn. 3. As our head, being the God of glory,
came into the world in the shape of a seruant, so his members



yea, and to reioyce in our present afflictions, vnder hope of
that glory to be reuealed in vs. There is no man vve see that
will refuse to change for the better, he exchanges siluer for
gold, and giues leade for pretious stones, though the better
he gets be but in opinion: and shall not wee be content
like the vvise men of God, to forgoe the earth, and the
pleasures thereof,What taste worldlings haue of the ioyes to come. that vve may enioy heauen. As for world|lings,
it is no meruaile to see them take a dunghill of earth
in their armes, and say vnto it, thou art my ioy and my por|tion,
for they not being illuminated with the light of the li|uing,
make choyse of that which according to their light
they esteeme to be best; or if at any time they haue tasted
of the powers of the life to come, yet are they like those
Marchants, who hauing tasted wines vvhich pleases them
well, refuse to buy them, being scared with the greatnesse of
the price which must be giuen for them: euen so haue they
their owne ioy at the hearing of the word, and hath also their
owne desires, to be glorified with Christ; but when they
heare that before they enioy that glory, they must suffer
with Christ, deny themselues, for sake their sinfull pleasures,
and cease from their gainfull trade of wickednesse, they giue
ouer the bargaine, they stumble and fall backe to the former
course of their vngodly life.
But assuredly if we all knew those things which belong
to our peace,The onely cause why we walke slowly toward that glory is be|cause we know it not. but now are hid from our eyes, ten thousand
worlds could not keepe vs backe from them; and therefore
seeing all the cause of our slow running towards that price
of our heauenly calling is in the darknesse of our minds, let
vs pray continually, that the Lord would lighten the eyes of
our vnderstanding, that we may know the riches of his glori|ous
inheritance prepared for the Saints: and againe, Lord
remember vs with the fauour of thy people, and visit vs
with thy saluation, that we may see the felicitie of thy cho|sen,
and reioyce with the ioy of thy people, and glory with
thine inheritance; which the Lord graunt vnto vs for Iesus
Christs sake.



Verse 19.
For the feruent desire of the creature way|teth
when the sonnes of God shall be reueiled.
_WE haue heard hitherto the Apostles first prin|cipall
argument of comfort against the Crosse,The Apostle insists in the amplification of this glory.
taken from the end of our afflictions, set downe
in the end of the 17. verse. If wee suffer with
Christ, we shall raigne with Christ.He proues the greatnesse and certaintie of that glory, by two arguments This argument hee hath
amplyfied in the 18. verse. We shall be glorified with such
a glory as for weight and eternitie shall farre exceed our
present sufferings. Now he insists still in the same amplifi|cation,
and he proues that glory must be both a great and a 
certaine glory.From the fer|uent desire which the crea|ture hath to it by the instinct of Nature. First, because the creature by that instinct of
nature which God hath put into it, waites for the reuela|tion
of that glory. Secondly, because the sonnes of God
who haue receiued the first fruits of the spirit, by instinct
of grace, waite also for it. Now it can neither be a small thing
nor yet vncertaine, which God hath taught his creatures 
both by instinct of Nature and of Grace to long for:From the fer|uent desire which the god|ly haue to it by the instinct of Grace. but it
must be some excellent and most certaine good, where|vpon
God hath set the instinct and desire of his creature.
This being the Apostles purpose, the order of his pro|ceeding
is shortly this, verse 19. he sets downe a proposition
of the creatures feruent desire,The order of his proceeding in the first argument. to see that glory reueiled:
thereafter he assignes two reasons why they are so desirous
of it. The first is verse 20. taken from the present hard estate
of the creature. The next is verse 21. taken from their future
better estate, vnto the which they shall be restored, when
the sons of God shall be reuealed: and then he concludes
this argument verse 22. And this purpose he handles at the
greater length, because in all the booke of God this sub|iect
is not handled saue in this place onely.A proposition of the feruent desire of the creature-ex|prest by foure phrases.
For the feruent. Here as I haue said, he sets downe a pro|position
of that feruent desire, whereby the creature waites
for the reuelation of the sonnes of God: and this earnest



that day of our redemption, notwithstanding that exhor|tation
belongs vnto vs, that wee should looke for that day
and hast vnto it.1 Pet. 3. As the creatures were not made for them|selues
but for vs, so they shall not be restored for themselues
but for vs, for the greater augmentation of our Glory, and
if they who shall haue but the second roome, long for that
day, how should we long for it, for whom that glory chiefly
is prepared?
When the sonnes of God shall be reueiled.The sonnes of God now are not reueiled. The sonnes of
God are now said, not to be reueiled in two respects: first,
because their persons are not reueiled: secondly, because 
their glory  dignitie is not yet reueiled.In regard of their persons, which now are not knowne. As for the persons
of elect men, it is true the Lord knoweth who are his, and
makes themselues also after their effectuall calling, to know
that they are his, his Spirit bearing testimonie vnto their
spirits, that they are the sonnes of God, he giues vnto them
that new Name, which none knowes, but they who haue
it; but now they are not so reueiled, that they are knowne
of the world:Iohn. 15. 20. 21. For this cause the world knowes you not, because
it knowes not him. The good wheate of the Lord is now so
couered with chaffe, and his excellent pearles are locked vp
in earthen vessels, the vessell is seene and contemned for the
basenesse thereof, the pearle is not seene, and therefore not
esteemed according to the excellencie thereof: beside this,
there are many of the sonnes of God not yet come into the
world, and many already gone out of it, whom wee know
not, but in that genrall assemblie all the Saints of God
shall be gathered together into one, at the right hand of
the Lord Iesus, and shall be clearely manifested, that the
wicked their enimies shall know them, and be confounded
to behold them.
And of this ariseth a warning to vs all,This learnes vs not to despise o|ther men, be|cause we know not what they are in Gods election. that none of vs
despise another, but that euen those who for the present are
euill, and contrary minded, wee waite vpon them patiently,
proouing, if at any time God will giue them repentance,
that they may come out of the snare of the Diuell. The sons

of God are not yet reuealed, he that presently is an enimie
in regard of his rebellious conuersation, what knowest thou
whether in the counsell of God hee be one of Gods cho|sen
children or not? and if hee be so, thou maist bee sure,
that ere hee dye, the Lord shall conuert him, if not of a
persecuter to make him a Preacher, as he did Paul, yet at
least a Professour of that same truth which thou hast em|braced.
Secondly,In regard of their glory which now is obscured. not onely are the persons of Gods sonnes vn|knowne,
but their glory also now is obscured, and their life
is hid with Christ, they are accounted the off-scowrings of
the earth, and intreated in the world, as if they were the
onely men to whom shame and ignominie did appertaine:Col. 3. 3.
yea, their glory is not knowne vnto themselues, euen those
who haue receiued the new Name, and the testimonie of
the Spirit recording to them, that they are the Sonnes of
God; when they looke to their contemptible bodies, and
abundant corruption in their soules, they seeme vnto them|selues
to be nothing lesse than the sonnes of God.The sons of God shold not iudge of them|selues by their present state. I marke
it, that we may learne to beware of Sathans pollicie, where|by
hee carryeth vs to iudge of our selues by our present e|state,
which cannot but breed in vs horrible feare and doub|tings.
To this craft let vs oppone that comfort of the Apo|stle,1 Iohn. 3.
dearely beloued, now are wee the Sonnes of God, yet doth
it not appeare what we shall be, it is but the beginnings, and
and not the perfection of grace and glory which we haue in
this life, by the beginnings let vs know that we are the sons
of God, and where wee finde no perfection, let vs not be
discouraged, remembring this is the time wherein the glory
of the sonnes of God is not yet reuealed.
We are here againe further to consider,Comfortable, that where the Lord calles the rest of his works his creatures, he calleth vs his sonnes. that where the
Lord giues vnto the rest of his workes, the name of a crea|ture,
he vouchsafes vpon vs the names of sonnes, shewing
vs, that albeit in regard of creation we are his creatures, and
come vnder that same name with the rest of his workes, yet
now in regard of his grace communicated vnto vs, wee are



The sinne of man hath brought this curse vpon the
creature,And as sin in|creases, so the curse increases. and the daily increase of mans sinne, makes a daily
encrease of the curse. The first man that sinned was Adam,
and for his sake God cursed the earth: the second notorious
sinner we read of was Cain, and for his sake God cursed the
earth the second time: and albeit the Lord doth not alway
tell in expresse words, how euery abhominable sinner that
hath succeeded Cain, hath in like manner drawne on a new
curse vpon the creature, yet that one serueth for all, to teach
vs, that as sinne growes so growes the curse, and the mul|tiplication
of the curse, brings with it a daily diminution of
that originall vertue and beautie, which the creature had in
the beginning.
 The other part of this vanitie is the abuse of the crea|ture,The other part of the vanitie is a threefold a|buse of the creature.
which is threefold: first, concerning God: secondly,
concerning the godly: and thirdly, concerning the wicked.
Concerning God, this is a fearefull abuse, that the creature
which God made for his glory, is abused to his dishonour;
 as when the Iewes tooke the gold and siluer which God
gaue them,Concerning God. and made vp of it Baal to themselues; or when
the Persians worshipped the Sunne; and the Egiptians
beasts insteade of God: for his vanitie and bondage, the
creatures in their owne kinde, they sigh and groane, com|playning
they should be abused to another end then that
whereunto the Lord did make them, and wheeat by their
naturall inclination they would be also themselues.
 Secondly,Concerning the godly. the creature is abused as concerning the godly,
when they are compelled to doe euill to those to whom they
would doe good: for euery creature in the owne kinde, is
naturally bent to be a comfortable instrument, and a seruant
to the seruant of God; but otherwise, where the fire is for|ced
to burne them, or the water to choke them, or that they
are in any such sort abused by the wicked, to trouble the
seruants of God, it is against their will, a vanitie and seruitude,
whereof they faine would be deliuered.

 And thirdly,Concerning the wicked whom against their will they serue. the creatures are abused when they are
compelled to serue the wicked rebels and enimies of God,
sore against their will. The Sunne is weary of shining to the
wicked, who hauing their eyes open to see the workes of
God, had neuer their hearts nor mouths open to glorifie
him; the Earth in like manner is wearied of the heauie bur|then
of sinne, which daily increases vpon her; she cryes vnto
God, and desires to be releeued of this bondage, yea, if the
Lord did not restraine her, she would open her mouth and
swallow the wicked, as she did Corah, Dathan and Abiram:
and in very deed when once the creature shall be set at li|berty,
and no superiour power shall hold them vnder this
seruitude, then shall the creatures declare that they serued
the wicked sore against their will, for no creature shall ren|der
any more seruice vnto them; the Sunne shall shine no
more vpon them, the Earth shall beare them no longer,
and the water shall not giue so much as one drop out of
her treasures to refresh them.
To cleare this,The creatures being restored to the liberty shall all concur to plague the wicked. out of that one temporall iudgement in|flicted
vpon the stife-necked Egiptians, we may take some
notice how fearefull that last and vniuersall wrath shall be,
that shall be powred out vpon all the wicked, being assem|bled
into one. Out of the third heauen came his Angell to
fight against them, and slew their first borne. In the second
heauen the Sunne withdrew his countenance from them, as
from a people of darknesse, not worthie of his light. In the
third heauen the elements by course fought against them,
the Fire flashed out terrible flames into their faces; the soft
Water gushed out of the bowels of the clouds, and was tur|ned
into hard stones, to strike them, who in the hardnesse of
their harts rebelled against God: the Aire became pesti+lentious
to them, and corrupted their bodies with Biles and
Botches: the waters beneath were turned into bloud; the
earth was poysoned with venemous flyes, which made it ot,
abhominable Frogs made their land stinck, for the lothsom|nesse
of their sinnes: their sensitiue creatures which serued

them were horribly plagued: their flockes by land consu|med
with murrine: their Fish in the Sea rots and des:
their vegitatiue creatures are also destroyed: their Vines
and Fig-trees are blasted: the flaxe that should haue clothed
them; the Barly that should hue fed them are smitten, and
there is nothing belonging to them, were it neuer so small,
but the wrath of God seased vpon it. This was but a tempo|rall
and perticular iudgement, yet doth it make vnto vs some
representation of that vniuersall iudgement, wherein all the
creatures of God shall concurre and lend their helps to tor|ment
the wicked, when the full cuppe of Gods wrath shall
be powred out vpon them.
Not of the owne will. This is (as we said before) figura|tiuely
spoken of the creature,How a will is ascribed to the creature. that it is said to haue a will.
For the will of the creature is no other thing, but the natu|rall
inclination of the creature; and the meaning is, that the
creature of the owne nature is not subiect to this vanitie, but
that it is subdued vnder it, by the superiour power of God,
for the sinne of man. Where if it be asked how stands this
with iustice,How stands it with iustice that the crea|ture is punished for mans sinne? that the creature which sinned not, should be
subiected to vanitie for the sinne of man? The question is
easily answered, if we consider that the creatures were not
made for themselues, but for the vse and seruice of man, and
that whatsoeuer change to the worse is come vpon them, is
not their punishment, but a part of ours. If earthly Kings
without violation of iustice may punish their rebels, not one|ly
in their persons, but by demolition of their houses, or o|therwise
in their goods and substance, how shall we be bold
to reproue the Lords doing, who hauing conuinced man of
a notorious treason, hath not onely punished himselfe, but
defaced the house wherein he set him to dwell? seeing hee
hath violated the band of his seruice vnto God, what reason
is it that Gods creatures should continue in the first course
of their seruice to him? surely it stands with the righteous
iudgement of God, that his creatures should become com|fortlesse
seruants to man, seeing man of his owne free will

is become an vnprofitable servent to his God, yea a wicked
rebell against him.
And againe,The fall of An|gels, of man,  of the creature compared. that the Apostle sayth the change which
is made in the creature, is against the will of the creature, it
serues greatly for our humiliation. The fall of Apostate
Angels was a fall by sinne, but with their will, and without
a Tempter to allure them, or without any hope that euer
they shall bee restored. The fall of man was also a fall
by sinne of his owne free-will, but not without the temp|ter,
neither without hope of recouery and restitution.
But the fall of the creature, was neither a fall of sinne, nor
of their owne will, but a casting of them downe against
their will from their originall state, yet not without hope to
be deliuered. Miserable in the highest degree are Apostate
Angels, who of their owne free-will without an exteriour
tempter, haue deserted their first habitation, and cast them|selues
into remedilesse condemnation. Miserable in the se|cond
degree are reprobate men, who haue fallen of their
owne free-will, suppose prouoked by an exteriour tempter,
and shall neuer be pertaker of the restitution of the sonnes
of God. But herein hath the Lord magnified his mercy to|wards
vs, that where wee fell with Angels, and reprobate
men, yet we are restored without them. The consideration
of our fall should humble vs, for in it wee are worse than
the creatures; they haue fallen from their glory, but not with
their owne will; we are fallen from ours, and we cannot ex|cuse
our selues, but it was with our will: Againe, the hope
of our restitution should greatly comfort vs, considering
that the Lord hath vouchsafed that mercy vnto vs, which he
hath denyed vnto others.
Further we are taught here,We should blame our selus when we are crossd by the crature. so oft as we are crossed by
the creature not to murmure against God, nor to blame the
creature, but to complaine vpon our selues. If the heauens
aboue be as brasse, and the earth as iron, if the sea rage and
the aire waxe turbulent, if the stones of the field be ffen|ces
whereat wee stumble and fall, if the beasts wee haue

bought or hyred for our vse, serue vs not at our pleasure,
let vs not foolishly murmure against them, as Balaam did
vpon his Asse; what meruaile they keepe no couenant with
vs, seeing we haue not kept couenant with our God?
Vnder hope.Man and the creature for mans ke are restored to hope, which nither Apo|state Angels, nor reprobate men haue. Herein hath the Lord wonderfully magni|fied
his mercy toward vs, that hee hath not onely giuen to
our selues a liuely hope of full deliuerance, but also for our
greater comfort hath extended the same toward the creature
for our cause. The Apostate Angels are not pertakers of
this hope, as we said before, that restitution promised in the
Gospell, vvas neuer preached vnto them: wee read that
sometime they haue giuen this confession, that Iesus is the
sonne of God, but they neuer sent out a petition to him for
mercy; for they haue receiued within themselues an irreuo|cable
sentence of condemnation, and they know certainly
that mercilesse iudgement abides their wilfull and malitious
Apostasie; and reprobate men in like manner, haue no hope
of any good thing abiding them after this life: and there|fore
vve are so much the more to magnifie Gods mercy
toward vs, vvho by Grace hath put a difference betweene
vs and them, vvhere there was none by Nature, and hath not
onely giuen to vs our selues a liuely hope of restitution, but
also for our sakes hath made the creatures that vvere cur|sed
for our sinne, pertakers of the same deliuerance with vs.


Verse 21.
Because the creature also shall be deliuered
from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious
libertie of the sonnes of God.
_HEre followes the second reason,The second reason of the feruent desire of the creature taken from their better estate which is to come. wherefore the
creature feruently desires the day of the reuela|tion
of the sonnes of God, and it is taken from
that glorious estate into the vvhich the creature
shall be translated in that day. Where first we haue to see
vvhat creature this is vvhich shall be deliuered, and secondly

vvhat the deliuerance is. The vvord creature, is a generall
name of all the vvorkes of God, but here it is put for those
creatures vvhich being made by God for man, vvere hurt
by the fall of man,What creatures shall be resto|red. and shall be restored vvith him. And so
vnder this name vve comprise not reprobate Angels and
men, neither those excrements of Nature, which are bred
of doung and corruption, neither thornes, thistles, or such
like, which are the fruits of Gods curse vpon the creature
for our sinne, and are in that day to be destroyed, not resto|red:
but by the creature we vnderstand the heauens and
earth, with the rest of the elements and workes of God,
therein contayned, made for the glory of God, and the vse
of man.
And this is to declare that excellent deliuerance vve
haue by Iesus Christ,Iesus the resto|rer heales euery wound that Sathan hath inflicted vpon man. there is no wound which Sathan hath
giuen man by sinne, but the Lord Iesus by his grace shall
cure it: he shall not onely purge our soules from all sinne,
and deliuer our bodies from the power of the graue and
corruption, but shall deliuer the creatures our seruants from
that curse, which our sinnes brought vpon them. To make
this yet more cleare,Three obiects of Sathans ma|lice: first God: secondly man: thirdly the creature. wee are to know that there are three
obiects of Sathans malice. The first is God and his glory:
the second is man and his saluation: the third is the creature,
made for Gods glory and mans good. The principall ob|iect
of Sathans malice is God and his glory, he hates the
Lord vvith a deadly and irreconcilable hatred, so that if it
lay in his power he would vndoe that most high and holy
maiestie: but because rage as he will, he cannot impaire
his sacred Maiestie, he turnes him to the secondarie obiect,
which is man, and troubles him by all meanes, not so much
for mans owne cause, as for the Lords, whose glory he seekes
to deface that shines in man. And if here also he cannot pre|uaile,
by reason that the Lord hath made a hedge round
about man, he turnes him to the third obiect of his malice,
which is the creature; against which he is so insatiable, that
if he can be licensed to doe no more, yet doth he esteeme

it some pleasure to him, to get leaue to enter into Swine,
that he may destroy them: and this hee doth, not that hee
accounts a beast his pray, for all the beasts of the earth can|not
satisfie this roaring Lyon, but that destroying the crea|ture,
he may driue man to impatience, and prouoke him to
blaspheme the Lord, as by these same meanes he made the
Gadarens murmure against Iesus Christ, and put him out
of their land; and this hath beene the course of Sathan euer
since the beginning.
But blessed be the Lord our God who ouer-shootes Sa|than
and all his intentions,God ouershoo|teth Sathan in all his machi|nations. that same man whom Sathan
wounded hath the Lord restored, and shall set his image
more glorious in him, than it was before: and those crea|tures
which Sathan defaced, for the hatred he carryeth to
Gods glory and mans good, the Lord shall restore againe:
the glory of God encreaseth as it is impugned, euery new
declaration of Sathans malice shall end in a new declarati|on
of Gods glory: neyther is that enimie able to giue a
wound to any of Gods children, but the Lord shall make
it whole, and shall at the length confound Sathan by his
owne meanes.
And here because it is commonly demaunded,To what vse the creaturs wil serue in the day of restitution we shall know best, when we see it. vnto what
vse can these creatures serue in that day, seeing wee shall
haue no neede of the Sunne, nor of other naturall meanes
whereby now our life is preserued? To this I answere, that
if the Lord will haue these workes of his hands to continue
and stand as euerlasting monuments of his goodnesse, and
witnesses in their kinde of his glory; who is it that can con|tradict
it? It is enough for vs that wee know they shall be
deliuered and transchanged into a more glorious estate,
but for what vse, wee shall best know in that day, when we
shall see it: in the meane time reuerencing the Lords dispen|sation,
let vs rather endeauour to be pertakers of that glory,
than curiously to moue thorny, and vnprofitable questions
concerning it.

Now as for the manner of their deliuerance.How the Apo|stle saith, the creatures shall be deliuered, seeing the Psal|mist saith they shall perish. Seeing the
Apostle saith that the heauens shall passe away with a noise,
and the elements shall melt with heate, and the earth with
the workes therein shall be burnt vp with fire; and seeing
the Psalmist saith, that they shall perish, how is it that here
the Apostle saith, they shall be deliuered? This doubt shall
easily be loosed if Scripture be made interpreter of Scrip|ture.
The Psalmist in that same place expones the word
of perishing, by the word of changing, what this changing
shall be, the Apostle here makes it manifest, while he cals
it the deliuering of them from one estate into another: so
that wee are not to thinke that they shall perish as concer|ning
their substance, but as concerning those qualities of va|nitie,
seruitude, and impotencie, whereunto they haue beene
subiected by the fall of man. As siluer and gold is changed
by the fire, the drosse perisheth, but the substance remay|neth;
so shall these creatures be changed in that day, for
which cause also they are called,Reu. 21. new heauens and new earth.
And out of this wee may perceiue the necessitie of that
exhortation giuen vnto vs by the holy Apostle,Seeing the glo|ry of that king|dome requireth that the crea|ture be chan|ged, how much more should we be changed? Seeing ther|fore
that all these things must be dissolued, what manner of per|sons
ought we to be in holy conuersation and godlinesse? seeing
the simplest seruant who shall haue any place in that king|dome,
must be changed, and receiue a new liuerie, how
much more ought wee our selues to be changed, who are
the sonnes and heyres of that kingdome? let vs not deceiue
our selues, no vncleane thing can enter into that heauenly
Ierusalem,2. Pet. 3. 11. without sanctification wee cannot see the Lord,
vnlesse wee be purged from our drosse, and puified and
fined, by the spirit of the Lord, wee shall not dwell in those
new heauens wherein dwels righteousnesse.



Verse. 22.
For wee know that euery creature groneth
with vs also, and trauaileth in paine together vnto ths
present.
_THe Apostle in this Verse concludes this pur|purpose
with some amplification thereof,The same pur|pose further amplified by groning and sighing of the creature. for
hee ascribes to the creature a groning with vs,
and a trauailing together in paine, whereby he
doth yet more expresse the vehemencie of their
desire: for as he that goeth vnder an heauie burthen grones,
and longs to be eased thereof, or as the woman which tra|uailes
with childe, hath a most earnest desire to be deliuered
thereof, so the creature wearie of this seruitude longs to bee
eased.
This groning of the creature is not to be neglected,Sometime God complaines to the creature, sometime the creature com|plaines to God vpon man: mi|serable is man if he complaine not on himself. see|ing
in holy Scripture wee finde, that sometime God com|plaines
to his creatures vpon the sinne of man, and somtime
the creatures complaines to God; miserable is man if hee
doe not complaine vpon himselfe. In the first of Esay, there
the Lord complaines to his creatures vpon man, Heare O
Heauens, hearken O Earth, I haue nourished and brought vp
Children, but they haue rebelled against me, c. and here a|gaine
the creature is brought in,Esay. 1. groning, and complaining
to God vpon man. The first bloud that euer the earth re|ceiued
into her bosome, sent vp vnto God a crying voyce
for vengeance, and the Lord heard it, and now the earth
meruailes in her kinde that hauing receiued so much bloud
of the Saints of God into her bosome, the Lord should de|lay
to require it: shee wonders againe that the hand of the
Lord stablisheth her, and makes her beare vp such a num|ber
of wicked men, as are a burthen to her, considering that
once he caused her to open and swallow vp Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram: and hath many a time since shaken her foun|dations,
and destroyed by earth-quake notable cities, ma|king
the houses of the inhabitants therof, their buriall place,

the burden of sinne being now wonderfully encreased, shee
meruailes that the Lord causeth her to beare it; and for this
cause she cryes and grones vnto the Lord: and this complai|ning
of the creature, wee are not to neglect it, (as I said) for
seeing they sigh and grone for the vanitie vnder which our
sinnes hath subdued them, should not we much more sigh
and grone for our owne sinnes? assuredly, if wee doe not,
we are conuinced to be more sensles, then the senslesse crea|tures
themselues.
Concerning this metaphor of trauailing,Trauailing two manner of wayes ascribed to the wicked in the Scripture. it is two manner
of wayes ascribed to the wicked in holy Scripture, and one
manner of way to the godly. For first their concupiscence
is compared to a mother that conceiues and trauailes con|tinually
without rest, till it bring out sinne, and sinne being
finished, is compared in like manner to a mother that brin|geth
out death. And secondly, the imagination of their hart
is compared to a mother, which conceiues cruell counsels
and mischieuous deuices against the godly, all their dayes
they trauaile with this birth, and would fain haue it brought
out to perfection, but at length they bring forth a lye: for
the malice of the wicked shall slay himselfe,Psal. 7. his mischiefe shall
turne vpon his owne head, and his crueltie shall fall vpon
his owne pae.One manner of way ascribed to the Godly. But as for the children of God, they trauaile
in paine of the monstrous birth of sin that is within them; not
that they are desirous to perfect and finish it, but to destroy
and abolish it, as being a monster within them which they
abhorre, and adulterous birth begotten by a most vnlawfull
copulation betweene Sathan and their corrupted will; the
father that begot this monster being Sathan, and the mother
that conceiued it, their corrupt Nature: for this they sigh,
and cry vnto God with the Apostle,Rom. 7. 24. O miserable man, who
shall deliuer me from this bdy of death? This was his voyce
vnto God, and should much more be our continuall lamen|tation,
seeing in sinnes we are more abundant, and in grace
farre inferiour to that holy Apostle. The Lord therefore
worke it in vs for his Sonne Christs sake.



Verse 23.
And not onely the creature, but wee also
who haue receiued the first fruits of the Spirit, euen
we doe sigh in our selues, waiting for the adoption,
euen the redemption of our bodyes.
_NOw followeth the Apostles other argument,The second ar|gument pro|uing the great|nesse and cer|taintie of that glory, is the feruent desire the godly haue to it by instinct of Grace.
wherby he proues the greatnesse and certaintie
of that glory to be reueiled,  it is taken from
that feruent expectation vvhich the sonnes of
God haue of it. It can neither be a vaine nor a small thing,
but by the contrary both great and certaine, vvhereupon
God hath set the desire of his best creatures, by instinct of
the Spirit of Grace. So that vve haue here first a description
of Gods children; they are such as haue receiued the first
fruits of the spirit: secondly, a twofold effect vvhich this
holy Spirit workes in Gods children; first a wearinesse of
their present bondage, and seruitude of sinne; secondly, a
vvaiting by a constant expectation for a better. And this
doth very much confirme the Apostles purpose, there be|ing
none on earth vvho can better iudge the excellencie of
that glory to come, than they vvho haue receiued the first
fruits thereof. Out of all doubt the testimonie of any one,
vvho hath tasted of that ioy to come, is more worth to com|mend
it, than is the contrary iudgement of a thousand others
to disproue it.
And not onely the creature.The sonnes of God and the creature grone together, and shall be resto|red together. The Apostle proceedes from
the testimonie of the creature, to the testimonie of the
sonnes of God; when he spake of the creature he said, they
sigh and grone with vs, they trauaile together in paine with
vs, and when hee speakes of the godly, hee saith, we sigh in
our selues, As man was not made for himselfe but for the
Lord, and therefore should wait vpon him, so the creatures
were not made for themselues but for vs: and therefore
where they are at couenant with vs, they in their kind wait
vpon vs, they goe with vs, they grone with vs, are grieued

with vs, and shall neuer rest till vve be deliuered; let licen|tious
men liuing in their sinnes marke this: they sigh not
in themselues with the godly, yea they scorne their sighings,
and therefore shall not be restored with the godly, they
grone not with the creature, and shall not be deliuered with
the creature.The wicked mourne not with them and shall not be pertakers so much as of the deliuerie of the creature. O miserable man, how vnhappie is that end,
whereunto thy vvanton and hard heart which cannot re|pent
doth lead thee? thou shalt not stand in iudgement
with the godly, where they goe there shalt not thou goe,
thou didst not mourne with the children of the marriage
chamber, and therefore shalt not enter with them into it to
be comforted; thou shalt goe to another place, and mourne
without them: the burthen of thy sins which now thou fee|lest
not, shall presse thee downe to hell, and confound thee
for euer: the creature that groned with the godly shall be
restored with them, and thou shalt not be restored. O how
shalt thou be cast downe, when the earth whereupon thou
treadest shall be deliuered into the glorious liberty of the
sonnes of God, and shall as a seruant stand in the day of re|stitution
but thou as a rebell shalt be cast into vtter dark|nesse,
and shall not be so much as pertaker of the deliue|rance
of the creature.
But we also who haue receiued the first fruits of the Spirit.A description of the godly.
In this description of the godly, let vs consider these three
things. First, that whatsoeuer grace we haue we receiued it.
Secondly, that grace we haue receiued is not full, but in part;
for we haue onely receiued the first fruits of the Spirit. And
thirdly, that the first fruits which we haue are sufficient
pledges to vs of the plenitude and fulnesse, which afterward
we shall receiue.
The first of these learnes vs humilitie:Learning vs hum litie, thankfulnesse,  diligence in Prayer. what hast thou O
man which thou hast not receiued? The Lord dispenses grace
to euery one according to his pleasure, and we are but ves|sels
filled and emptied as hee will. Secondly it learnes vs
thankfulnesse: whatsoeuer Grace wee haue receiued wee
should returne both the praise and the vse of it to him who

gaue it; as the waters by secret conduits come from the Sea,
returne againe openly into it, through the troughes, so that
all men may see the returning, albeit they saw not the com|ming:
so that Grace which the Lord by his Spirit secretly
conuayes to the godly, doth againe publikely returne vnto
him by prayse and well doing. And thirdly, it doth teach
vs diligence in prayer; if we desire encrease of Grace, vve
should seeke it from him of vvhom vve haue the beginning,
and vse all the meanes, such as hearing, reading, praying,
keeping of a good conscience, by which Grace may grovv,
and be intertayned in vs.
The next thing we obserue is,No plenitude but first fruits of the Spirit haue we now. that in this life we receiue
not the plenitude and fulnesse of Grace, but onely the first
fruits thereof. The vse of this is, first to comfort the children
of God, who are oftentimes discouraged with the sense and
feeling of their owne wants. It is one of Sathans stratagems
to try those by the rule of perfection, who are yet but in
the state of proficients,Therefore are we not to think that we haue no grace, be|cause we haue but beginnings and we had neede to beware of it.
Shall I giue that vantage to the aduersary, as to thinke I
haue no faith, because it is weake? or I haue no loue, be|cause
it is little: or no sanctification, because it is but in a be|ginning?
No, but I will so hunger and thirst for more grace,
that I will still giue thankes for the grace I haue receiued;
for here vve haue no fulnesse, our greatest measure is as
the first fruits, in respect of that which is to come.
On the other side,This comfort vainly abused by prophane men. because euery comfort vvhich is giuen
to the godly, is turned by prophane contemners and moc|kers,
into an occasion and nourishment of sinne: they are to
know this comfort belongs not vnto them: It is a common
thing to them to excuse the want of all Grace. O it is but
a small grace vvhich in this life is communicated to the best,
and they thinke their sinnes are well inough couered, by this
that all men are sinners, as if there were no difference be|tweene
sinne tyrannizing in the wicked, and captiued in the
the godly, or as if beginnings of Grace in the regenerate
did not seperate them in regard of conuersation from the

vnregenerate who are void of all Grace. Let them therefore
know that the Spirit of God vvhom the godly receiue, is
not onely called the first fruits, the earnest, and the witnesse
of God, but also the seale and signet of the liuing God. As
a seale leaues in the waxe that similitude and impression of
the forme which is in it selfe; so the Spirit of God commu|nicates
his owne image to all those whom he seales against
the day of redemption, hee makes them nevv and holy crea|tures.
And this conuinces carnall professors of a lye, vvho
say they haue receiued the first fruites of the Spirit, notwith|standing
that their vvorks be wicked and vncleane: they may
rather if they would tell the truth, say as those who being
demaunded vvhether they had receiued the holy Ghost or
no, answered we know not vvhether there be an holy Ghost
or no: so may they instead of bragging of the first fruits
of the Spirit, say in truth we knovv not vvhat yee call the
first fruits of the Spirit.
And thirdly,Why the Lord giues vs not in this life the principall, as well as the earnest. out of this description vve may gather, that
albeit we haue no more but the first fruits of the Spirit, yet
are they sufficient to assure vs, that hereafter vve shall enioy
the whole Masse. In two respects it is customable to men to
giue an earnest penny in buying and selling, either when
the summe is greater than they are able to pay for the pre|sent,
or when the thing bought is of that nature, that it can|not
presently be deliuered: but betweene the Lord and vs
there is no buying nor selling, he giues freely vnto vs, both
the earnest and the principall, but first the one, and then the
other; not that the Lord is vnable to pay presently all that
he hath promised, but because the principall is of that na|ture,
that it cannot be receiued, till we be prepared for it.
As the husbandman must sow and tary with patience till
the haruest come, wherein he may sheare: as the warriour
must fight before he obtaine the victory; and the wrestler
receiues not his crowne till hee haue ouercome, neither
doth he that runnes in a race obtaine the prise, till he haue
finished it: so must the Christian, in all these be exercised,

before that the Lord possesse him in the promised king|dome
of his sonne Christ Iesus.What comfort we haue now in the earnest and first fruits of the Spirit.
And though payment of the principall for a time be
delayed, yet for our comfort, the earnest and first fruits are
presently deliuered vnto vs, the Lord so dealing with vs as
he delt with Israell in the Wildernesse when he caused the
twelue spies to bring with them from the riuer of Eschol, a
branch of the Vine tree, so full of the clusters of grapes,
that it was borne betweene two vpon a tree, together with
the figges, and pomegranats, and other fruits of that land:
for no other end, but that Israell tasting of the first fruits of
Canaan might be prouoked to a more earnest desire there|of,
as also to assure them that the Lord who had giuen them
the beginnings, would also put them in possession of the
whole, according to his promise: euen so the Lord Iesus
who hath gone before vs to our heauenly Canaan, not to
view it onely, but to take possession thereof in our name,
hath sent downe vnto vs some of the first fruites thereof,
that we may taste them, such as peace of Conscience, and
ioy of the Spirit, that by proofe of the small beginnings,
we may knovv vvhat excellent comfort is laid vp in store
for vs.Two effects which the Spi|rit workes in the godly, first a sense of their miserie for which they sigh.
We sigh in our selues. Here followes now the two effects
of the Spirit, which he vvorkes in them vvho haue receiued
it. The first, is a sense of their present misery, which causes
them to sigh vnto God for deliuerance, and hee sayth, they
sigh within themselues, to teach vs that it is not an hipocri|ticall
and counterfait, but an inward and godly sorrow,
vvhich the Spirit workes in the children of God. Which I
doe not so speake as if I did condemne those sighes which
breake forth without; for sometime the griefe of hart is so
aboundant in the godly, that not onely it breakes out in
sighing and mourning, but in strong crying to God also,
but to restraine the hipocrisie of others, who make a faire
shew of that in the flesh, which is not in the Spirit. True
religion striues rather to be approued of God, than seene of

men: one sigh proceeding from the heart, is a louder crying
in the eares of the Lord of hosts, and more forcible to moue
him, than the noise of all the shooting Priests of Baal, when
they are gathered together into one.
We are therefore more deepely to consider this,Sighing and mourning goe before comfort that the
Spirit of God first teacheth vs to figh and mourne for our
present misery, before he comfort vs with a constant hope
of deliuerance. If now we mourne not, wee shall not reioyce
hereafter: it is onely mourners whom God hath marked in
the fore-head, to saue from the wrath to come: such a con+tinuall
mourner was Dauid,Psal. 6. 6. who protests that in the night
he watered his couch with teares, and in the day mingled
his cuppe therewith:Iob. 3. 24. Iob in like manner, my sighing (said
he) comes before my eating. The Saints of God are not asha|med
to professe that of themselues, which the mockers of
this age esteeme a womanly affection; there is nothing to
be found among them, but eating, drinking, singing, and a
contracting of one sin after another, with carnall reioycing;
but woe be vnto them that now laugh,Luke 6. 25. for assuredly they
shall weep,Mt. 5. 4. the end of their ioy shall be endles mourning and
gnashing of teeth,Gen. 27. 38. they shall shed teares abundantly with
Esau, but shall finde no place for mercy.
Let vs therefore goe to the house of mourning with the
Godly,Maries teares pleased Christ better than the Pharises deli|cates. rather than to the banquetting houses of the wicked,
reioycing in their sinfull pleasures. At one time Simon the
Pharise gaue our Sauiour a dinner, and Mary who had
beene a sinner,Luke. 7. 38. verse. 44. brought him the sacrifice of a contrite heart,
and the Lord esteemed more of her teares, than of the Pha|riies
delicates. No banquet pleaseth the Lord Iesus so well
as a banquet of teares, poured from a truely penitent heart.
The Lord is said to gather the teares of his children, and
keepe them in a bottell, thereby to tell vs that they are pre|tious
in his sight: for hee is not like fooles who gather into
their treasures, things which are vaine and needlesse. But
alas, how shall hee gather that which wee haue not scatte|red?
where are our teares, the witnesses of our vnfained

humiliation before God.The deplorable hardnes of hart in this age, that cannot mourne The hardnesse of hart hath ouer|growne
this age, that albeit there be more then cause, yet
there is no mourning. The sonnes of Cain learned without
a teacher to worke in brasse,Gen. 4. 22. and iron, and the wit of man
can make the hardest mettall soft, to receiue an impression,
but cannot get their owne stonie heart made soft; yea, the
children of God finde in experience how hard a thing it is
to get a melting heart.Num. 20. 11 The rocke rendred water to Moses
at the third stroke, but alas, many strokes will our hearts
take, before they send out the sweete teares of repentance:
this I marke that knowing our naturall hardnesse, we may
learne without intermission to fight against it.
For herein is our case so much the more pittifull,Seing wee haue so many causes of mourning: without vs, the troublesome estate of Gods Church. that ha|uing
more than matter enough of mourning, yet wee doe
not mourne: without vs, should not the troublesome estate
of the Church of God, be a matter of our griefe, though
our priuate estate were neuer so peaceable? Godly Nehe|miah
being placed in the honourable seruice of King Ar|tashashte
the Monarch of the world,Nehem. 1. 4 was not so much com|forted
with his owne good estate, as grieued at the desola|tion
of Ierusalem. Decay of Religion, and increase of Idola|trie,1. King. 29. 4
made Eliah wearie of his life: the Arke of God capti|ued,
and the glory departed from Israell, draue all comfort
out of the heart of the wife of Phinees:1. Sam. 4. 19. these and many moe
may teach vs,Amos. 6. 6. that the affliction of Ioseph should be matter
of our sorrow.
The causes of mourning within vs,Causes of mour+ning, within vs, our manifold sinnes. are partly our sinnes,
partly our manifold tentations. As our sinnes are contracted
with pleasure, so are they dissolued with godly sorrow. It is
the best medicine, which is most contrary to the nature of
the disease: our sinne is a sicknesse, wherein there is a carnall
delight to doe that which is forbidden, and it is best cured
by repentance, wherein there is a spirituall displeasure and
sorrowing for the euill which wee haue done: this mourning
for sinne lasts in the godly so long as they liue in the body,Rom. 7. 24.
yea, those same sinnes which God hath forgiuen, and put

out of their affection, are still in their remembrance for their
humiliation,2 Kin. 20. 23 so that with Godly Ezechia they recount all
their dayes, and their former sinnes in the bitternes of their
heart: so long as sinne remained in their affection, it vvas
the matter of their ioy, but now being by grace remoued
out of the affection,And our mani|fold tentations. it becomes the matter of their sorrow.
The other cause of our mourning, is our manifold ten|tations:
for this world is no other thing but a stormie Sea,
wherein so many contrary windes of tribulation blowes vp|on
vs, that we can hardly tell which of them we haue most
cause to feare. On euery side Sathan besets vs with tentati|ons,
on the right hand and on the left, vt quatuor angulis
pulsata domus, alqua ex parte ruinam faciat, that the house
being shaken at all the foure corners, may fall downe in one
part or other; no rest nor quietnes for vs in this habitation,
terrours within,Act. 20. 19. fightings without. Propter quod vno consilio
migrandum est Christianis, For the which, it is best for vs
with one aduise to conclude, that wee will remoue; and in
the meane time send vp our complaint to our Father in hea|uen,Ioshua. 10. 6.
as the Gibionites did to Ioshua, shewing him how we
are beseiged and enuironed for his sake, and praying him to
come with hast and helpe vs.
Wayting for the Adoption.The other ef|fect the spirit works in vs, is a waiting for de|liuerance. Now followeth the other ef|fect
of the Spirit, for hee not onely causeth vs (as we haue
heard) to sigh and mourne for our present miseries, but also
comforts vs with the hope and expectation of deliuerance,
though in this life wee haue trouble, yet haue we no trouble
without comfort.2. Cor. 1. 3. 4 Blessed be God who comforts vs in all our
tribulations, and beside that which we presently haue, it is
yet much more which wee looke for. The men of this
world haue no ioy without sorrow,Prou. 24. 13 euen in laughter their
heart is sorrowfull, pretend what they will in their counte|nance,
there is a heauinesse in their conscience, arising of
the weight of sinne, but it is far otherwise with the Godly,
for euen in mourning they doe reioyce, and vnder greatest
heauinesse they carry a liuely hope of ioyfull deliuerance.

Againe,The day of death and day of resurrection earnestly wai|ted for by the godly. wee are to marke that the Godly are described
in holy Scripture, to be such as doe not liue content with
their present estate, but waites and longs for a better: and
specially there are two dayes, for which the Children of
God are said to wait; the first, the day of death, wherin they
goe to the Lord: the second, the day of appearing wherein
the Lord shall come vnto them: they soiourne in the body,
more weary of it, then Dauid was of his dwelling in the
tents of Kedar: they waite with patient Iob, till the day of
their change come,Iob. 14. 14. and doe desire with the Apostle to bee
dissolued, that they may be with Christ: they pray for it so
oft,Mat. 6. 10. as they vse that petition, Let thy kingdome come, seeking
death so farre as it is a meanes to abolish sinne vtlerly,Luke. 11. 3. that
Christ their King may alone raigne in them: but as for the
wicked, the remembrance of death is terrible vnto them, and
in their thought they put it farre from them, and when it
comes,Death comes on the wicked as Ihu came on Iehoram. it comes vpon them vnlooked for. As Iehu furiously
came vpon Iehoram, and hee made with all his speede to
his chariot, thinking to flye away, but in vaine for the arrow
of Iehu ouertooke him;2 King. 9. 23. 24. so death comes vpon the wicked in
a day, and place wherein they looked not for it, and they
being terryfied with it, runnes with all the speede they can
to their chariots, that is, to their refuges of vanitie, but the
dart of death surely ouer-takes them. Miserable are they
whose comfort standeth rather in an vncertaine delay of
death, than in any certaintie which they haue of eternall
life.
But let vs be prepared for it,We should not soiourne in the body like Ionas in the sides of the ship, but like Abraham in the doore of the tabernacle. as the good Israelites of
God, with our loynes girded vp, and our staues in our hands,
ready to take our iourney from Egypt to Canaan, whenso|euer
the Lord our God shall commaund vs. As foules de|sirous
to flye, stretch out their wings, so should man desi|rous
to be with the Lord, stretch out his affections toward
the heauens. Abraham sat in the doore of his Tabenacle
when the Angell appeared vnto him,Exod. 12. 11. Elias came out to the
mouth of his Caue,Gen. 18. 1. when the Lord appeared to him,1. King. 19. 9 and

we must also reioyce to come out of the caue and taberna|cle
of this wretched body, if we would meet with the Lord,
yea, euen while as we dwell in the body, if in our affection
we come not out, and stand as it were in the doore of our
tabernacle,Ionas 1. 5. but like Ionas sleeping in the sides of the ship,
we lye downe in the hollow of our heart, sleeping in care|lesse
securitie, it is not possible that the Lord can be fami|liar
with vs.
The other day for which the godly are said to wait,The day of Christs second comming lon|ged for. is
the day of Christs second comming. The Apostle giues this
as a token of the rich grace of God bestowed on the Co|rinthians,
that they waited for the appearance of Christ, and
to the Philippians hee saith,1 Cor. 1. 7. our conuersation is in heauen,
from whence we looke for our sauiour the Lord Iesus,Philip. 3. yea hee
giues it out as a marke of all those who are to be glorified,
when he sayth,2 Tim. 4. 8. there is laid vp for me a crowne of righteous|nesse,
and not for me onely but for all them who loue Christs se|cond
appearing:Heb. 9. 28. And againe, Christ was once offered to take
away the sinnes of many, and vnto them that looke for him, shall
he appeare the second time, without sinne vnto saluation.
These and many moe places proues that there is great
scarcitie of Faith and spirituall grace in this generation,As the Iewes waited for the yeere of Iubilie so should we for the day of Christ, but alas few doe so.
there being so few that vnfainedly longs for the day of his
appearance: suppose euery man in word mumble vp that
petition, let thy kingdome come, yet are they few who when
Iesus testifieth surely I come quicklie, can in truth answer with
the godly,Reu. 22. 20. Amen, euen so, come Lord Iesus: and all because we
are neither weary of our present miserie, nor certaine of
that glorious deliuerance to come, otherwise vve would long
for it, and reioyce at the smallest appearance thereof. The
woman with childe reckons her time as neere as shee can,
and albeit others haue no minde of it, yet is it alway in her
remembraunce, because that then she hopes for deliuerance.
Among the Iewes as the day of their Iubilied awes neere,Leuit. 25. 10.
so the ioy of them that were in prison encreased, being
assured that then they were to be releeued; and should not

wee much more reioyce, the neere that the day of our eter|nall
Iubilie draweth vnto vs, wherein all teares shall be wi|ped
away from our eyes, and sorrow and mourning shall
flye away for euer.
Where,The wounded co~science euen of the godly de|ires not death. for the comfort of the weake Christian, wee are
to consider, whether the Godly be alway in this estate, that
they dare lift vp their heads with ioy, and pray for Christs
second appearance or not? To this I answere, that their
disposition herein is according to the estate of their consci|ence:
as the eye being hurt is content to be couered with a
vaile, and desireth not to behold the light, wherein other|wise
it reioyceth; so the conscience of the Godly being any
way wounded, is afraid to stand before the light of the coun|tenance
of God, till the time that it be cured againe. And
this made Dauid to craue, that the Lord would spare him a
little,Psal. 51. 9. and giue him space to recouer his strength; but after
mourning and earnest calling for mercie,Psal. 86. 3. the conscience be|ing
pacified, then doe the Godly say with Simeon. Now
Lord let thy Seruant depart,Luke. 2. 29. for mine eyes haue seene thy sal|uation.
For the Adoption.Adoption is ey|ther begun as now: or accom|pished as wee looke for it. He said before, that we haue receiued
the spirit of Adoption, and now he saith that wee waite for
Adoption: but wee must vnderstand that there is a begun
Adoption, whereby wee are made the sonnes of God, and
that wee haue receiued alreadie: there is in like manner a
consummate Adoption, whereby wee are manifested to be
the sonnes of God, and entred into the full possession of our
fathers inheritance, and that we waite for.
The redemption of our bodies.There is also a two-fold re|demption: first, of the soule fro~ sin: secondly, of the body from death. As there is a two-fold adop|tion,
so also a two-fold redemption: the first is defined by
the Apostle to be the remission of our sinnes, and that we
haue receiued already: the second is called in that same
Chapter, the redemption of the possession, and here the re|demption
of our bodyes, and this we looke for to come. As
the soule was first wounded by sinne, and then the body
with mortalitie and corruption: so the Lord Iesus the

restorer, who came to repair the wound which sathan inflict|ed
on man, doth first of all restore life to the soule by the
remission of sins, which he hath obtayned by his suffering
in the flesh: and therefore the Herald of his first comming
cryed before him,Iohn. 1. 29. behold the Lambe of God that taketh away
the sinnes of the world:Reu. 20. 5. 6 This is the first Resurrection, blessed
are they who are pertakers of it, for vpon such the second death
shall haue no power: but in his second comming we shall also
bee pertakers of the second redemption, hee shall redeeme
our bodyes from the power of the graue, wherein now they
lye captiued, and deliuer them from the shame of mortali|tie
and corruption.
Let this comfort vs against the present base and contemp|tible
state of our bodyes,Co~fort against the present base estate of our bodyes. now they are but filthy sinckes of
corruption, and vessels so full of vncleannesse, that the Lord
hath appointed in the body fiue conduits to purge the na|turall
filth thereof, and after this they are to be laid downe
in the bed of corruption, the wormes spread vnder them
and aboue them,2 King. 19. (as it is said of the King of Ashur) shall de|uoure
and consume their flesh, the earth shall eate vp their
bones, and turne them into dust; the braine which was the
seat of many proud and vaine imaginations, becomes after
death oftentimes the seat of the vgly oads; the reynes that
were the seat of concupiscence, engendreth serpents; and the
bowels which could neuer be gotten satisfied with meate
and drinke, shall be replenished with armies of crawling
wormes: but against all these we haue this comfort, that as
presently we haue obtained remission of our sinnes, so are
we assured of a glorious redemption of our bodies, qui enim
resurgit in anima,Bernard. resurget in corpore ad vitam, for hee that
riseth now in his soule, shall hereafter rise in his body to e|ternall
life.
And of this euery man is admonished,He who hath the first redemp+tion shall be sure of the se|cond. that if he loue his
body, he should in time take heed to the estate of his soule,
see that it be pertaker of the first redemption, which is the
remission of sinnes, and be sure thy body shall be pertaker

of the second redemption. It is a pittifull thing to see what
preposterous care is taken by men for conseruation of their
bodily life; there is nothing they leaue vndone, vt differant
mortem quam auferre non possunt,Bernard that they may at the least
prolong and delay death, which they cannot cut away: but
if men take so much paines, and suffer so strait a dyet of
body, and bestow so great expenses that they may liue a
short vvhile longer vpon earth, vvhat should men doe that
they may liue for euer in heauen?


Verse 24.
For we are saued by hope, but hope that is
seene is not hope: for how can a man hope for that
which he seeth?
_IN this verse and the subsequent,An obiection answered. the Apostle
answeres an obiection: seeing hee said before
that vve haue receiued the Spirit of adoption,
how hath he said now that we are still waiting
for adoption? He doth therefore teach vs, that
both these are true, we are saued now, and we looke for a more
full saluation hereafter; we are adopted now, and vve looke
for the perfection of our adoption hereafter: and that it is
so hee proues here by this reason; the saluation that novv
vve haue is by hope, therefore it is not yet come, nor per|fected.
The necessitie of this consequence depends vpon
the nature of hope, vvhich is of things that are not seene, nor
as yet come to passe.
This place is abused by the aduersaries,This verse abu|sed to impugne Iustification by Faith. to impugne the
doctrine of iustification by Faith: we are saued say they by
hope, and therefore not by faith onely. That wee may see
the weaknesse of their reason, we vvill first compare Faith
and Hope, in that relation which they haue to Christ: se|condly
in that relation vvhich they haue mutually among
themselues. For we deny not, that Faith, Hope, and Loue,
each one of them hath a place in the worke of our saluation,

but the question betweene vs and them is, concerning the
right placing of them.Faith and hope compaired in their relation to Christ. First, then it is certaine, that both
faith and hope looke vnto Christ; Iesus Christ and that
which he hath conquered vnto vs, is the obiect of them
both, but diuersly: for faith enters vs into a present posses|sion
of Christ and his benefits,Iohn. 3. 36. he that beleeueth in me (saith
our Sauiour) hath eternall life, hee saith not onely hee shall
haue it, but also that presently hee hath it: Hope againe
lookes for a future possession of Christ, which shall bee
much more excellent, than that which presently we inioy;
for the possession of Christ which now I haue by Faith is
imperfect and mediate;1 Cor. 13. 9. 10. by Faith I know Christ but in part,
by Faith I apprehend him but in part also: and this posses|sion
I haue it mediately, to wit, by the meanes of the Word
and Sacraments; but my hope directs mee to looke for a
mroe excellent possession of Christ, within a short while,
in whom I shall enioy much more than now by the know|ledge
of my Faith I can see in him, or yet by apprehension
of my Faith I can comprehend of him. And this is that per|fect
and immediate possession of Christ which by Hope
we looke for.
Now as for their mutuall relation among themselues,Faith and hope compared in their mutuall relation be|tweene them|selues.
Faith is of things past, present, and to come; Hope is onely
of things to come: Faith is more largely extended than
Hope: wee hope for nothing which wee beleeue not, but
something wee beleeue for which wee hope not: wee be|leeue
that the paines of hell abide the wicked, but we hope
them not; for hope is an expectation of good to come, they
may fall vnder feare, but come not vnder hope. Againe,
Faith is the mother of Hope; for of that imperfect know|ledge,
and apprehension of Christ which I haue by Faith,
there ariseth in mee an hope and expectation of a better:
Hope againe, is not onely the daughter of Faith, but the
conseruer and nourisher of Faith, the piller that vnder|props
it, when it faints; for in this life we are beset with so
manifold tentations, the worke of God seeming oftentimes

contrary to his word, and things appearing to fall out other|wise
than the Lord hath promised, that our Faith thereby
is wonderfully daunted, and therefore hath neede to be sup|ported
by Hope, which teacheth alwayes with patience to
depend vpon Gods truth, and to looke for a better. As for
example,Psal. 50. 15. the Lord saith, Call vpon me in the day of thy trou|ble,
I will heare thee, and deliuer thee, and thou shalt glorifie me,
according to this promise the Christian calling vpon God
and yet not finding deliuerance, his Faith begins to faint,
but then Hope comes in, and succoureth Faith, and her
counsell is,Habak. 2. 3. the vision is for an appointed time, at last it shall
speake and not lye: though it tarry, waite, for it shall surely
come and not stay: and this Faith being strengthened by
Hope, continues her prayers to God, vntill she obtaine her
promised and desired deliuerance.
And of this it is euident,The right place assigned to eue|ry one of these three, Faith, Hope,  Loue, in the worke of saluation. in what sense it is that the Apo|stle
saith, wee are saued by Hope, to wit, because by it wee
are vpholden in trouble: for he is not here disputing of the
manner of our Iustification (which he hath done before) but
discoursing of those comforts which wee haue to sustaine vs
in affliction. If ye aske by which of these three, Faith, Hope,
and Loue, we are iustified, that is, by which of them we ap|prehend
Christs righteousnes offered to vs in the Gospell,
the Apostle hath answered already, wee are iustified by
Faith? If yee demand which of these three chiefely sustaines
vs in affliction: the Apostle here telleth you, that when
Faith is weake, Hope saues vs that wee dispaire not: and if
yee demaund which of these three declares vs to bee men
iustified by Faith in Christ, the Apostle telleth you, wee
must declare our Faith by good workes; for Faith worketh
by Loue: these are the right places, which these three excel|lent
graces of the Spirit hath in the worke of our saluation,
and they goe so ioyntly together, that they cannot bee
sundred.
When we say that a man is iustified by Faith onely, we
doe not therefore make the iustified man to be without

Hope and Loue.The doctrine of Iustification by Faith onely, takes not away Hope  Loue. For albeit in the action of the apprehen|ding
and applying of Christs righteousnesse, Faith onely
workes, for which wee say truely wee are iustified by Faith
onely, yet Hope and Loue haue other actions pertayning
to saluation, necessarily requisite in the iustified man. And
this doth cleare vs of that false calumnie wherewith the ad|uersaries
doe charge vs,Calumnie of the aduersary concerning this confuted. as if we did teach, that Faith might
be without Hope or Loue, because wee affirme that wee are
iustified by Faith onely. I say most truely, when I say that
among all the members of the body, the eye onely sees, but
if any man collect of my speach, that the eye is onely in the
body, without eare or hand, he concludes wrong. For albeit
in the facultie of seeing I say the eye onely sees, yet doe I
not for that seperate it from the communion of the rest of
the members of the body. In the Sunne heat and light goe
inseperably together; of these two it is the heat onely that
warmes vs, doe I therefore say that the heat is without the
light? Among all the graces of the Spirit, when I say
that Faith onely iustifies, I doe but point out the proper
action of Faith, but doe not therefore seperate it from
Hope and Loue. So farre iniurious are the aduersaryes of
the truth vnto vs, when they accuse vs for maintayning a
Faith which is without Hope, and doth not worke by Loue,
which we neuer affirmed.
Of this now it is euident,Hope of a Christian is a strong thing, depending on sure warrants. that the Hope of a Christian
must be very strong, seeing it sustaines him in trouble; it is a
pillar that sustaynes the whole building, and a most sure
anchor, which being fastened vpon the rocke Christ Iesus,
holds vs so fast, that we who are weake vessels, tost too and
fro with restles tribulations, cannot be ouercome; it leanes
vpon most certaine warrants, whereof now we vvill onely
consider a few.
The first warrant of our hope is the word of God:The first war|arant of our Hope is the word of God.
whereof novv onely vve vvill touch these two comfort able
places. The Apostle saith, there is reserued for vs in heauen
an immortall inheritance,1 Pet. 7. 4. vnto the which wee also are kept by



But hope that is seene is not hope.A short descrip|tion of the Na|ture of Hope. The Apostle to confirme
his reason subioynes a short description of the nature of
hope, that it is of things which are to come, and not yet
seene, for that which is present, and a man seeth, he cannot
bee said to hope for it: yea, then shall hope cease, when we
shall enioy that which we hope for.August. Spes tunc non erit quan|do
erit res. In the first of these words Hope is put for the
thing Hope; in the second, for the vertue of Hope it selfe;
and thus much of Hope.


Verse. 25.
But if wee hope for that which we see not, wee doe with patience abide for it.
_THe Apostle here concludes not onely this his
last purpose,The conclusion of his first prin|cipall argument of comfort a|gainst the crosse wherein hee hath taught vs, that
the very nature of hope leades vs to looke for
some better thing which is to come, but also he
concludes his first principall argument of com|fort;
making this to bee the end of all, that it becomes vs
with patience to abide our promised deliuerance. And al|beit
for memories sake wee haue reduced all that hee hath
spoken, into one principall argument, yet may wee see how
vnder this one, many particular reasons are heaped vp toge|ther,
tending all to this one conclusion; that we should abide
it with petience.Sixe seuerall reasons of com|fort, lurking vnder this one. First, wee haue heard that the nature of
our sufferings are so changed, that they are now made suf|ferings
with Christ. Secondly, that the end of them is to be
glorified with Christ. Thirdly, that the glory to come doth
farre exceede in waight and eternitie our present sufferings.
Fourthly, that the creatures haue a feruent desire of the re|uelation
of that glory. Fiftly, that they also who haue re|ceiued
the first fruites of the Spirit, are wearie of their pre|sent
misery, and waite for ther edemption to come. And last,
that in all our troubles wee are saued, and sustained with the
hope of that which is to come, and not with a present

possession of that which wee would haue. In all these re|spects,
it becomes vs not onely to be of good comfort for
the present, but also patiently to looke for a better. The A|postle
brings in his conclusion vpon his last argument, but we
are to consider that it hath an eye vnto all that goes before,
and that euery one of those reasons aforesaide, serueth to
strengthen this conclusion, that if wee hope for that which
is to come, then will we with patience abide for it.
We haue first to marke a difference betweene the Chri|stian
and the Worldling:The worldlings comfort is in things that are seene, the Chri|stians not so. the Worldling hath his affection
on things which are seene, hee cannot mount aboue them;
hee hath receiued his consolation on earth; his portion is
here, and he possesseth his best things in this present life. It
is farre otherwise with the Christian, for in his affection he
transcends euery thing which is subiect to sense, hee is not
now a possessor, but an expectant by hope of his best
things, hee hath them not in re, but in spe: therefore may he
say to the Worldling, as our Sauiour saide to his Kinsmen,
your times is alway, but my time is not yet come. The Christian
is that good husbandman, who hath more comfort in that
seed, which he hath sowen, and couered with earth that he
seeth it not, than he hath in that, which he sees lying before
his eyes in the barne, for hee knowes that the one, at the
last, shall render him manifold greater encrease, than the
other.
It is not an vnpleasant Allegorie which Augustine makes
vpon these words of our blessed Sauiour.Augustines Allegory on the words of Christ. If a Some aske
bread of any of you that is a Father, will he giue him a stone?
or if hee aske a fish,Luke. 11. 11. will he giue him a Serpent? or if hee aske an
egge, will he giue him a Scorpion. The Lord Iesus being the
highest Doctor that euer taught, doth teach in the lowest,
applying himselfe to our capacitie; by homely similitudes
of earthly things, hee labours to bring vs in all his doctrine
to the knowledge of things heauenly: I know that the end
of these parables is to confirme vs in this assurance, that if
we seeke good things from the Lord, we shall obtaine them,



day of death, vvhich vvill be to thee a day of darknesse, and
dolefull displeasure, which shall swallovv vp with one gape,
not onely the sense, but also the remembrance of all thy
former delights?
Where then are your pleasures O worldlings,Worldlings haue no present pleasures: such as are gone are lost, such as are to come or vncertaine. vvherein
yee reioyce? present pleasures yee haue not, those vvhich
are past are vaine and comforts you not, and those which
are to come are vncertaine: in the smallest things how oft
are ye deceiued? yee looke for a faire day and a foule comes
vpon you: ye looke for continuance of health, and sicknes
vnawares seases vpon you: yee comfort your selues vvith
the hope of a good successe of your affaires, and an euill
successe ouerturnes incontinent all the counsels of your hart:
thus the good for which yee looke to come, in your owne
experience you finde it deceiues you. Call not therefore
any more vpon vs to follow you, and to drinke with you of
your perishing pleasures, wee haue had a proofe of yours,
and found them to bee vanitie; but if yee will, come and
take a proofe of ours, will you taste of those delicates
vvhereunto God hath called vs? will you eate of the fruit
that growes vpon the tree of life, discouered by the Gospell,
vnder the shadow whereof vve delight to sit? righteousnes
shall breed you peace, and peace shall breed you ioy in the
holy Ghost, and these shall in such sort delight you, that in
regard of them, your soule shall loath all your former vaine
pleasures vvherein you delighted before.
Of this we may see further, that as Faith procreates hope,Impatience in trouble pro|ceeds from the want of Hope.
so hope procreates Patience: so that the want of Patience
in trouble bewrayes the want of Hope, What made Saul
who in his first beginning draue Witches out of the land,
in his latter end to make his refuge to them? surely because
all hope had failed him that the Lord would answere him
any more. When Samaria was besieged and straited vvith
Famine, as long as Iehoram had any hope hee waited vvith
patience vpon the word of Elisha, that there should be
great plenty shortly in Samaria, but when by the womans

complaint he vnderstood that the Famine was encreast to
that height, that his subiects were forced to eate their chil|dren,
his hope failed him, and hee concludes to attend no
longer vpon the Lord, but vowes in his impatience to cut
off the head of Elisha. Thus the cause of all impatience in
trouble, that driues men to seeke deliuerance by wicked
and vnlawfull meanes, is onely the want of hope.
Againe,Licentiousnes in prosperitie proceeds from the want of hope. if yee looke to those who in prosperitie layes
downe the raynes of their affections with all licentiousnesse
to goe after their desired pleasures, yee shall find the onely
cause thereof is the want of hope, he that hath (saith Saint
Iohn) this hope in himselfe that he shall see God purges himselfe,
euen s God is pure. And this our Sauiour teacheth vs more
clearely, in the Parable of that seruant who because hee
thought within himselfe that his Maister would not come,
began to beat his fellowes instead of feeding them. So that
the ground of all the Atheisme of our time, is pointed out
to be the want of hope: there is no sinne committed but
through impatience, all proceedes of this, that mans vnre|generate
and proud nature cannot contayne the selfe within
the limites prescribed vnto it by the Lord: he that is gouer|ned
with patience is easily kept both in peace and warre
from extremitie of affection. If any man prophane like Esau
sell his birth-right for a messe of pottage, that is, forgoe
eternall life for the perishing pleasures of this life, it is be|cause
he hath no hope; and therefore no meruaile if vvith
patience he abide not for a better, but rather in impatience
breake after his affections, to embrace those things which
are present.
Among all the graces of the Spirit,Without pati|ence no grace can be preser|ued. this praise may be
giuen to Patience, that it is the keeper of the rest: if our
patience be not first broken, we cannot be induced to the
committing of any sinne. Sinnefull concupiscence proceeds
from the impatience of continencie; couetousnesse from this
that we are impatient of our sober estate. Therefore did
Tertullian call patience such a gouernour of the affaires



behauiour may conuince the vnbridled affections of many
professed Christians.Ethnicke phi|losophers ex|cluded from the praise of true Patience. In which sence Basile commended
Socrates: yet cannot their patience deserue the praise of true
vertue; for neither did their suffering proceed from the Spi|rit
sanctifying their harts by Faith, without which it is im|possible
to please God, nor was the end thereof directed to
his glory; albeit as sayth the Apostle, after a sort they knew
him, yet did they not glorifie him, and though they seemed
omni virtutum genere praeclari, to excell in euery kinde of
vertue; yet herein are they conuinced to be vniust, quod dona
Dei non retulerunt ad suum authorem, that they returned not
the gifts of God to the author thereof, but rather abused
them to their owne vaine-glory; and so fayling both in the
beginning, as also in that end whereunto they should haue
beene directed, they cannot haue the praise of acceptable
vertues to God, but are rather to be accounted shadowes
of vertues, than vertue indeed. Quid enim illis cum virtutibus,
qui Dei virtutem Christum ignorant? what haue they to doe
with vertue, who are ignorant of Christ the true vertue of
God? Certe verus philosophus est amator Dei: but the most
excellent thing that euer they did, flowed rather from a
loue of themselues, and their owne glory, than from any loue
of God.
The second sort of persons excluded from the praise of
true patience,Worldlings su|styning great distresse for gaine, are also excluded from the praise of true Patience. are worldlings: who howsoeuer they indure
very much, and sustaine great distresse in their bodyes, and
restlesse cares in their mindes, yet haue not this end propo|sed
to them, that by the good which presently they seeke
they may attaine vnto better. Our Sauiour hath recommen|ded
to vs that patience whereby we possesse our soules; hee
counts not of those sufferings, which men endure that they
may possesse things which are without them: for what is
that possession worth whereby men possesse those things
which are without them, they themselues being possessed
within of worse than themselues? They are called Lords,
and are the seruants of seruants; haue Villages, Cities and

multitudes of men vnder their commandement, and they
themselues are captiued slaues vnder the seruitude of Sathan:
but that Patience is praise worthy, whereby we possesse our
soules in patience, euen then when wee sustayne greatest
losse of things that are without vs: yet certainely all those
cares of worldlings, which causes them to endure the neces|sities
of hunger and thirst, the heat of the day, and cold of
the night, seemes to be but licitae quodammodo insaniae, that
is, lawfull and tollerable furies, if they be compared with
others.
This definition doth also exclude from the praise of this
excellent vertue those miserable Atheists who sustaine great
stresse and painfull labours,Atheists who pine themselues to commit euill excluded from the praise of true Patience. that they may commit euill.
These are they of whom Salomon saith, they cannot rest vn|lesse
they haue done wickedly. And of this sort were those
Iewes who vowed they would neither eate nor drinke, till
they had the Apostles life; and those pharasaicall spiits, of
whom our Sauiour saith, they compasse both sea and land
to make one of their owne religion, and when they haue
done, makes him ten times more than himselfe the childe of
Sathan; this is wicked Patience. Vera enim patientia est
amica bonae conscientiae, non inimica innocentiae: as in like
manner, that losse of goods, want of rest, and enduring of
shame, which men suffer to obtaine the sinfull pleasure of
their lusts. For Patience is not famula concupiscentiae, the
handmaid of inordinate concupiscence, but comes sapientiae,
the companion of godly wisedome. And last of all here is
secluded that Patience, by which men in the hardnesse of
hart, endure most stubbornely the punishment inflicted vp|on
them for their sinnes, which is miseranda potius durities,
quam miranda aut laudanda patientia, rather miserable hard|nesse
to be pitied, than patience worthy to be praised: for
then is patience good when the cause for which we suffer is
good: it is not poena sed causa quae facit Martyrem, euery
strong suffering of torment makes not a man a Martyr,
but the good cause for which hee suffers: therefore are we



In a Godly man his desires are better than his deedes,
hee cannot doe the good that hee desires, as the Apostle
plainely confesseth of himselfe: but the wicked haue their
desires worse than their deed; for when they haue done
most wickedly, yet haue they still a desire to doe more, till
their tormenting conscience waken them: and so whereas
the one sinneth of weaknesse,The Christian is freed from wickednes not from weaknes. the other sinneth of wicked|nesse.
Certainely they who are truely Godly are so far from
wickednesse, that if they were such men as they desire to
be, and could possibly perform that good which they prease
to doe, there would not be such a thing as a spark of the life
of sinne left remaning in them. Alwayes wee liue vnder this
hope, that the Lord who hath already by his grace deliue|red
vs from wickednes, will also in his owne good time de|liuer
vs from our weaknesse: hee shall make our deeds an|swerable
to our desires, and wee shall become such as may
say, Now thankes be to God, for I doe the good which I
would.
These infirmities after our regeneration are left in vs,Why infirmities are left in vs af|ter our regene|ration.
partly as Antidotes against our naturall presumption, as
wee may see in the holy Apostle, who least hee should haue
beene exalted out of measure, was buffeed with the An|gell
of Sathan: and partly for our prouocation to prayer,
that having experience of our owne weaknesse, wee might
runne to the Lord who is the strength of our soule, and
seeke his helpe by prayer, whereunto otherwise we are very
slow by nature, notwithstanding it be the best and most ac|ceptable
seruice that we can giue vnto God vpon earth. We
haue marked this in experience, that as they who finde not
themselues bodily diseased seeke not the Phisition, so hee
that feeles not the spirituall infirmities of his soule, cannot
pray vnto God to remedie them: the Lord hath vsed the in|firmities
of many as holy meanes to make them truely reli|gious,
who were prophane before, and for these causes are in|firmities
left in vs.

Infirmities.Our infirmities are manifold. So the Apostle speakes in the plurall num|ber,
because not one, but manifold are the infirmities where|unto
we are subiect: whereof there arises to vs a two-fold
warning. First, that we take heede vnto our selues, and see
where wee are weakest, to the end that there wee may
strengthen our selues. The Philistims were very carefull to
know wherein Sampsons strength lay, to the end that spoy|ling
him of his strength they might spoyle him of his life:
but Sathan by long experience knows our infirmities, and
sets vpon vs there where hee knowes that wee are weakest.
As therefore they who are besieged looke not so much vn|to
the stronger part of the wall,Wee should strengthen our selues most where we are weakest. as vnto the weaker, that they
may strengthen it: so wisdome craues that we should looke
most narrowly to our greatest infirmities. Hee that hath
children albeit he loue them all, yet hath he most respect to
the most infirme among the; and he that hath many tene|ments
of land, hastes soonest to repayre that which is most
ruinous; and among all the members of the body, we care
most for those that are weake or wounded. Seeing Nature
hath taught vs to take heed to those things which are ours,
shall we not much more take heed vnto our selues? It is
euen a point of holy wisedome to consider where wee are
weakest, and what those sinnes are vnto which we are most
subiect, and by which Sathan hath gotten greatest vantage
against vs, that so we may take the more paynes to make
our selues strong against it.
And after that by prayer and spirituall exercises,Yet so that we remember that the enimie re|pulsed at one place will as|sault another. thou
hast made thy selfe strong there where thou wast wont to
be weake, yet take heede vnto thy selfe, it is not one but
many infirmities whereunto we are subiect, and the craftie
enimie can very well change his tentations vpon thee, if he
be repulsed at any one part, whereat he was wont to enter,
hee will goe about and seeke vantage at an other: and
therefore seeing our enimie is restlesse, and the matter hee
workes vpon is our manifold infirmities, let vs walke cir|cumspectly,
and pray continually, standing with the whole



grace, the grace of Prayer is, we should not so vainely pro|fesse
in our words, that wee can pray, as earnestly beseech
him with the Disciples that he would teach vs to pray. As
that Eunuch professed that hee could not vnderstand with|out
a guide,Acts. 8. 31. so may we that we cannot pray without a guide,
it is easie to speake of God, but not so easie to speake vnto
God; hee that will speake to God (saith Ambrose) must
speake to him in his owne language, that is, in the language
of his Spirit.
Prayer is not a communing of the tongue with God,Praier is a com|muning of the soule with God but
of the soule with God, and of such a soule onely as is taught
by the holy Spirit how to pray: it is true the Lord vnder|stands
the thoughts of euery mans heart, but the language
acceptable to God, are those motions of the heart which are
raised by his owne Spirit, and hee that wants this Spirit, can
not speake vnto God in Gods language. Let this serue to
reforme the corrupt iudgement of many, who thinking
themselues able enough to pray, passe ouer their dayes with|out
the grace of Prayer, a fearefull punishment of carnall
presumption.
This naturall inabilitie to pray consists in these:Our natural in|abilitie to pray is, eyther in our corrupt vnder|standing, by which we seek things vnlaw|full, some|time
the fault is in our vnderstanding, fallimur putantes pro|desse
quae poscimus, cum non prosint, wee are deceiued, think|ing
those things to be profitable for vs which are not: so the
Iewes not content to be fed with Manna according to the
Lords dispensation, will haue flesh, which the Lord giues
them, but in his anger: and their posteritie not content with
the Lords gouernement, will haue a King like other nati|ons,
which the Lord gaue them, but in his wrath. Of this
sort are they, who send out in stead of lawful prayers, vnlaw|full
imprecations against their brethren, crying for the
plagues of God vpon their neighbours, for euery small of|fence,
in stead of the blessings of God: these are like the
Disciples that prayed for fire from heauen to burne vp
Samaria, not being led by a right spirit; or rather like vnto
Corah,Numb. 16. Dathan, and Abiram, who sent vp to the Lord

strange fire, vvhich at length brought downe a strange
iudgement vpon themselues.
Sometime againe wee seeke that which lawfully may
be sought:Or in our cor|rupt affection, by which wee seeke things lawfull for the wrong end. the fault is not in the vnderstanding, but in the
affection? as when men seeke lawfull things for the wrong
end, or in the wrong place. Of the first (sayth Saint Iames)
yee seeke and receiue not, because yee aske amisse, that yee may
consume it vpon your lusts.Iames. 4. 3. Of the second (saith our Sauiour)
seeke first the kingdome of Go,Mat. 6. 33. and other things shall be cast
vnto you: the Lord is greatly dishonoured when we seeke
any thing before himselfe: for remedy let vs remember
these rules. First, that the thing we seeke be good. Secondly,
that vve seeke the greatest good in the first roome. And
thirdly, that the secondary gifts vve seeke them for the right
end, namely, that they may be seruants to vs in our seruing
of God onely, and that wee abuse them not as occasions of
sinning against our God.
And further we may learne here how little cause either
the Pelagian had of old,What good can we doe by Na|ture, seeing we cannot doe so much as pray for our selues. or the semipelagian Papists haue
now, to magnifie so farre the arme of flesh, as to affirme
that man vnregenerate hath power of his owne free-will, to
make choise in things spirituall, of that which is good: for
seeing vve cannot know vvhat is good for vs, till the Spirit
teach vs, vvhat power haue vve of our selues to make choise
of it? It is true that men by the quicknesse of their naturall
vvit, haue found out many artes and trades, profitable for
this naturall life; so Iubal was the first Father of them who
play on Harpes and Organes,Gen. 4. 22. and Tubal-cain the first in|uenter
of cunning working in brasse and iron: but as for
spirituall things which concerne the life to come, man is not
able by any power of Nature to help himselfe therein: for
vvhat can he doe, seeing he doth not vnderstand those things
that are of God?
But the spirit it selfe makes request.How the Spirit requests for vs. The Apostle to the
Galathians hath a commentary for these words, when hee
saith that God hath sent downe his Spirit into our harts, by



and againe,Chrisan Mat hom. 10. tardius dando quod petimus, instantiam nobis ora|tionis
indicit, the Lord when hee is slow to giue that which
vve aske, doth it onely that he may commend his gifts vnto
vs, and make vs more instant and earnest in prayer.
For the better vnderstanding of this,If the Lord re|fuse that which we wil, it is be|cause it is not for our weale. let vs distinguish
our petitions: sometime vve seeke those things which are
not so expedient for our selues to be granted as refused vnto
vs; and in these non audit nos ad voluntatem, vt exaudiat ad
salutem, the Lord regardeth not thy wil, but thy vveale. The
Apostle buffeted by an Angell of Sathan, besought the
Lord to remoue that tentation from him, but obtained not
his vvil, the Lord saw it was not for his weale: and not onely
doe we read that men beloued of God haue beene refused in
mercy, but others haue had their petitions granted in anger:
which wee may see not onely in the Israelites, vvho obtay|ned
flesh when they sought, but in his anger; but also in
those damned Spirits, vvho sought licence of the Lord Iesus
to enter into Swine, and obtained it, but to the greater aug|mentation
of their vvrath.
If therfore thy petition vnto God be for a thing absolutely
necessary to thy saluation,And the refusal of anything to his owne, is not without the graunt of a better. be assured that howeuer the Lord
delay it, hee shall not simply refuse it: and if otherwise thou
craue a thing not absolutely necessary for thee, if the Lord
refuse to satisfie thy will therein, it is that hee may doe ac|cording
to thy weale. When the Disciple asked Iesus of the
resurrection,Acts. 1. 6. Lord wilt thou at this time restore the kingdome
to Israell? he satisfied them not in that which they craued;
It is not for you (saith hee) to know the times or seasons which
the Father hath put into his owne hand: but another thing
meeter for them, and lesse craued of them, hee promised
 vnto them: But yee shall receiue power of the holy Ghost, when
hee shall come vpon you, and yee shall be witnesse vnto me. A
comfortable answere indeed, an exchange most profitable
for vs, and wee rest content with it, So be it, euen so be it, O
Lord, giue vs thine holy Spirit, and deny vs any other thing
thou wilt.

And of this againe we learne,Prayer which obtaines all o|ther gifts is also a gift of God, therefore the praise of all is due to the Lord that we liue onely by mer|cy,
for not onely those things which we obtaine by prayer,
are begged by vs, and giuen by God, For what hast thou O
man that thou hast not receiued? but we see here that prayer
it selfe, whereby wee get all things, is also a gift of God: if
we wanted not of our owne, we would not seeke of another
by prayer,1 Cor. 4. 7. and if vve could also pray of our selues, vve nee|ded
not another to teach vs, Etiam ipsa Oratio inter gratiae
munera reperitur, it is the Lord who commands and wor|keth
in vs both the will and the deed: vnto him therefore be|longs
the prayse of all,
Wee haue here also to consider a great comfort for the
Godly,Comfort for the godly, whe~ no man will speake for them they want not Intercessours. who are oft times redacted to that estate, that there
is none among men to speake for them: Ieremie cannot
finde one Ebed-melech, neyther haue the Prophets of the
Lord one Obadiah to hide them: Daniel hath none to speak
for him, al stands vp that had credit, to procure that he may
be cast into the denne: those that should be friends, often|times
become foes to the seruants of God, but euen at this
time their comfort is, that not onely they haue Iesus the
Iust an Aduocate for them at the right hand of his Father,
but haue also the Spirit the Comforter within them, an In|tercessor
for them.
Miserable therfore must they be who bend their tongues
to speake against those,Miserable are those who bend their tongues a|gainst them, for whom the holy Spirit maketh request. for whom the holy Ghost maketh
request vnto God: that rebuke which the Prophet gaue to
Iehosaphat, vvhen he went out to help wicked king Achab,
wilt thou helpe them that hate the Lord? we may turne to those
in our time, that are enimies to the Children of God, Will
yee hurt them,2. Chron. 18. whom the Lord helpeth? The Children of
God in all their infirmities haue the holy Spirit for their
helper, vvhat euer man speakes against them, hee maketh
request vnto God for them. It cannot then otherwise be,
but in the end comfort must be to them, and confusion vnto
their enimies. That oracle which Zeresh gaue to Hamans
husband, shall assuredly prooue true vpon all the enimies of



in all our waies principally to looke vnto it. It is in the most
part of men an argument of their Atheisme, that they look
curiously to the decking of the body, which falleth vnder
the eye of man,Let not man therefore sinne vnder hope of secrecie. but regard not the hid man of the heart,
which falleth vnder the eye of God. And againe, we learne
here, that it cannot be without great contempt to God, to
sinne against him vnder hope of secrecie; it is with thy sin,
to ioyne a mocking of God: for in effect thou sayest with
the Atheist, The Lord seeth not. A most high sinne against
his Maiestie, whereby thou dost all thou canst to pull out
the eyes of the Lord, that hee should not see, or at least
thinks so of him in the false conclusion of thy darkned mind.
No meruaile therefore, that against such as thou art, the
Prophet threaten that fearefull curse:Esay 29. 15. Woe be to them that
seeke in deepe to hide their counsell from the Lord, their works
are in darkenesse, and they say, who seeth vs? or who knoweth
vs? your turning of deuices shall it not be esteemed as the pot|ters
clay? for shall the worke say to him that made it, hee made
me not? or the thing formed, say of him that fashioned it, hee
had none vnderstanding?Psal. 94. 89 10. 11 Vnderstand yee vnwise among the
people, and yee fooles when will yee be wise? Hee that planted
the eare, shall hee not heare? or he that formed the eye, shall he
not see? he that teacheth man knowledge, shall hee not know?
Certainely, the Lord knoweth the thoughts of the heart of man,
that they be but vanitie.
Let vs therefore sanctifie the Lord God of hostes in our
heart,But let the eye of the Lord be an awband, euenin secret to keepe vs from sinne. let vs neuer seeke to hide our wayes from heauen, for
that is impossible: let vs learne of Henoch to make our liues
a walking with God; and with Dauid, let vs alwayes set the
Lord before our eyes: so in the middest of our owne house,
wee shall walke in the innocencie of our heart: where there
is no eye of man to make vs ashamed, the reuerence of God
shall keepe vs from sinne. The feare of earnall men, is the
countenance of men: what restrayned Abner, and made
him vnwilling to slay Asahel? If I doe it (said he) how shall
I hold vp my face to thy brother Ioab:2 Sam. 2. 22. but the awe of spirituall

men is the countenaunce of God:Gen. 42. 18. this restrayned Ioseph
that in secret hee durst not commit adultry, and it was his
reason to perswade his brethren, I feare God, and therefore
dare doe you no euill. Certainely this is onely true godlines,
when wee liue so as vnder the eye of God, and the reue|rence
of his inuisible maiestie, restraynes vs from doing those
sinnes, which otherwise we might doe vnknowne, or at least
vncontrouled of men.
And so much the more let vs endeauour to attaine to this
holy disposition,The sonnes of Adam seeke to hide themselues from the Lord, because how so euer our corrupt Nature
cannot hide her crooked wayes from the Lord, yet she de|sires
and preases to doe it, and if her deeds and thoughts be
brought vnto the light, it is sore against her will: but the
children of God renued by grace, willingly presents their
hearts to God, that he should looke vpon them. And this
the Apostle points out here, when hee saith, that not onely
God knowes the heart, but that hee searches the heart.
Searching, is the inquisition of a thing which is hid and co|uered,
and imports the contrary corruption of our Nature,
vvhich seekes to hide and obscure it selfe from the Lord.
As Adam presently after his fall sought to couer his na|kednesse
with figge-tree leaues, so hath he transmitted this
heritable euill to all his posteritie, that when they haue done
wickedly,But in vaine. they doe what they can to couer it: but in vaine,
for the Lord is such a searcher, from whose eyes no man
can hide that for which he makes inquisition. Laban searched
the Tent of Iacob for his idols, and could not finde them
though they were there: but what the Lord searches hee
shall finde out. If Saul hide himselfe the Lord can tell the
people that he lurkes among the stuffe. As a light where
it comes makes things to be seene which were hid in dark|nesse,
so the Lord when he searches, saith he will search with
lights; to tell thee that were thy deedes neuer so secret, hee
will make them manifest. Let vs not therefore like the pro|phane
Atheists seeke to hide our secrets from the searcher,
but let vs liue as in the sight of God.

Neyther is it without great cause that the Lord passing
by other things,The heart only makes the diffe|rence between the true christi|an  counter|faite. looketh onely to the heart, the heart being
the essentiall difference that distinguisheth a true Christian
from a counterfaite: for outward exercises of godlinesse the
hypocrite in appearance may match the holy one. Ye shall
see Cain sacrificing no lesse then Abel: yee shall see Esas
seeking the blessing with greater crying, and moe teares,
than Iacob: and Saul shall confesse his sinne no lesse than
Dauid: and Ahab shall humble himselfe in dust and ashes,
more penitent like than Ezechiah: the Pharisee shall be
more abundant in fasting and giuing of almes, than the Pub|lican.
As he that doth paint a fire, may paint the colour and
the forme of the bowing flame thereof, but can no way
paint the heate thereof: so an Hypocrite can looke like a
Christian, speake like a Christian, and in outward actions
counterfait the Christian, but can neuer attaine to the Chri|stians
heart: therefore is it that the Lord most of all delights
in the heart, and we also most of all should take heede vnto
it, to keepe it holy.
Beside this,It is in great wisedome that God hath loc|ked vp the hart of one man from another. that the Lord hath locked vp the heart of
one man from another, and hath reserued the knowledge of
the heart to himselfe onely, the Lord hath done it in great
wisedome: for seeing that man diuided himselfe by sinne
from God, their hearts by nature are so discordant among
themselues, that if their hearts were as manifest to others,
as their faces, there could not be a fellowship nor societie
entertained among men. Looke how many men are in the
world, there are as many sundry iudgements and wils, euery
man hauing a kingdome in his breast, and so carryed away
with a desire of his owne super-excellencie, that hee seeketh
the aduancement of his owne will with the ouerthrow of all
others, whose will is not agreeable to his, if hee might at|taine
vnto it. Againe, the heart of man is such a bottomlesse
fountaine of wickednesse, that if it were manifested, the
world should be infected with viler abhominations, than
any that yet are knowne in it: for if the tongue which is

but a little member of the body, when it fomes out but a
small part of that filth which abounds in the heart, be so
forcible as to corrupt the honest minds and manners of the
hearers, what should be done if the heart it selfe were laid
open, which is by nature but a stincking puddle, and filthy
store-house of all iniquitie?
And further for the comfort of the whole Church of God,The soueraign|ty of God ouer man appears in this, that hee is vpon the se|crets of their hearts.
and euery member thereof, let vs marke the soueraigntie of
our God ouer all his creatures in these two, that not onely
hee is vpon their secrets whether they will or not, for hee
sits in their hearts, but also hath soueraign commandement
ouer them, so that he can when he wil,  will when his glory
requires, eyther take their hearts vtterly from them, or turne
their owne hearts against themselues, as domestick enimies
to torment them. And as for the first, it is manifest out of
this place, that the Lord sitteth vpon the secret counsell of
the wicked; for hee searcheth the heart. It was a great dis|couragement
to Benhadad King of Aram, that the secret
conclusion, which hee laid with his captaines in his cabinet
counsel, concerning the ordering of his battels against Israel,
were discouered as they were concluded, by Elisha the Pro|phet,
vnto the King of Israell, and who reueiled them to
Elisha but the Lord our God, who sits as moderator in the
counsell of the wicked, whether they will or not to ouerrule
their determinations,  direct them to his owne end, which
is his glory, and good of his Church. Let our enimies
then take counsell, and conspire together as they will, hee
that doth sit in the heauens shall haue them in derision. The
counsell of the Lord shall stand, and what hee hath decreed
shall onely come to passe: let vs therefore rest in him.
It were good for men to consider this,Man hath but his hart to hold him vp,  God can take it fo~ him, when hee will. that albeit man
be sustained and vpholden by his owne heart, so that no o|ther
thing can help him if it faile him, yet it is in the Lords
power to doe with it what hee will: how oft haue we seene
that the Lord being angry at man, passing by all the mem|bers
of his body, and leauing them whole and sound, hath

stricken the heart with such terrours, that most valiant men
hauing eyes could not see, hauing a tongue could not speak,
hauing hands could not strike to defend themselues, and
hauing feete could not doe so much as runne away, their
heart being taken from them by God, they are left in a strait
and comfortlesse estate. But farre more miserable are they,
when the Lord turnes their owne hearts against themselues,
and makes them a terrour to themselues. A fearefull exam|ple
whereof wee haue in Belshazzar,Dan. 4. 6. who seeing nothing
without him, but the figure of a hand which stirred him
not, was so stricken and pursued with his owne heart with|in
him, that his flesh trembled, his countenance waxed pale,
his knees smote one against another. If man considered this,
he would be loath to prouoke the Lord vnto anger, seeing
hee can neyther sustaine the wrath of God nor eschew it.
Moreouer wee are taught here,We haue neede of great reue|rence in praier, seeing we speak to him who searcheth the heart. seeing our Prayer is a
conference with him who searcheth the heart, that we should
alway pray with our heart, for otherwise if wee draw neere
him with our lips our heart being farre from him, hee will
curse vs as deceiuers, that hauing a male in our flock, doe sa|crifice
a lame thing vnto the Lord: that is, in stead of the
seruice of our hearts, doe offer vnto him the seruice of our
lips. The Lord hath no delight in the sacrifice of fooles, who
are rash with their mouth to vtter a thing before him, not
considering that hee is in heauen, and they are vpon earth,
the mouth may reach to men who are beside vs, the heart
onely may reach to God who is aboue. It was a very godly
protestation that Dauid made,Psal. 139. 23 Try me O Lord, and prooue
my thoughts in the night, and see if at any time I haue spoken
that to thee with my mouth, which I haue not thought with
my heart: and albeit wee haue not as yet atteyned vnto it,
yet is it that holy sinceritie whereat wee should ayme in all
our prayers, so to speake vnto God that our conscience
may beare vs record that we lye not, and that we haue spoken
nothing with our mouth, which we haue not thought vvith
our heart.

We are therefore for the right ordering of our prayers,Three things to be obserued in Prayer.
to take heede to these three things. First, preparation before
prayer. Secondly, attention in prayer. Thirdly, reuerent 
thanksgiuing after prayer.That prepara|tion go before it. As for the first, as Moses and
Iosua put off their shooes before they came neere the Lord,
so are we to remoue out of our hearts vncleane cogitations,
and affections, whereby we haue trode in the filth of sinne,
before we pray; for those are neuer lawfull, but most vnlaw|full
in the time of prayer. As for worldly cogitations they
are sometimes lawfull, but neuer in the time of prayer. As
Abraham vsed his Asses to serue him for the iourney, but
when he came to mount Moriah, the place of the worship,
he left them at the foot of the hill: so the thoughts of the
world are sometime tollerable, if wee vse them as seruants,
to carry vs through in our iourney, from the earth to hea|uen,
but we must not take them with vs into the holy place
wherein the Lord is to be worshipped.
To help vs to the preparation before prayer,Motiues to preparation. let vs con|sider;
first that he to whom we speake is the Father of light,
and we are by nature but the children of darknes: call there|fore
vpon him in the sinceritie and vprightnesse of thine
heart; for he loues truth in the inward affections. Secondly,
he is the Father of glory, come therefore before him with
feare and reuerence, for thou art but dust and ashes. Thirdly,
he is the Father of mercy, repent thee therefore of thy
sinnes, and then draw neere with a true heart, in assurance
of Faith.
The second thing requisit, is attention in Prayer: the Lord 
to whom we speake is the searcher of the heart,That there be attention in prayer. and there|fore
we should beware that we speake nothing to him with
our mouth, which our heart hath not conceiued. For it is a
great mockerie to the Lord to desire him to consider those
petitions which we haue not considred our selues; we scarce|ly
heare what we say our selues, and how then shall we craue
the Lord may heare vs? We finde by experience that it is
not an easie thing to gather together in one, and keepe

vnited the powers of our soule in prayer vnto God. Sathan
knowes that the gathering of our forces is the weakening of
his kingdome, and that then we are strongest, when we are
most feruent in prayer, and therefore doth hee labour all
that hee can to slacke the earnestnesse of our affection, and
so to make vs more remisse in prayer, by stealing into our
hearts if not a prophane, at least an impertinent cogitation,
so that vnlesse we fight without ceasing against the incursi|on
of our enimie, like Abraham diuing away the rauening
birds from his Sacrifice, vnlesse we expell them speedely,
as oft as they come vpon vs, it is not possible that wee can
intertaine conference with God by prayer.
 And thirdly,That after prayer therebe thanksgiuing to God. after thy prayer thou shouldst come away
with reuerent thanksgiuing. It is the fault of many carelesse
worshippers, they goe vnto God as men goe to a Well to
refresh them when they are thirstie; they goe to it, and their
face toward it, but being refreshed they returne with their
backe vpon it: euen so doe they sit downe to their prayers
without preparation, powre them out without attention and
deuotion, and when they haue done, goes away without re|uerent
thanksgiuing: whereas indeede euery accesse to God
by prayer, should kindle in our harts a new affction to|ward
him, if we consider that when we pray, and gets any
accesse, so oft we are confimd in this, that he who hath
the keyes of the house of Dauid, and opens and no man
shuts, hath opened to vs an entrance to the throne of grace,
which shall neuer be closed againe vpon vs: whereof their
should arise in our hearts a daily encrease of ioy, which
should make vs to abound in thanksgiuing.
Makes request for the Saints.The curse of Moab is vpon prophane men, they pray and preuailes not. We haue further to learne
that none are pertakers of the grace of Prayer, but men
sanctified in Christ Iesus: the Spirit requests for Saints, not
for prophane and impenitent men, howsoeuer sometime
they babble for themselues, yet are their prayers turned in|to
sinne. The curse of Moab is vpon them, they pray and pre|uailes
not. As without sanctification we cannot see God, so

without sanctification wee cannot pray to God: euery one
that calles on the name of the Lord, should depart from
iniquitie. Doe we not feele it by experience, that the further
we goe from our sinnes, the neerer accesse we get vnto the
Lord: and on the contrary, doth not the Lord protest a|gainst
his people the Iewes?Esay. 1. 15. albeit yee make many prayers yet
I will not heare yo,Ierem. 7. 9. for your hands are full of blood. Will you
steale, murther, and commit adultrie, and come and stand be|fore
mee in this house, where my name is called vpon, before
your eyes? behold euen I see it, and will for this cause cast you
out of my sight.
But here seeing it is for Saints onely that the Spirit re|quests,Seeing the spi|rit requests for Saints onely, how shall we know that he requests for vs who are sinners?
what shall then become of mee may the weake
Christian say, who am the chiefe of all sinners? To this I
answere, that in vs who are militant here vpon earth both
of these are true; wee are sinners, and we are Saits, but in
sundry respects. If we say we haue no sinne wee lye, and the
ruth of God is not in vs.1 Ioh. 1. 8. And if our aduersary say that there
is nothing in vs but sinne, hee is also a lyer. That therefore
we may know how these are to be reconciled, let vs consi|der
that the Euangelist Saint Iohn saith,1 Ioh. 5. 18. hee that is borne of
God sinneth not: and in the same Epistle speaking also of
men that are regenerate and borne of God, he saith, if wee
say we haue no sinne we deceiue our selues. The Apostle Saint
Paul speaking of himselfe in one and the selfe same place,
affirmes that he did the euill which he would not,Rom. 7. 15. 17 and yet in|continent
hee protests that it was not hee but sinne dwelling
in him.
The resolution of this doubt will arise by considering
that in the Christian man are two men,In the christian man are two men, the new and the old. the new man, and
the old; the one the workmanship of God, the other the
workmanship of Sathan; the one but young, little  weake
in respect of the other, like little Dauid compared to the
Gyant Goliah. Yet the new man who is weakest hath this
vantage, that he is daily growing, whereas the other is daily
decaying; the life of the new man waxeth stronger and

stronger, the life of the old man weaker and weaker, the
one tending to perfection, the other wearing to a finall
destruction.
Now the Lord in iudging of the Christian lookes not
to the remanents of sinne in him,God iudges of the Christian by the new man, and not by the old. which are daily decaying,
but to the new workmanship of his owne grace in him,
which is daily growing; according to it he esteemes, iudges,
and speakes of the Christian: from it hee giues vs these
names, as to call vs Saints, righteous, c. not counting with
vs what wee haue beene, neither yet weighing vs by the
corruption of sinnefull nature which remaines in vs, but ac|cording
to the new grace which in our regeneration hee
hath created in vs,Num. 23. 21 He sees no iniquitie in Israell, and it is his
praise to passe by the transgressions of his heritage. But the
Christian by the contrary in iudging of himselfe, he lookes
most commonly to that whereunto the Lord lookes least,
his sinnes are euer before him, the old man is continually
in his sight, as a strong, and mightie Gyant, whose force
hee feares, whose tyrannie makes him to tremble, and by
whom hee finds himselfe detayned vnder miserable thral|dome
farre against his will, and therefore all his care is how
to subdue this tyrannie, how to quench his life, and shake
off his dominion in this warfare: hee sighes, complaines,
and cryes vnto God with the holy Apostle,Rom. 7. 24. O miserable
man who shall deliuer me from this body of sinne. But because
so long as this old man hath a life, hee neuer rests to send
out sinnefull motions and actions, which doe greatly greiue
the child of God, therefore is it that hee esteemes himselfe a
miserable creature, yea, and the chiefe of all sinners. Thus
yee see how it is, that God accounts his children Saints, and
they account themselues Sinners.
Where againe Saint Iohn saith,How it is to be vnderstood that he who is borne of God sinneth not. that hee who is borne of
God sinnes not, and yet that hee who saith he hath no sinne is a
lyer, both of these is true. He that is borne of God, that is, the
new man, sinneth not: for sure it is that all the sins which are
committed by man, are either done without the knowledge

of the new man, his vnderstanding being as yet so weake
that he doth not know euery sinne to be sinne, or then if he
knowes them to be sinnes, they are done without his con|sent
or approbation, yea they are done sore against his will,
so that the new man in the sinnes which are done in the body
is a patient not an agent.
So that as an honest man captiued by violence,The new man liues in the bo|dy like Lot in Sodome: and a|gainst
his will compelled to behold wicked and abhomina|ble
deedes, which he would not so much as looke to if hee
were free: so is the new man detayned in the body as a cap|tiue,
and compelled to looke vnto that which he loues not,
that is, to the sinnefull motions, vnruly lusts and affections
of his corrupt nature, whereunto he consents not, but pro|tests
against them, and for their sake becomes weary of so|iourning
in the body, so that Ioseph was not more weary of
his prison, nor Ieremie of his dungeon, nor Daniel of the
company of Lyons,Psal. 120. 5. nor Dauid more weary of his dwelling
in the tents of Kedar, than is the new man weary of his abiding
in the bodie. Hee is like Lot in Sodome, whose righteous
soule was vext day by day, by hearing and seeing the vnclean
conuersation of the Sodomites: hee is like Israel in Aegipt,
kept in most vile slauerie by the tyrannie of Pharaoh, sigh|ing
and crying: he is like the godly Iewes holden in capti|uitie
in Babell, many things they saw there done to the dis|honour
of God, which they no way approued, and many
things they would haue done, that they had no libertie to
doe. So this new man perceiues many sinnefull motions and
actions brought in vpon him by a superiour power, which
are a griefe vnto him, and vexation of his spirit.
And this is the greatest comfort of the new man,Reioycing when he doth good, grieued when he doth euill. that
whatsoeuer good he doth, hee doth it with ioy: and on the
contrary, euill that is done in the body it is a griefe to him
to see it, yea he protests against it, O Lrd this is not I, but
sin that dwels in me,Rom. 7. 15. thou knowst I like it not, I allow it not,
I wish from my heart there were not done in mee any thing
that might offend thee. Onely happy, and thrice happie is

the man, who with the holy Apostle is able to say so. Thus
yee see in what sense the Godly are sayd by the Euangelist
in one place not to sinne, and in another not to be with|out
sinne. The Lord worke this holy disposition in vs, that
the life of sinne may daily be weakned in vs.
According to God. hould not psent petitio~s to God, which are not accor|ding to his wil. Wee haue last of all to marke here,
that those petitions which flow from the Spirit, are accor|ding
to Gods will, and therefore as concerning temporall
things, because wee know not absolutely what is the will of
God, whether health, or sicknesse, riches, or pouertie be
most expedient for vs, wee are to pray with a condition, if it
be his will but as for those things which are directly against
his will, it is a great mockery, if it be done with knowledge,
or otherwise a grose impietie to seeke them from him. It is
written of Vitellius that one of his friends asking from him
a certaine thing which hee refused, and being impatient of
the refusall, did say to him, What auaileth thy friendship to
me, if I cannot obtaine that which I craue? returned back
to his friend this answere, And what auaileth to me thy
friendship, if for thy sake I must doe that which becomes
me not? If such equitie be in a mortall man that hee vvill
not graunt an vnlawfull thing, euen to his tender friend, how
much more are we to thinke that it is in the Lord our God:
Away therefore with these cursed and abhominable sacri|fices,
as to present vnto the Lord petitions which are not
agreeable vnto his holy will.
And last to conclude this,A Christian hath accesse to the priuie cha~|ber of the great king euer when he pleaseth. that wee may be encouraged
to prayer, let vs consider vvhat excellent priuiledge this is,
that the Christian as oft as hee pleaseth, hath libertie to
speake vnto the Lord his God. The Persians thought it a
piece of their sillie glory not to graunt accesse easily vnto
their subiects, yea, not to those of most noble ranck; there|fore
yee see how afraid Hester the Queene was to goe in
vnto the King vnsent for. But the Lord our God King of
Kings, proclaimes vnto vs free accesse, as oft as we are dispo|sed
to call vpon him, ready at all times to extend the scepter

of his peace toward those vvho seeke him in spirit and
truth. Yea, though vvith Dauid thou preuent the morning,
and rise at midnight to call vpon him, thou shalt find him,
euen then waiting vpon thee, Inuenire potes, praeuenire non
potes, come vvhen thou vvilt thou maist find him, but canst
not preuent him. Let vs therefore vse our libertie well, and
see wee neglect not to begin in time our acquaintance with
the Lord, by frequent speaking vnto him, if so be vve looke
hereafter for euer to remaine vvith him.


Verse 28.
Also wee know that all things worke toge|ther
for the best to them who loue God, euen to them
who are called according to his purpose.
_NOw followeth the Apostles third and last prin|cipall
argument of comfort,The third prin|cipall argument of comfort, is from the proui|dence of God, working all things to the good of his owne. taken from the
prouidence of God, which so ouer-ruleth all
things that fall out in the vvorld, that hee cau|seth
them to vvorke together, and that for the
best vnto those vvho loue him: and among the rest our af|flictions
are so farre from being preiudiciall to our saluation,
that by the prouidece of God, vvhich is the daily executer
of his purpose, vvorking all things according to the counsell
of his vvill, they become meanes helping vs forward to that
end, namely, conformitie with Christ, vvhereunto God hath
appointed vs. The comfort is summarily set downe in these
words, All things worke together for the best to them who loue
God: the confirmation thereof is broken vp in these vvords,
euen to them who are called according to his purpose; and the
explication is subioyned in the two subsequent Veses.
Also.Manifold bles|sings of God are vpon the Godly. That is, beside all the comfort vvhich I haue giuen
you before, I giue you yet this further: not one but ma|nifold
are the comforts vvhich the Lord hath discouered
for his children in holy Scriptures.Psal. 34. 19. Many are the troubles of
the righteous, but the Lord deliuers him out of them all: that is,

for euery trouble the Lord hath a seuerall deliuerance.1 Cor. 10. 13 Eue|ry
tentation (sayeth the Apostle) hath the owne issue: euery
horne that riseth against vs to push vs,Zach. 1. 2. hath an hammer at|tending
vpon it to represse it (saith the Prophet.) Esau mour|ned
on Isaac, albeit he vvas prophane, yet he cryed pittifully,
Hast thou but one blessing my Father? but vvee, with the holy
Apostle may blesse our heauenly Father, who doth so com|fort
vs in all our tribulations, that as the sufferings of Christ
abound in vs, so our consolations abound through Christ.
The store-house of his consolations can neuer be emptied.
The Lord our God hath not delt niggardly nor sparing|ly
with vs,If the first fruits of our comfort be so sweete, what shall the full masse be? but a good measure of consolation, pressed down
and running ouer, hath he giuen vs in our bosome, his holy
name be praised therefore. And yet how little is all this,
vvhich now vvee receiue, in comparison of those inestima|ble
ioyes prepared for vs, the like vvhereof the eye neuer
saw, the eare neuer heard, the heart did neuer vnderstand?
Surely the greatest measure of comfort vvee haue in this life,
is but the earnest penny of that principall, which shall be
giuen vs hereafter: if the first fruites of heauenly Canaan
be so delectable, how shall the full masse thereof abundant|ly
content vs, when wee shall behold the face of our God
in righteousnesse, and shall be filled with his image, and
with that fulnesse of ioy which is in his presence, and those
pleasures which are at his right hand for euermore?
Wee know.None but a Christian can know the my|steries of the Gospell. If yee ponder the Apostles words, yee shall
finde that by an Emphasis hee restaines this knowledge to
the Children of God, excluding worldlings and naturalists
from it: The spirituall man discerneth all things, but hee him|selfe
is iudged of no man.1 Cor. 9. 11. A naturall man cannot vnderstand
the things that are of God.1 Cor. 2. 14. The Gospell is wisedome indeed,
but wisedome in a misterie,1 Cor. 2. 5. 6. and wisedome among them that are
perfect. Euery article of our Faith, and point of Christian
doctrine, euery priuiledge of a Christian is a mysterie: no
meruail therfore that the Gospell be foolishnes to the natu|rall
man who perisheth; the excellent things of christianitie

can be knowne of none,Pearles which none know but they who haue them. but those who possesse them: the
value, or rather vanitie of earthly Iewels hath beene better
knowne of some vvho neuer had them, than of others who
haue enioyed them: but the Iewels of God Children such
as Peace, Righteousnesse, and Ioy in the holy Ghost, can be
knowne of none, but of him vvho oth possesse them: the
new Name none can know but hee vvho hath it, neyther
can any man know the sweetnesse of hid Manna vnlesse he
taste it.
If you goe,Worldlings speake of them like birds coun|terfaiting the voyce of man. and speake to a Worldling of inward peace,
and spirituall ioy, or of the priuiledges of a Christian, yee
shall seeme to him a Barbarian, or one that speaks a strange
language, which hee doth not vnderstand: or if hee him|selfe
speake of them, as hee hath learned by hearing, or
reading, yet shall hee speake like a Bird, vttering voyces,
which shee vnderstandeth not. As the brute beast knowes
not the excellencie of mans life, and therefore doth delight
it selfe with Hay and Prouender, seeking no better, because
it knoweth no better: so the naturall man knoweth not the
excellencie of a Christian, and therefore doth disdaine him,
and esteeme him a foole, a madde man, and the off-scowring
of the world; hee takes the doung of the earth in his armes
for his inheritance: if hee can obtaine the portion of Esau,
that the fatnesse of the earth may be his dwelling place; if
his vvheat, and his oyle abound to him, hee careth for no
more; hee knoweth not what it is to haue his soule made
glad vvith the light of the countenance of God. This is your
miserable condition, O yee wretched Worldlings, yee are
cursed with the curse of the Serpent,Worldlings cursed with the curse of the Serpent. yee creepe as it were,
vpon your bellyes, and yee lick the dust of the earth all the
dayes of your life, yee haue not an eye to looke vp vnto hea|uen,
nor an heart to seeke those things which are aboue.
Most fearefull is our estate, vve warne you of it, but it is the
Lord who must deliuer you from it.
This resolute knowledge is the mother of spirituall cou|rage,
constancy, and patience: for why shall hee feare in the

euill day,Sure know|ledge of Chri|stian comfort is the mother of patience. yea, though the earth should be remoued, and
the mountaines fall into the middest of the sea, who sees
the Lord sitting on his throne, and the glassie sea of the
world before him, gouerning all the waltrings, changes, and
euents of things therein, to the good of them who loue him?
Oh that wee had profed so much in the schoole of Christ
all our dayes, that without doubting or making any excepti|on
we could beleeue this which here the Apostle layes for
a most sure ground of comfort, that so we might change all
our thoughts and cares into one, namely, how to grow in
the loue of God: that in a good conscience we might say to
the Lord with Peter,Ioh. 21. 15. Lord thou knowest I loue thee: casting
the burthen of all the rest of our feares, griefes, and ten|tations
vpon the Lord who cares for vs, and hath giuen vs
this promise for praemunire, all comes for the best.
The Souldier with courage enters into the battell vnder
hope to obtaine the victory;Other men ha|zards vnder hope, but the Christian runs as sure to ob|taine. the Marriner with boldnsse
commits himselfe to the stormie seas vnder hope of vantage;
and euery man hazards in his calling, yet are they all vncer|taine
venturers, and knowes not the end: but the Christian
runnes not as vncertaine, but as one sure to obtaine the
Crowne;Rom. 16. 20 for hee knowes that the God of peace shall shortly
tead Sathan vnder his feet. What then? shall not hee with
courage enter into the battell, wherein hee is made sure of
the victory before he fight, knowing that all the warriours
of Christ shall be more than conquerours through him? if
we will onely stand still wee shall see the saluation of the Lord.
Gideon with his three hundred fought against the great host
of Midian without feare,2 Chron. 20. 17 because hee was sure of victorie.
Dauid made hast and ranne to encounter with Goliah, be|cause
hee was perswaded that God would deliuer him into
his hands. The Israelits were not afraide to enter into the
Riuer of Iordane, because they saw the Arke of God before
them deuiding the waters. And shall onely the Christian
stand astonished in his tentations, notwithstanding that the
word of God goes before him to resolue him that whatso|euer

falles out, shall come for the best to him? The Lord
increase vs and make vs to abound more and more in the
loue of our GOD; for perfect loue casts out feare: the Lord
strengthen our faith, that through these mistie cloudes of
affliction which now compasse vs, we may see that comfor|table
end which God in his word hath discouered vnto vs.
And to this effect we must beware of the subtile slights
of Sathan,One of Sa|thans slights is to cause vs to iudge of the works of God by their be|ginnings. who to the end that he may spoile vs of this com|fort
in trouble, endeauours by all meanes either to quench
the light of God vtterly in our mindes, or at least to darken
and obscure it by precipitation of our vnbeleeuing hearts:
carrying vs headlong to iudge of the workes of God by
their beginnings, and to measure our selues in trouble by
our present estate and condition, not suffering vs to tarrie
while we see the end:What inconue|niences arise from this pre|cipitation. whereof it comes to passe that our
hearts being tossed too and fro with restlesse perurbations,
like trees of the forrest shaken with the winde, we hasten
in our necessities to be our owne prouisors, in our dangers
we will be our owne deliuerers, and euery way vve become
the caruers of our owne condition. Wee haue so much the
more neede to beware of this precipitation, because the dee|rest
seruants of God haue fallen through it into fearefull
sinnes against the Lord: As wee may see in Dauid, who
being in extreame danger in the Wildernesse of Maon, said
in his feare that all men were lyers. Is not this a great blasphe|mie,
to say that the promises which the Lord made to him
by Samuel were but lyes? and in his other extremities hee
is not ashamed to confesse that he thought that God had for|got
to be mercifull,Psal. 39. 9. and had shut vp his tender mercy in dis|pleasure:
but when he saw the end, then he was compelled
to accuse himselfe,Psa. 116. 10 and giue glory vnto God. I should haue
beene dumbe,  not opened my mouth, because thou didst it: and
againe I said in my feare all men are lyers, for notwithstand|ing
all Samuels promises, I looked for nothing but death,
but now considering the deliuerance,Psa. 116. 13. I must say pretious in
the sight of the Lord is the death of all his Saints.

Seeing this precipitation made Dauid to stumble and
fall,He that will iudge of Laza|rus on the dunghill, shall think him more mi|serable than the rich Glutton. may vvee not feare least it carry vs to the like inconue|nience
vnlesse we learne to beware of it in time? let vs not
therfore iudge of the vvorks of God before they be ended.
If wee should looke to Lazarus on the doung-hill, full of
byles and sores, hauing no comfort but from the dogs, and
compare him with the rich Glutton clothed in purple, and
fairing daintely euery day, what can wee iudge but that La|zarus
is the most miserable of the two? yet if wee tarrie till
the Lord haue ended his worke, and Lazarus be conuayed
to Abrahams bosome, and the rich Glutton be gone to his
place, then shall the truth appeare manifestly, All things
worke together for the best to them that loue God. Let vs there|fore
learne to measure the euent of things, not by their pre|sent
condition,But wee shall best iudge of the works of God, if we tar|ry till they be ended. but by the prediction of Gods word; let vs
cleaue to his promise, and waite on the vision, which hath
his owne time appointed, it shall speake at the last and shall
not lye, though it tarry, let vs wait for it, it shall surely come
and not stay: let vs goe into the Sanctuary of God and con|sider
the end,Esay 48. 22. there shall we learne that, There is no peace to
the wicked, howsoeuer they flourish for a time  that it can|not
be but well with them who loue the Lord:Psal. 37. 37. Marke the
vpright man, and behold the iust, the end of that man is peace,
but the transgressours shall be destroyed together, and the end
of the wicked shall be cut off. Thus both in the troubles of the
Godly, and prosperitie of the wicked, wee should suspend
our iudgement, till wee see the end.
All things worke together.Gods wonder|full wisdome in causing things of so contrary qualities to a|gree to do one worke. Mark the singular priuiledge
of the Christian, not onely afflictions, but all other things
whatsoeuer worke for the best vnto him, and not onely so,
but they worke together. Many working instruments are
there in the world, whose couse is not one, they commu|nicate
not counsels; yea, their intentions oftentimes are con|trary,
yet the Lord bringeth all their workes vnto this one
end, the good of those who loue him: where euer they be
in regard of place; what euer in regard of persons; yea,

howsoeuer disagreeing among themselues, yet are they so
ruled by the prouident power of the supreame gouernour,
our heauenly Father, that all of them workes together vnto
the good of them that loue him.God hath rested from the worke of crea|tion, not of gubernation. For albeit the Lord rested
the seauenth day from the workes of creation, so that hee
made no new kinde of creature after that day, yet did hee
not rest from the workes of prouidence or gubernation:
whereof our Sauiour saith,Ioh. 5. 17. my Father workes hitherto and I
worke. When man hath finished a vvorke hee resignes it to
another to be gouerned: as the Wright vvhen he hath buil|ded
a ship giues it ouer to the Marriner to rule it; neither
is man able to preserue the vvorke of his hands, neither yet
knowes hee what shall be the end thereof: It is not so with
the Lord: as by the worke of creation hee brought them
out, so by his prouident administration hee preserues them,
and rules euen the smallest creatures, directing them vnto
such ends as he hath ordained them for in the counsell of
his vvill.
How euer some Ethnicks haue beene so blinde,His prouidence extends to the smallest things. as to
thinke that God did neglect the smaller things vpon earth,
scilicet is superis labor est: and Epicures also whose false
conceptions of the diuine prouidence are rehearsed by Eli|phaz.Iob. 22. 13. 14.
How should God know? how should hee iudge through
the darke cloud? the cloudes hide him that he cannot see, and
hee walkes in the circle of heauen: yet it is certaine hee rules
not a part onely but all;Psal. 113. hee is not as they thought of him,
a God onely aboue the Moone: No, though he dwell on high
yet he abases himselfe to behold the things that are on earth;
hee is not onely a God in the mountaines,1 King. 20. as the Syrians
deemed, but a God in the vallies also. There is nothing so
great, nothing so small, but it falles vnder his prouidence,
yea hee numbers our hayres, and keepes them, not one of
them can fall to the ground without his prouidence. Si sic
custodiuntur superflua tua,Augustine. in quanta securitate est anima tua?
if hee so keepe thy superfluities, how much more will hee
keepe thy soule?

Let it therefore content vs in the most confused estate of
things we can see fall out in the world,In greatest confusion of things, let vs keepe our com|fort, the end of them shal be our good. that the Lord hath
said, All things shall worke for the best vnto vs. Let vs not
question with Marie, how can this be? nor doubt with Sa|rah,
how can I conceiue? nor with Moses, where shall flesh
be gotten for all this multitude? but let vs sayth Augustine
consider the author, and such doubts shall cease. As he hath
manifested his power and wisedome in the tempering of
this world, making Elements of so contrary qualities agree
together in one most pleasant harmonie, so doth it appeare
much more in gouerning all the contrary courses of men to
the good of his own children. One notable example where|of
wee will set downe for all.Gen. 37. c. Iacob sends Ioseph to Do|than
to visit his brethren, his brethren casts him into the pit,
Reuben releeues him, the Midianites buyes him, and sels
him to Potiphar, his Mistresse accuses him, his Maister
condemnes him, the Butler after long forgetfulnesse recom|mends
him, Pharaoh exaltes him. O vvhat instruments are
here,  how many hands about this one poore man of God?
neuer a one of them looking to that end which God had
proposed vnto him; yet the Lord contrary to their intention
makes them all vvorke together for Iosephs aduancement in
Aegipt.
But now to the particulars.The end of all the wayes of God, is our good. There is nothing in the
world which workes not for our weale: all the vvorkes of
God, all the stratagems of Sathan, all the imaginations of
men, are for the good of Gods children; yea, out of the most
poysonable things, such as sinne and death, doth the Lord
draw wholesome and medicinable preseruatiues vnto them
vvho loue him. All the wayes of the Lord (saith Dauid) are
mery and truth:Psal. 25. 10. marke vvhat hee sayth, and make not thou
an exception vvhere God hath made none, All, none excep|ted:
therefore be thou strengthened in the Faith, and giue
glory vnto God, resoluing with patient Iob, albeit the Lord
would slay me,Iob. 13. 15. yet will I trust in him.

Sometime the Lord seemes to walke in the way of anger
against his children,Yea euen when he seemes to be most angry with his children he is working their good. which hath moued many of them to
poure out the like of these pittifull complaints, the arrowes
of the almightie are vpon me, (said Iob) the venime whereof
doth drincke vp my spirit, and the terrours of God fight against
me, thou settest me vp as a marke against thee, and makes me
a burthen to my selfe.Iob. 6. 4. Thy indignation lyes vpon me (said Da|uid)
yea from my youth I haue suffered thy terrours doubting
of my life.Isa. 38. 17. 13. 14 For felicitie I haue had bitter griefe (said Ezekiah)
for the Lord like a Lyon brake all my bones, so that I did chat|ter
like a Swallow, and mourne like a Doue. I am troubled on
euery side (said the Apostle) hauing fightings without and
terrours within.2 Cor. 7. 5. Yet in all this dealing the Lord hath a se|cret
way of mercy, in the which he walkes for the comfort
of his children: it is but to draw vs vnto him, that he shewes
himselfe to be angry with vs,Chrisost. in Mat. hom. 14 aduersatur tibi deus ad tempus,
vt te secum habeat in perpetuum, the Lord is an aduersarie to
thee for a while, that hee may for euer reconcile thee to
himselfe. And this albet for the present we cannot perceiue,
and can see no other but that the Lord hath taken vs for his
enimies, yet in the end we shall be compelled to acknow|ledge
and confesse with Dauid, it was good for mee O Lord
that euer thou correctedst me, for the Lord is mernailous in
his saints:Rom. 11. 13 O the deepenesse of the riches both of the wisedome
and knowledge of God, how vnsearchable are his iudgements and
his wayes past finding out? His glory is great when he vvorks
by meanes, his glory appeares greater when hee vvorkes
without meanes, but then his glory shines most brightly
when he workes by contraries.
It was a great worke that hee opened the eyes of the
blinde man,For the work|ing of God with his chil|dren is by con|traries. but greater that hee did it by application of
spittle and clay, meanes meeter to put out the eyes of a seeing
man than to restore sight to a blinde man. So hee wrought
in the first creation, causing light to shine out of darknesse;
so also in the worke of redemption, for by cursed death he
brought happy life, by the crosse he conquered the crowne,

and through shame hee went to glory. And this same order
the Lord still keepeth in the worke of our second creation,
which is our regeneration, hee casts downe, that hee may
raise vp; hee kils and hee makes aliue, hee accuseth his chil|dren
for sinne, that so hee may chase them to seeke remis|sion
of sinness; hee troubleth their consciences that so hee
may pacifie them. And in a word, the meanes which hee
vseth, are contrary to the worke it self, which hee intends
to performe in his Children. Hee sent a fearefull darkenesse
on Abraham euen then when hee was to communicate vn|to
him most ioyfull light; he wrestled with Iacob and shook
him too and ro, euen then when hee came to blesse him;
hee strooke the Apostle Paul with blindnesse at that same
time, when hee came to open his eyes; hee frownes for a
while vpon his beloued, as Ioseph did vpon his brethren, but
in the ende with louing affection shall hee embrace them;
hee may seeme angry at thy prayers, as hee put backe the
petitions of that woman of Canaan, but at length hee will
graunt a fauourable answere vnto them. Let vs not therfore
murmure against the Lord, by whatsoeuer meanes it please
him to worke: It is enough wee know that all the wayes of
God, euen when hee deales most hardly with his children,
are mercie, and tends to the good of those who loue him.
And as for Sathans stratagems,Sathans strata|gems are direc|ted to the good of the godly. it is also out of doubt, that
they worke for the best to them who loue the Lord, not
according to his purpose indeede, but by the Lords opera|tion,
who directeth all Sathans assaults to another end then
hee intended, and trappeth him continually in his owne
snare. If vnder the Serpents shape hee deceiued Adam, vn|der
the Serpents name shall the Lord curse him, and all
those weapons whereby hee seeketh to destroy the worke
of Gods grace in vs, doth the Lord turne to destroy the
workemanship of Sathan in vs: I meane that whole bastard
generation of peruerse affections, which Sathan hath be|gotten
vpon our mutable nature,Ambr. lib. 1. de paeni. ca. 13 by a most vnhappy and
vnlawfull copulation. De veneno eius fit spirituale antidotum:

of this poyson the Lord maketh a spirituall preseruatiue.
The experience of all the Saints of God proues this,Sathans accusa|tions for sinnes past are vnto the godly pre|seruatiues a|gainst sin to come. that
Sathan by his restlesse tentations doth destroy himselfe:
which is most euident both in his tentations for sinne com|mitted,
tending to desperation, as also in his tentations vnto
sinne, tending to presumption. Euery accusation of the
conscience for sinne past, is vnto the Godly man a preser|uatiue
to keepe him from sinne in time to come, hee rea|soning
with himselfe after this manner: If mine enimie doe
so disquiet my minde with inward terrour, for those sinnes
which foolishly I did by his entisement, why shall I hearken
to him any more, and so increase the matter of my trouble?
for what fruit haue I of all those sinnes which I did by his
instigation, but terrour and shame? and shall I looke that
this forbidden tree can render vnto me any better fruit here|after?
O what a faithlesse traitor is Sathan, he entiseth man
vnto sinne, and when hee hath done it, hee is the first ac|cuser
and troubler of man for sinne. When hee comes first
vnto vs hee is a tempter; when wee haue finished his worke
(which is sinne) hee is an accuser of vs vnto the Iudge; and
when hee returneth, hee returneth a troubler and tormen|ter
of vs, for those same sinnes which he counselled vs to doe.
Stoppe thine eare therefore O my soule, from the voyce of
this deceitfull enchanter.
His tentations againe vnto sinne,And his tenta|tions to sinne chases them to the throne of grace. are vnto the Godly
man prouocations that spurre him forward vnto the throne
of grace: for while as wee finde his restlesse malice pursu|ing
in vs that little sparke of spirituall life, whereby the
Lord hath quickned vs, and our owne weaknes and inabilitie
to resist him, then are wee forced with Israell in Egypt, to
sigh for the thraldome,2 Chron. 20. 13 and to cry with Iehoshaphat, O Lord
our God, wee know not what to doc, but our eyes are toward
thee. And who feeleth not this, that the grace of feruent
prayer, wherein otherwise wee faint, our heart being more
ready to fall downe than the hands of Moses, vnlesse they
be supported, is greatly intended in the Children of God

by the buffets of Sathan as is manifest in the holy Apostle.
Magna certe potestas,Ambr. ibid. quae imperat Diabolo, vt se ipse destruat,
a great power of God this is certainly, which commandeth
Sathan to destroy himselfe; Se enim destruit cum hominem,
quem tentando supplantare studet, ex infirmo fortiorem efficit,
for then doth hee destroy himselfe, when the man whom
hee seeketh to ouerthrow by his tentation, of a weake man
is made stronger, by those same meanes. Thus the Lord our
God ouer shootes Sathan in his owne bow, and cuts off the
head of Goliah with his owne sword: his holy name be prai|sed
therefore.
Now as concerning outward afflictions,As the Phili|stims vnder|stood not Sam|sons riddle, how sweete came out of the sowre, so cannot world|lings that com|fort is in the crosse. it is true that as
the Philistims could not vnderstand Sampsons riddle, how
sweet came out of the sowre, and meat out of the eater, so cannot
Worldlings vnderstand, that tribulation bringeth out pati|ence,
and that our light and momentanie afflictions cause vnto
vs a farre more excellent and eternall waight of glory: but the
Children of God haue learned by experience, that albeit
no visitation be sweet for the present, yet afterward it brings
the quiet fruite of righteousnesse vnto them who are thereby
exercised,Iudg. 14. 14. and that there is more solide ioy in suffering re|buke
with Christ,Rom. 5. 3. than in all the pleasures of sinne, which
endure but a season.2 Cor. 4. 13. As Moses the typycall Mediator of
the olde Testament made by his prayer the bitter waters
of Marah become sweet,Heb. 12. 11. so Iesus the true Mediator by his
passion, hath mittigated to his children the bitternesse of the
crosse, yea, hath made it profitable vnto them.
The prodigall sonne concluded not to returne home to
his Father till he was brought low by affliction.Afflictions pro|fitable to the children of God Hagar was
proud in the house of Abraham, but humble in the wil|dernesse:
Ionas sleepeth in the ship, but watcheth and pray|eth
in the Whales belly: Manasses liued in Ierusalem as a
libertine, but bound in chaines in Babell, hee turneth his
heart vnto the Lord his God. Corporall diseases forced ma|ny
in the Gospell to come to Christ, where others enioy|ing
bodily health would not acknowledge him. The earth

which is not tilled and broken vp, beares nothing but
thornes and bryers; the Vines waxe wilde in time, vnlesse
they be pruned and cut: so would our wilde hearts ouer|grow
with the noysome weedes of vnruly affections, if the
Lord by sanctified trouble did not continually manure
them.Lam. 3. 27. It is good therefore (sayd Ieremy) for a man to beare
the yoke in his youth:Psal. 119. 71 and Dauid confesses, it was good for him
that he was afflicted:Ioh. 15. 2. yea our Sauiour saith, euery branch that
beares fruit, my heauenly Father purges it, that it may bring
forth more fruit.
No worke can be made of gold and siluer without fire,The wicked putrifie and rots in their prosperitie.
stones are not meet for pallace worke vnlesse they be polli|shed
and squared by hammering, no more is it possible that
we can be vessels of honor in the house of our God, except
first we be fined and melted in the fire of affliction: ney|ther
can we be as liuing stones to be placed in the wall of
heauenly Ierusalem, except the hand of God first beat from
vs our proud lumps, by the hammer of affliction. As stand|ing
waters putrifie and rot, so the wicked feares not God
because they haue no changes:Iere. 48. 11. and Moab keepes his sent be|cause
he was not powred from vessell to vessell, but hath beene
at rest euer since his youth. And therefore O Lord rather than
that we should keepe the sent of our old naturall corrupti|on,
and liue in a careles securitie without the feare of thine
holy name, and so become sit fasts in our sinnes, no, rather
O Lord change thou vs from estate to estate, waken vs with
the touch of thine hand, purge vs with thy fire, and chastise
vs with thy roddes, alway Lord with this protestation that
thou keepe towards vs that promise made to the sonnes of
Dauid,2 Sam. 7. 14. 15. I will visit them with my roddes if they sinne against
me, but my mercy will I neuer take from them: So be it, O
Lord, euen So be it.
The same comfort haue we also against death,Death workes also the good of Gods chil|dren. that now
in Iesus Christ it is not a punishment of our sinnes, but a full
accomplishment of the mortification of our sinne, both in
soule and body: for by it both the fountaine and the fluxe

of sinne are dryed vp, all the conduits of sinne are stopped,
and the weapons of vnrighteousnesse broken. And though
our bodyes seeme to be consumed and turned into nothing,
yet are they but sowen like graynes of Wheat in the field
and husbandry of the Lord, which must dye before they
be quickned, but in the day of Christ shall spring vp againe
most glorious. And as for our soules, they are by death
releeued out of this honse of seruitude, that they may re|turne
vnto him who gaue them: therefore haue I compa|red
death to the red sea,Death compa|red to the red Sea: Egiptians drowne in it. wherein Pharaoh and his Aegipti|ans
were drowned, and sancke like a stone to the bottome,
but the Israelits of God went through to their promised
Canaan: so shall death be vnto you O miserable infidels,
whose eyes the God of this world hath blinded, that no
more then blinded Aegiptians can yee see the light of God
shining in Goshen, which is his Church, though yee be in
it; to you I say your death shall be the very centre of all
your miseries, a sea of the vengeance of God, wherein yee
shall be drowned, and shall sincke with your sinnes heauier
than a milstone about the necke of our soules to presse you
downe to the lowest hell.
But as for you who are the Israelits of God,But the Israelits of God shall goe through it. ye shall walk
through the valley of death and not neede to be afraid, be|cause
the Lord is with you, his staffe and his rod shall com|fort
you: albeit the guiltinesse of forepassed sinnes, yet re|mayning
in the memory, the terrour of hell, and horrour
of the graue stand vp on euery side like mountaines threat|ning
to ouerwhelme you, yet shall yee goe safely through
to the land of your inheritance, where with Moses and
Miriam and all the children of God, euen the congrega|tion
of the first borne,How the eni|mies of Gods childre~ against their will pro|cures their good. yee shall sing prayses ioyfully to the
God of your saluation.
Now in the last roome, concerning the imaginations of
men against vs, wee shall haue cause to say of them in the
end, as Ioseph said to his brethren, yee did it vnto me for euill,
but the Lord turned it to good.Gen. 50. 20. The whole history of Gods

booke is a cloude of manifold witnesses concurring together
to confirme his truth, therefore among many wee will be
content with one. When Dauid was going forward in bat|tell
against Israell,1 Sam. 29. with Acish King of Gath, vnder whom
he soiourned a while in the time of his banishment, the re|manent
Princes of the Philistims commanded him to goe
backe, and this they did for the worst to disgrace him, be|cause
they distrusted him, but the Lord turned it vnto him
for the best: for if hee had come forward he had been guil|tie
of the blood of Israell, specially of Saul the Lords an|nointed,
who was slaine in that battell: from this the proui|dent
mercy of God doth in such sort deliuer him that no
offence is done by Dauid to Saul, or his people, because
Dauid came not against them, neither yet could the Phili|stims
blame him, because he went backe by their own com|maund.
So a notable benefit Dauid did receiue by that same
deed wherein his enimies thought they had done him a
notable shame.
And where otherwise it pleaseth the Lord to suffer wic|ked
men to lay hand on the bodyes of his children,Death of the body to a Christian is but as the rent|ing of Iosephs garment from him. yet all
they are able to doe is but like the renting of Iosephs gar|ment
from him. As he doth sustaine small losse whose gar|ment
is cut if his body be preserued: so the Christian when
his body is wounded vnto the death, yet hath he lost no|thing
which hee striues to keepe, for hee knowes it is but a
corruptible garment, which would decay in it selfe, albeit
there were no man to rent it.Chrisostome. Non sunt ita timenda spiritui,
quae fiunt in carne, quae extra nos est quasi vestamentum: let
not therefore our soule be afraid for those things which are
done to our bodyes, for it is without vs as a garment that
doth but couer vs. Thus haue wee seene how that their is
nothing so euill in  selfe vvhich by the prouident vvorking
of God is not turned to the good of his children.
Whereof arises yet vnto vs this further comfort, that
seeing it is the priuiledge of euery one who loues the Lord,
it must much more be the priuiledge of the whole Church,

that promise made to the Father of the faithfull,Since to eue|ry Christian all things work for the best, much more are we to think that this is the priuiledge of the whole Church. I will blesse
them that blesse thee, and curse them that curse thee, we may
easily thinke belongs also to all his seed, euen to that con|gregation
of the first borne. The Lord will bee a wall of fire
round about Ierusalem, and the glory in the middest of her, he
will keepe her as the apple of his eye, and make Ierusalem
a cuppe of poyson to all her enimies, and a heauie stone,
which whosoeuer striueth to lift shall be torne therewith,Gen. 12. 3.
though all the people of the earth were gathered together
against it, the weapons made against her shall not prosper,
and euery tongue that shall rise against her in iudgement
shall be condemned. This is the heritage of the Lords ser|uants,
and the portion of them that loue him: for the Church
is that Arke which mounts vp higher, as the water increases,
but cannot be ouerwhelmed: the bush which may burne,
but cannot be consumed: the house built on a rocke, which
may be beaten with winde and raine, but cannot be ouer|throwne.
The Lord who changeth times and seasons,A warning for Kings  such as are in au|thoritie. who takes
away Kings, and sets vp Kings, hath reproued Kings for his
Churches sake, yea, hee gouernes all he kingdomes of the
earth in such sort, that their fallings  risings, their changes
and mutations are all directed to the good of his Church.
In one of these two sentences all the Iudges of the world
may see themselues, and foresee their end, for eyther that
shall be fulfilled in them, which Mrdecay said to Ester, who
knowes if for this thou art come to the kingdome,Hester. 4. 14. that by thee
deliuerance may come to Gods people? or else that which Mo|ses
in Gods name said to Pharaoh, the oppressour of the
Church in her adolescencie,Exod. 7. I haue set thee vp to declare my
power, because thou exaltest thy selfe against my people.
May wee not behold here how vnsure their standing is,They who rise to authoritie  not to the good of the Church shall assuredly fall.
and how certaine their fall, who when they are highest, abuse
their power most, to hold the people of God lowest; what
else are they but obiects whom the Lord hath raised vp to
declare his power and iustice vpon them? If wee shall mark

the course of the Lords proceeding, euer since the begin|ning
of the world, wee shall finde a blessing following them
whom he hath made instruments of good vnto his Church,
and that such againe haue not wanted their owne recom|pense
of wrath, who haue continued instruments of her
trouble.
When the Lord concluded to bring his Church from
Canaan to soiourne in Egypt,Examples ew|ing how God hath altered the state of world|ly Empires for the good of his Church. hee sent such a famine in Ca|naan
as compelled them to forsake it, but made plentie in
Egypt by the hand of Ioseph, whom the Lord had sent be|fore
as a prouisor for his Church, and by whom Pharaoh
was made fauourable to Iacob: but when the time came, that
the Lord was to translate his Church from Egypt to Ca|naan,
then hee altered Pharaohs countenance, and raised
vp a new King who knew not Ioseph, hee turned the Egyp|tians
hearts away from Israell, so that they vexed Israell,
and made them to serue by crueltie.In Pharaoh king of Egypt. Thus when the Lord
will bring them to Egypt hee maketh Pharaoh fauourable,
which also brings a blessing vpon Pharaoh, and his people;
but when the Lord vvill haue them to goe out of Egipt,
hee maketh another Pharaoh an enimie vnto them, where|by
both they are made willing to forsake Egypt, and Pha|raoh
prepares the way for a fearefull iudgement on himselfe
and his people.
Againe,In the Monarch of Babell and Persia. when the sinnes of Israell came to that ripenes,
that their time was come, and their day drew neere, the
Lord stirred vp the King of Babell, as the rod of his wrath,
and staffe of his indignation: He sent him to the dissembling
nation, and gaue him a charge against the people of his wrath,
to take the spayle and the pray, and to tread them vnder feete
like mire in the streets, and to this effect, that the Lord might
be auenged of the sinnes of Israell, he subdued all the king|domes
round about them vnder the King of Babell, that no
stoppe nor impediment should be in the way to hold back
the rodde of Ashur from Israell. But yet againe when the
Lord had accomplished all his worke vpon Israell, and the

time of mercy was come, and the seauentie yeares of cap|tiuitie
expired, then the Lord visited the proud heart of the
King of Ashur, and for his Churches sake he altered againe
the gouernement of the whole earth, translating the Em|pyre
to the Medes and Persians, that so Cyrus the Lords
annoynted might performe to his people the promised de|liuerance.
All which should learne vs in the greatest changes and
alterations that fall out in the world,Therefore in our greatest mutations our hart should not be moued from confidence in God. to rest assured that the
Lord will worke for the good of his Church: though the
earth should be moued and the mountaines fall into the mid|dest
of the sea, yea, though the waters thereof rage, and be
troubled, yet there is a riuer, whose streames shall make
glad the cittie of our God in the middest of it; yea, if they
who should be the nourishng Fathers of the Church, for|sake
her, and become her enimies, they shall assuredly pe|rish,
but comfort and deliuerance shall appeare vnto Gods
people out of another place. The Lord for a while may put
the brydle of bondage in the Philistims hand, to humble
Israell for their sinnes, but it shall be taken from them, at
length his Church shall with ioy draw water out of the Well
of saluation, and prayse the Lord, saying: though thou wert
angry with mee, thy wrath is turned away, and thou comfortest
mee, yea Sion shall cry out, and shout for ioy, for great is the
holy One of Israell in the middest of her. And therefore in our
lowest humiliations let vs answere our enimies: Reioyce not
against me O mine enimie,Iob. 19. though I fall I shall rise, when I
shall sit in darkenesse, the Lord is a light vnto mee. I will beare
the wrath of the Lord because I haue sinned against him, vntill
hee plead my cause and execute iudgement for me, he will bring
me forth to the light, and I shall see his righteousnesse: then hee
that is mine enimie shall looke vpon it, and shame shall couer
him who said to mee, where is the Lord thy God? now shall hee
be trodden vnder as the mire in the streets? yea, so let all thine
enimies perish, O Lord.

For the best.What is a chri|stians best. This good or best, is no other thing, but
that precious saluation prepared to be shewed in the last
time, reserued in the heauens for vs, and whereunto wee are
reserued by the power of God through Faith. Of this it is
euident that our best is not yet wrought, it is onely in the
vvorking, and therefore vvee are not to looke for it in this
life.
There is a great difference in this,A wicked man is at his best when he is first borne, for the longer he liues the moe sins he multiplyes. betweene the Godly
and the wicked: the one enioyes their best in this life, the
other not so, but looketh for it. If if should be demaunded
when a wicked man is at his best, I would answere his best
is euill enough, but then is bee at his best, when hee comes
first into the world, for then his sinnes are fewest, his iudge|ment
easiest: it had beene good for him that the knees had
not preuented him, but that hee had dyed in the birth.
For as a riuer which is smallest at the beginning, increases
as it proceedes, by the accession of other waters vnto it: so
the wicked the longer he liueth,Ierem. 9. 3 waxeth worse and worse, de|ceiuing
and being deceiued, proceeding from euill to worse, till
at length hee be swallowed vp in that lake that burnes with
fire and brimstone.
And this the Apostle expresseth most significantly,A man conti|nuing in sinne compared to one gathering a treasure. when
hee compaes the wicked man vnto one gathering a trea|sure,
wherein hee heapeth vp wrath vnto himselfe against
the day of wrath: for euen as the worldling, who euery day
casteth a piece of money into his treasure, in few yeares
multiplyes such a summe, that hee himselfe is not able to
keepe in minde the particulars thereof; but when hee brea|keth
vp his boxe, hee finds in it sundry sorts of coyne, which
were quite out of his remembrance: Euen so it is, and
worse with thee, O impenitent man, who not onely euery
day, but euery houre and moment of the day doest multi|ply
thy transgressions, and defile thy conscience, by hoord|ing
vp into it some dead worke or other, to what a recko|ning
thinkest thou, shall thy sinnes amount in the end?
though thou doest forget them, as thou committest them,

yet the Apostle tels thee that thou hast laid them vp in a
treasurie.
Yea not onely hast thou laid vp in store thy sinnes,With euery new sinne he gathers a new portion of wrath. but
with euery sinne hast gathered a portion of wrath propor|tionable
to thy sinne, which thou shalt know in that day
wherein the Lord shall breake vp thy treasure, and open
the booke of thy conscience, and set thy sinnes in order be|fore
thee, then shall thine owne wickednesse correct thee, and
thy turning backe shall reproue thee, then shalt thou know and
behld that it is an euill thing and a bitter, that thou hast for|saken
the Lord thy God. Thou shalt be astonished to see such
a multitude of witnesses standing vp against thee, those sins
which thou hast cast behind thy backe, thou shalt see them
set in the light of the countenance of God: woe then
shall be vnto thee, for the Lord then shall turne thine owne
wayes vpon thie head, the Lord shall giue thee to drincke
of that cuppe which thou hast filled with thine owne hand,
when thou shalt haue accomplished the measure of thine
iniquitie, and hee shall double his stripes vpon thee accor|ding
to the number of thy transgressions.
But as for the children of God if yee doe aske,A Christians best beginnes in the day of his conuersion when
they are at the best: I answere, praysed be God, our worst
is gone, our good is begunne, our best is at hand. As our
Sauiour said to his kinsmen, so may wee say to the world|lings,Ioh. 6. 3.
your time is alway, but my time is not yet come. We were
at the worst immediately before our conuersion, for our
whole life till then was a walking with the children of dis|obedience
in the broad way that leads to perdition, then we
were at the worst, when we had proceeded furthest in the way
of vnrighteousnesse, for then we were furthest from God.
Our best began in the day of our recalling, wherein the Lord
by his word and holy spirit called vpon vs, and made vs
change our course, turning our backes vpon Sathan, and
our faces toward the Lord, and so caused vs to part com|pany
with the children of disobedience, that where they
went on in their sinnes to iudgement, we came home with

the penitent forlorne vnto our fathers familie. That was a
a happy day of diuision betweene vs and our sinnes; in that
day with Israell we entred into the borders of Canaan to
Gilgall;The day of our conuersion was a day of diusi betweene vs  our old sinnes which wee should not for|get. there were we circumsised, and the shame of Egipt
taken from vs, euen our sinne, which is our shame indeede,
and which wee brought vvith vs euen from our mothers
wombe. The Lord graunt that we may keepe it in thankfull
remembrance, and that we may count it a double shame to
returne againe to the bondage of Egipt, to serue any more
that Prince of darknesse in bricke and clay, that is, to haue
fellowship with the vnfruitfull workes of darknsse, but
that like the redeemed of the Lord wee may walke from
strength to strength, till we appeare before the face of our
God in Sion.
Alway this difference of estates betweene the godly and
wicked,Seeing our best is not in this life, let vs pos|sesse our oules in patience. should learne vs patience, let vs not seeke that in
the earth, which our gratious father in his most wise dis|pensation
hath reserued for vs in heauen, Let vs not be like
the foolish Iewes who loued the place of their banishment
in Babell, better than their home. Now our life is hid with
God in Christ, and we know not yet what we shall be, but
we know when hee shall appeare we shall be like him, the
Lord shall carrie vs by his mercy, and bring vs by his
strength into his holy habitation; hee shall plant vs in the
mountaine of his inheritance, euen the place which he hath
prepared, and sanctuary which he hath established, then
euerlasting ioy shall be vpon our head, and sorrow and
mourning shall flye from vs for euer. And now till the Lord
haue accomplished his worke in vs, let vs not faint because
the wicked floorish: how euer they prosper they are to bee
pittied more than enuied; let them eate, and drinke, and be
merry, sure it is they will neuer see a better life, then that
which presently they enioy, they haue receiued their conso|lation
in this life, and haue gotten their portion in this pre|sent
world.

Surely,How they are to be pittied who reioyce in things present, as in their best things. no tongue can expresse their miserie: and yet as
Samuel mourned for Saul when God reiected him, and
Ieremie wept in secret for the pride of his people, that would
not repent of their sinnes: how can wee but take vp a bit|ter
lamentation for many of you, whom in this time of
grace wee see to be strangers from grace? wee wish from
our harts ye were not like the kinsemen of Lot, they thought
hee had but mocked, when hee told them of an iminent
iudgement, and therefore for no request would goe out of
Sodome, but tarryed till the fire of the Lords indignation
did consume them: but that rather as Sarah followed A|braham
from Caldee to Canaan, so yee would take vs by
the hand, and goe with vs from hell to heauen: but alas,
the lusts of the flesh hold you captiue, or then the loue of
the world doth bewitch you; but all of them in the end shall
deceiue you: for all the labour vnder the Sunne is but vani|tie
and vexation of Spirit, when you haue finished your
taske, you shall be lesse content than you were at the begin|ning;
you shall be as one wakened out of a dreame, who
in his sleepe thought hee was possessor of great riches, but
vvhen hee awaketh behold hee hath nothing: or not vnlike
that rich man who said in his securitie, Now my Soule thou
hast much goods for many yeares,Luke. 12. 19. and euen vpon the next day
redacted to such extreame necessitie with that other who
dispised Lazarus, that he had not so much as a drop of cold
vvater to coole his tongue withall: then shall you lament
and say,Wisd. 5. 7. We haue wearied our selues in the way of iniquitie, and
it did not profit vs.
Alas,Miserable worldlings who take more paines to get  keep any thing than Iesus Christ. how shall I learne you to be wise? Is not this a pit|tifull
blindnesse? the Lord vvhen hee created man, made
him Lord aboue all his creatures, and now vnthankfull
man sets euery creature in his heart aboue the Lord. O
fearefull ingratitude, Doe you so reward the Lord, O foolish
people and vnwise? There is nothing which yee conceit to be
good, but when yee vvant it you are carefull to seeke it,
vvhen you haue it, you are carefull to keepe it; onely you

are carelesse of the Lord Iesus, though hee be that incom|parable
iewell, vvhich bringeth light in darkenesse, life in
death, comfort in trouble, and mercy against all iudgement:
ye should set him as a signet on your heart, as an ornament
on your head, and put him on as that glorious attire vvhich
gets you place to stand before God. But vvhat paines doe ye
take to seeke him? vvhat assurance haue yee that yee are
in him? or vvhat mourning doe yee make, for that yee doe
not possesse him? can you say in truth, that the tenth part
of your thoughts or words haue been bestowed vpon him?
No, no, it is the shame of many that they haue taken more
paynes to keepe a signet on their hand, than euer they did
to keepe Iesus in their hart; they wander after vanitie and
follow lyes, they forsake the fountaine of liuing waters. Oh
consider this yee that forget God,Psal. 50. 22. least hee teare you in peeces,
and there be none to deliuer you.
The last lesson vve obserue in this part of the Verse is
this:How all things worke for the worst to the wicked. as all things workes for the best to them who loue the
Lord, so all things workes for the vvorst vnto the vvicked;
there is nothing so cleane which they defile not, nothing so
excellent vvhich they abuse not. Make Saul a King, and
Balaam a Prophet, and Iudas an Apostle, their preferment
shall be their destruction: if they be in prosperitie they
contemne God, and their prosperitie becomes their ruine:
if they be in aduersitie they blaspheme him, and like raging
waues of the sea cast out their owne dirt to their shame; yea
what speake I of these things? euen their table shall be asare
vnto them, Iesus Christ is a rocke of offence vnto them, the
Gospell the sauour of death vnto them, and their prayer is
turned into sinne; and what more excellent things then
these? As a foule stomacke turnes most healthfull food into
corruption: so their polluted conscience turnes iudgement
into gall, and the fruit of righteousnesse into wormewood.
And all this should prouoke vs to a holy care to become
good our selues, or else there is nothing were it neuer so
good can be profitable to vs.

To them that loue God.The persons to whom the for|mer comfort belongs are described to be such as loue God, and are called by him. We haue heard the Apostles last
argument of comfort, which is that the Lord so ruleth all
things by his prouidence, that those things which seemes to
be against his children, are made to worke together for the
aduancement of their good. Deus enim adeo bonus est vt nihil
mali esse sineret, nisi etiam adeo esset potens, vt ex quolibet malo
possit elicere bonum, for God is so good that hee would suf|fer
no euill to be, were it not he is also so powerfull that of
euery euill, hee is able to draw out good. Now wee pro|ceede
to the persons to whom this comfort belongs: who
are first described to be such as loue God: secondly, as are
called according to his purpose.Three things inseperably knit, 1. Gods purpose con|cerning vs, 2. his calling of vs, 3. our loue toward him. Here are three things con|ioyned
together, euery one depending on another. First, the
purpose of God, vvhich is no other thing but his eternall
and immutable decree concerning our saluation. Secondly,
our calling, flowing from this purpose. Thirdly, a loue of
God, wrought in our hearts by this effectuall calling. These
three are so inseperably conioyned together that from the
lowest of these we may goe vp to the highest: of that vnay|ned
loue of God which is in thee, thou mayest know that he
loued thee, and in his vnchangeable purpose hath ordayned
thee to life. This is the greatest comfort that can be giuen to
men vpon earth, to let them see that or euer the Lord laide
the foundations of the earth, he first laid the foundation of
thy saluation in his owne immutable purpose, which being
secret in it selfe and obscured from vs, is now manifested
vnto vs by our effectuall calling. But of this we will speake
more God willing hereafter.
The loue of God then is set downe here as a principall
effect and token of our calling:None can loue God but such as he hath cho|sen and called. As the Lord calles none
effectually but those whom hee hath elected: so none ca
loue him but those who are effectually called by him; yea
thou thy selfe who now loues the Lord, before thy calling
louedst him nod, thy heart went a whooring from God, and
thou preferredst euery Creature before him, and for the
smallest pleasure of sinne thou caredst not to offend him.

It is thought among the multitude a common thing,It is thought a common thing to loue God, but none can loue him who are not belo|ued of him. and an
easie to loue the Lord, and euery man abhorres in word to
be counted such a monster as hath not the loue of God, but
they are farre deceiued; for man till he be called by grace
cannot loue the Lord, herein is loue, not that we loued God,
but that hee loued vs. If now we doe know him and know
him so that we loue him,1 Ioh. 4. 10. it is because we were first knowne
of him, and so knowne that we were beloued of him: not
that there is any equalitie betweene these loues, or that we
are able to match the Lord in affection; non enim pari vber|tate
fluunt hi duo amores, for these two loues flowes not in a
like plentie: as the running of a little strand is nothing in
comparison of the great Ocean, so is our loue to God as no|thing,
if it be compared with his incomprehensible loue to|ward
vs, yet is it most certaine, amor Dei amorem animae parit,
it is Gods loue to vs which begets in the soule a loue to
God: Nemo itaque se amari diffidat, qui iam amat, let no
man therefore who loues God distrust that he is beloued.
It is very comfortable, that among all the pen-men of the
holy Ghost none doe speake more of loue than Iohn, euen
hee who vvas Christs beloued Disciple, whom hee loued a|boue
the rest: for it doth teach vs that whosoeuer is greatly
beloued of God, shall also become a carefull practiser of loue
toward others.
That therefore we may know the heart of God toward
vs,He that would know Gods purpose toward him, let him go downe to his own heart, and not vp to Gods counsell. it shall not be needfull that we enter into his secret coun|sell,
but let vs goe and enter into our owne hearts, and there
we shall finde resolution, albeit the Lord send not now to
you that are men, an Angell to witnesse, as hee did to Da|niel,
that he was a man greatly beloued of God, or to testi|fie
to you that are women, that which he did to Mary, that
shee was freely beloued of the Lord, yet so many of you
as vpon knowledge in sinceritie can say with Peter,Ioh. 21. 15. Lord
thou knowest that I loue thee, haue here a testimonie no lesse
certaine, to wit, his owne Oracle in his word, to make you
sure that yee are beloued of him.

And that the comfort may be the more sure vnto vs,Loue the first affection that Sathan peruer|ted.
seeing loue is the principall token of our calling, wee will
speake a little of Loue, that so we may know whether wee
be endued with this most excellent grace of the spirit or no.
Naturally the affection of Loue i man is so inordinate, that
not vnproperly Nazianzen called it dulcem tyrannum, a
sweet tyrannie, that by deceitfull allurements compels the
whole man to follow it: and it is not onely in it selfe distem|perated,
but altogether set vpon wrong obiects, our loue
being so set vpon the creature that we neglect the Creator:
a fearefull ingratitude, that where in the beginning the Lord
set vp man as Prince and ruler ouer all his creatures, putting
all the workes of his hands in subiection vnder him, that
man should meet the Lord with such vnthankfulnesse as
to set in his affection, euery creature before the Lord, Doe
yee so requite the Lord O yee foolish people and vnwise?
But as this was the first affection which Sathan through
infidelitie peruerted,And the first which in our regeneration is rectified by the spirit of grace. turning it from the Lord and setting
it vpon the forbidden tree: so it is the first affection which
in the regeneration is rectified by Faith, and by which fai
workes in the sanctification of the rest, turning it from the
creature and setting it vpon God. Where we are to consider
of the lawfull obiects of our loue, ad of the due measure
of loue we owe vnto euery one of them. The obiects of our
loue are three: the first is God: the second is our selfe: the
third is our neighbour.
The first and principall obiect of our loue is the Lord
our God,The first ob|iect of refor|med loue is God. whom we ought so to loue that wee loue him a|boue
all things, and that for no other thing more than for
himselfe: in loue the Lord will not suffer a companion, nei|ther
Father, nor Mother, Wife nor Children, nay not thy
owne life should be so deere to thee, as that for any of these
thou shouldst offend thy God, otherwise hee tels thee him|selfe
that thou art not worthy of him, and he will not reckon
thee among those that loue him:August. de temp. ser 223 Non amat Christum qui
aliquid plus quam Christum amat, he loues not Christ who

loues any thing more than Christ, and then doe wee loue
something more than him, if from him wee seeke any thing
more than himselfe. This is a mercinarie loue, when man
loueth God for his gifts. It was obiected by Sathan vnto
Iob but falsely for euen then when he was spoyled of all the
earthly comforts, which God had giuen him, yet the loue
of God continued in him, from which he blessed the Lord.
As the woman which loueth her husband because hee is
rich, is rather to be called a louer of his riches, than of him|selfe:
so the Worldling, who with the carnall Israelite, doth
worshippe God for his wine, and his oyle, and the rest of
those good things which God giues men, is but an hyre|ling,
not a sincere worshipper, nor a chast louer of the Lord
his God.
The second obiect of our loue is our selues:The second ob|iect of reformed loue is our selus for in that
the Lord requireth that I loue my neighbour as my selfe,
it is manifest, that first of all I ought to loue my selfe. Hee
that loueth not God cannot loue himselfe;He cannot loue his brother who loues no himselfe. and hee who lo|ueth
not himselfe, cannot rightly loue his neighbour: with|out
the loue of God, all the selfe loue which is in man is but
selfe hatred. As the franticke man who in his fury wounds
his owne body is pittyed of all men, as one that hath no pit|tie
of himselfe: so the prophane man, who by multiplying
transgressions slayeth his owne soule, is more iustly to be
accounted an hater of himselfe: it is the holy loue of God
that first teacheth thee to take heede vnto thy selfe, to pre|serue
both soule and body from the wrath to come, and that
worketh in thee an holy care to conforme thy selfe to the
Lord whom thou louest, and with whom thou desirest to
remaine for euer. Thus being taught to loue our selues, we
shall also learne to loue our neighbour; the ordered loue of
our selues being (as I said) that patterne, according to which
wee should loue our neighbour. Prius ita vide si nosti di|ligere
teipsum,Augustine.  tunc committam tibi proximum, quem dili|gas
sicut teipsum, Learne therefore first of all to loue thy
selfe, and then will I commit thy neighbour to thee that

thou maist loue him as thy selfe. Si autem nondum nosti dili|gere
te, timeo ne decipias proximum sicut te, but if otherwise
thou hast not learned to loue thy selfe, I feare that as thou
deceiuest thy selfe, thou wilt also deceiue thy neighbour,
louing him so that thou draw him into the sare of sin with
thy selfe, to both your destructions: this is not loue but ha|tred;
for hee who loueth any thing truely, hateth euery
thing that would destroy it; as hee that loueth a garment,
hateth the moth that consumeth it; and hee that loueth a
tree, hateth the worme that eateth it vp: so hee that loueth
a man will also hate the sinne that slayes the man, otherwise
if thou cherish that which destroyeth him, thou hatest him
indeed, and louest him not.
It is commonly thought a needlesse lesson to teach a man
how to loue himself,Man hath need to learne how to loue himself rightly. but in very deed it is most needful, it be|ing
a common disease among men, mare res suas magis qua~
seipsos,Aug. ad frat. in Eremo. ser. 30. to loue any thing which is theirs better than them|selues,
 quis vtilemiudicet vitae alienae, quem videt inuti|lem
vitae suae? and who can iudge that hee can be profitable
vnto other men,Amb. lib. 2. offi. cap. 12. whom hee seeth vnprofitable, yea, hurtfull
vnto himselfe? Though it be principally said to Preachers,
yee are the light of the world, and salt of the earth, yet doth
it also (saith Chrisostome) appertaine to euery Christian: but
hee that hath not so much light as to shine to himselfe, how
shall hee shine vnto others? how shall hee guide them, ex|cept
it be as the blinde leades the blinde, and both of them
at length fals into the ditch? and hee that hath no salt to
pouder his owne speeches, nor to eate vp the corruption
of his owne heart, how can hee effect the reformation of o|thers?
Thus you see how the spirit of grace reforming our
affection of loue sets it vpon God,Loue to our selues and our neighbor uld be measured, but our loue to God should be without mea|sure. our slues, and our neigh|bour.
Now as for the measure of our loue toward these, wee
are to know that the loue of our selues and our neighbour
is bounded and limited, but the due measure of the loue of
God is to loue him without measure. Three conditions are

required in our loue to God: to wit, that we loue him with
all our heart, with all our minde, and with all our strength:
wee must loue him earnestly, that other loue draw vs not
from him, but his loue may be so strong in our heart, as to
banish out of it all other vnlawfull loue,Bern. in Cant ser. 20.  vincat dulcedo
dulcedinem, quemadmodum clauus clauum, that so the sweet|nesse
of Christ may ouercome in vs all sweetnesse of the
creature, as one nayle driues out another.
The Apostles loued Iesus with an hearty affection,Three conditi|ons requisite in the loue of God. wee
haue (said they) forsaken all thing to follow thee: yet had they
not learned to loue him with all their minde, that is, wisely,Mat. 19. 27.
with knowledge and vnderstanding; for they loued him so
that they liked not his sufferings, and had no will that hee
should dye; the speaches giuen out before hand by our Sa|uiour
of his death, they could neither conceiue them nor
approue them: therefore did our Sauiour rebuke them, If
ye loued me,Iohn. 14. 21. ye would certainely reioyce that I goe vp to my
Father: out of doubt their affection was toward him, but
they did not yet vnderstand how good it was for the glory
of God and mans saluation, that Iesus should dye, and ther|fore
could not reioyce in it. And the Apostle Peter when
hee heard that Iesus behoued to suffer, because hee loued
him,Mat. 16. 22. 23 said to him, Maister pittie thy selfe, but receiued this
answere, Goe behinde me Sathan, for thou vnderstandest not
the things that are of God: culpans in vtro non affectum sed
consilium, blaming in them both, not their affection, but
their vnderstanding: yet afterward when Peter was better
informed, that Iesus behoued to dye, and rise the third day,
hee disswaded him no more, but rather promised that hee
would dye with him; hee had now learned to loue Iesus not
onely with his heart, but also with his minde; not earnestly
onely, but also wisely; yet when it came to the poynt, hee
denyed his Maister at the voyce of a Damsell, because hee
had not learned to loue him with strength, as hee did after|ward:
when he had receiued the holy Spirit in greater mea|sure,
hee loued Iesus euen to the very death, with so strong

an affection, that before the Counsell hee choosed rather
to dye for Christ, than to denye him, Licet vitam tunc mi|nime
posuit, deposuit tamen, in so much that albeit hee lost
not his life, yet hee freely laid it downe for Iesus.
These are thee three,In this life wee are farre from that measure of the loue of God which should be in vs. whereunto wee are to aspyre in all
our life, to loue the Lord heartely; to loue him wisely; (for
inconsiderate zeale, and temerarious precipitation doth not
please him) and to loue him with so strong an affection, that
wee chose rather to suffer death than to forsake him. But
alas, how farre are wee from this holy disposition? who can
say hee hath attained to that measure of holy Loue which
the Law of God requireth in him? and therefore should vve
endeuour to grow daily in loue, earnestly praying the Lord,
that hee vvould breath by his Spirit vpon that little sparke
of heauenly life vvhich hee hath created in our hearts, that
it be not extinguished with the ashes of our corruption, but
may increase, and become a great flame to burne vp our af|fections
with such a loue of God, as may carry vp all the
powers of our soule toward him.
To this effect let vs meditate frequently vpon these foure
causes for vvhich wee should loue the Lord:Foure medita|tions helpful to encrease in vs the loue of God. first, for that
which hee is in himselfe, to wit, the fountaine of all good|nesse,
the greatest and supreame good; if it be good that 
man would haue,We should loue him, because he himselfe is the supreame good. let him loue the Lord to vvhom there is
none like in goodnes, inuenito si potes aliquid pretiosius Deo,
 dabitur tibi, finde out if thou canst any thing more pre|tious
than God, and it shall bee giuen thee. The Platonists
by the light of nature saw that all the pulchritude and beau|tie
which shineth in the creature vvas but spendor quidam
summi illius boni, which should transport vs in our affection
toward him from whom it came, Pulchrum coelum, pulchra
terra, sed pulchrior, qui fecit illa, the heauen and earth are
beautifull, but more beautifull is hee who made them: and
therefore as oft as any good in the creature beginneth to
steale our heart after it, let vs in our affection goe vp to the
Creator, considering that the Lord hath not made these

beautifull or profitable creatures that we should go a whoo|ring
after them, but that by them as steps we should climbe
vp to him that made them, and rest in him.
The second cause that may breed the loue of God in vs,
if we meditate vpon it is,Because he hath first loued vs. that the Lord hath first loued vs:
Inuenimus eum, sed non praeuenimus, we haue found him, but
we did not preuent him; we knovv him novv, but were first
knowne of him; hee found vs first, and that euen vvhen vve
vvere enimies vnto him:Bernard. dilexit non existentes, imo resistentes,
he loued vs vvhen vve vvere not, yea vvhen vve vvere rebels
against him, and shall vve not novv being reconciled by
the death of his sonne endeauour to loue him againe.
Thirdly,He hath decla|red his loue by innumerable gifts already giuen vs. the Lord by his continuall gifts hath testified 
his loue to vs, he hath not beene vnto vs as a wildernesse,
or as a land of darknes: if we vvill remember and tell what
the Lord hath done to our soule, vvee shall finde vvee are
ouercome with the multitude of his mercies, and there is
none that hath deserued the loue of our hearts comparable
to the Lord. If our loue be free let vs set it vpon him who
is most worthy to be loued, and if it be venall, let vs also
giue it vnto him who hath giuen vs most for it.
And fourthly,Hee hath yet greater things which he hath prepared for vs to giue vs. it shall waken in vs the loue of God, if vve 
consider in our hearts what great things the Lord hath pro|mised
to giue vnto vs, euen such as the eye hath not seene;
and the eare hath neuer heard; life without death; youth
without age; light without darkenesse; ioy without sadnes;
a kingdome without a change,Aug. de ciuit. dei. l. 10. c. 18 and in a word, he shall then
giue vs a blessed life, non de his quae condidit, sed de seipso, not
of those things which hee hath made but of himselfe.Our loue to God must be tryed by the ef|fects thereof.
But to returne to our former purpose, that we may know
vvhether this holy loue be created in our hearts by the spi|rit
of grace or no, we must try it by the fruits and effects of
loue,Property of Loue, it longs to obtaine tha which is belo|ued. whereof novv it shall content vs to touch a few. First,
it is the nature of Loue, that it earnestly desires and seekes
to obtaine that which is beloued. Hereby shalt thou knovv
whether thy affection of loue be ordered by Christ, or

remaine as yet disordered by Sathan. The affection which
Christ hath sanctified will follow vpward, seeking to be
there where he is. Euery thing naturally returnes to the owne
originall; as the waters go downe to the deep, from whence
they came: so carnall loue powred out like water, returnes
to Sathan who begat it, and carries miserable man captiued
with it downward to the bottomles pit: but holy loue being
as a sparke of heauenly fire kindled in our hearts by the
holy Ghost, ascends continually and rauishes vs vpward to|ward
the Lord, from whom it came, not suffing vs to rest
till we inioy him.
Let this then be the first tryall of our loue,We loue not God if we vse not the exerci|ses of the word and prayer, see|ing by them onely we haue familiaritie with God vp|on earth. if wee vse
carefully those holy meanes by which vve keepe and enter|taine
familiaritie with our God, it is an argument that vve
loue him: and what other meanes is there by which man
vpon earth is familiar with God, but the exercises of the
word and prayer? Godly Dauid who protests in some pla|ces
that he loued the Lord, prooues it in other by the like of
these reasons, O how loue I thy law? it is my meditation con|tinually:Psal. 119. 97
and againe, I haue loued the habitation of thine house,
and the place where thine honour dwels.Psal. 26. 8. One thing haue I de|sired
of the Lord,Psal. 27. 2. that I may dwell in the house of my God all
the dayes of my life, to behold the beautie of the Lord, and to
visit his holy temple. As this doth serue for the comfort of
those who delight in the exercise of the word and prayer,
so doth it serue for the conuiction of those, to whom any
other place is more amiable than the labernacles of God:
an euident proofe they haue not the loue of God, because
they neglect the meanes euen when they are offered, by
which familiar accesse is gotten vnto the Lord.
And againe,We loue not God if we long not to be with him in heauen, wher he shews his most fami|liar presence. because the fight we haue of God in this life,
is but through a vaile, and the tast we get of his goodnesse
is but in part, and that in the life to come the Lord will fully
embrace vs in the armes of his mercy, and kisse vs for euer
with the kisses of his mouth: therefore is it that the soule
which vnfainedly loues the Lord cannot rest content with

that familiaritie which by the Word and Prayer it hath
with God in this life, but doth long most earnestly to be
with the Lord, where shee knoweth that in a more excel|lent
manner shee shall embrace him: whereof proceedeth
these and such like complaints,Psal. 42. 1. As the Hart brayeth for the
riuers of water, so panteth my soule after thee O God, O when
shall I come and appeare before the presence of my God?Psal. 143. My
Soule desireth after thee as the thirsty land,Phillip. 1. For I would be
dissolued and be with the Lord,Reuel. 22. Therefore come, euen so, come
Lord Iesus.
But alas,How by this tryal it is found that many are void of the loue of God. here are wee taken in our sinnes, thou sayest
thou louest the Lord, but how is it then that thou longest
not to see him, neyther desirest thou to be with him? yea, a
small appearance of the day of deah, or mention of the day
of iudgement, doth terrifie and afray thee: where as other|wise
if thou didst loue him, they would be ioyfull dayes vn|to
thee: seeing in the one wee goe to him, and in the other
he commeth to vs to gather vs, and take vs thether where he
is. Surely, those men who contenting themselues with the
gifts of God in this life, thinke not long to enioy himselfe,
are but like an adulterous woman, who if so be shee pos|sesse
the goods of her husband, regards not albeit shee ne|uer
see himselfe. I confesse indeed, wee may reioyce in all
the gifts which God hath giuen vs, as in the tokens and te|stimonies
of his loue, but wee are alwayes to vse them with
this protestation, that nothing giuen vs in this life be allow|ed
vnto vs for our portion and inheritance, and that no con|tentment
euer come vnto our hearts till wee get himselfe
who gaue them. If the loue of the Corinthians made the A|postle
to say, I seeke not yours but you, how much more should
the loue of God compell vs to say vnto him, It is not thy
gifts O Lord but thy selfe I long for, thou art the portion of
my soule? if thou wouldest giue me all the workes of thine
hands, yet shall I neuer haue comfort nor contentment, ex|cept
thou dost giue me thy selfe,Cant. 1. 6. Therefore O thou whom my
Soule loueth, shew me where thou feedest, where thou lyest at

noone, and dost rest, for why should I be as shee that turneth
aside to the flockes of thy companions! Blessed is he that hun|gers
and thrists for thy righteousnesse, for hee shall behold
thy face, and be filled with thine image, for in thy presence
is the fulnesse of ioy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for
euermore.
The second tryall of our loue is Obedience,The effect of true loue is o|bedience, and a care to please the Lord. and an holy 
care in all our callings to serue and honour the Lord. Prea|chers
must be tryed by this rule, Peter, louest thou mee? feede
my flocke. Gouernours and Counsellers must be tryed by
this, Can yee say in truth with the Godly Gouernour Da|uid,Iohn. 21. 15.
I loue the Lord? then will yee also say with him, what
shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits? how shall I shew
my loue toward him? and what shall I doe in my time for
aduancement of his glory? If thou dost loue the Lord, then
wilt thou be a nourishing Father to his Church, a carefull
aduancer of his kingdome, a wise prouisor to remoue those
stumbling blocks which hinder the course of the Gospell:
If yee loue the Lord, then will yee stand vp with Dauid,
and say,Psal. 139. 21 Doe not I hate them O Lord that hate thee? doe not
I earnestly contend with them that rise vp against thee? surely
I hate them with vnfained hatred, as if they were mine vtter
enimies.
If ye honour the Lord as Dauid did,What great blessing belon|geth to them, who in their calling seeke to honour God. the Lord shall blesse
you as hee blessed Dauid. Dauid sware vnto the Lord, that
hee would not rest, till hee found out a place for the Lord,
euen an habitation for the mightie God of Iacob. And the
Lord sweares againe vnto Dauid, that of the fruit of his bo|dy,
hee would set vp one to raigne after him. But if other|wise
there be nothing in you but a care to stablish your
selues and your houses, vvith the neglect of the glory of
God, then remember that the curse of Shebna, and not the
blessing of Eliakim shall be vpon you,Esay. 22. 23. Yee shall not be fast|ned
as a nayle in sure place, but shall be rolled and turned away
like a ball: the Lord shall driue thee from thy station, and out
of thy dwelling place shall hee destroy thee: For the wicked shall

not haue his desire, his thoughts shall not be performed, ney|ther
shall hee be established on the earth,Psa. 140. 11 but euill shall hunt
him to destruction,Psal. 52. 5. The Lord shall take thee and plucke thee
out of thy Tabernacle, and roote thee out of the Land of the
liuing.
And generally all of you in your callings remember that
the value of your Christian loue must be tryed by the same
touchstone,But this age in word calleth Christ their King, but casts off his yoke. not by your words but by your workes. If any
loue mee (saith Iesus) let him keepe my commandements, but
here also the hypocrisie of this age is discouered: as the
Iewes called Iesus their King,Iohn. 15. 10. and bowed their knees before
him, but spat in his face and buffetted him: so the bastard
Christians of this age call Christ their Lord, and bowe their
knees before him, yet by their sinfull life they crucifie him,
and tread his bloud of the couenant vnder their feete: they
kisse and betray him with Iudas, it is but a Scepter of reed
they allow him, for they giue him no commaundement
ouer their affections, wherefore great is the controuersie
which the Lord hath this day with the men of this gene|ration.
The third tryall of loue is Bountifulnesse,The propertie of loue is boun|tifulnesse. the Apostle 
sayth Loue is bountifull: experience proues that euery louer
bostoweth bountifully on that which hee loueth: yee loue
your bodyes,1 Cor. 13. 4. and therefore largely bestow vpon them to
feede them, and cloth them, yea, with excessiue apparrell;
yee loue your Children, and lets them want no needfull
thing for them; yea, yee loue your beasts, and spares not to
bestow largely vpon them: onely you say you loue the
Lord, but wherein are yee bountifull toward him? It is true
that in nothing can a man be profitable to the Almightie,
but are there not workes commaunded vs, which should so
shine before men, that by them our heauenly Father may
be glorified? though workes can be no merits, yet are they
your witnesses, and what haue yee done to remaine when
yee are dead as witnesses of your loue toward the Lord?
Though your goodnesse extend not to the Lord, yet where

is your delight that should be on his Saints and excellent
ones vpon earth? where is your compassion and loue toward
the brethren? are not the men of this age like vnto that fig-tree
which had faire leaues, but not so much as one figge to
giue vnto Iesus in his hunger, hauing the shew of godlinesse
but haue denyed the power therof, yeelding words inough but
no fruits to adorne the glorious Gospell of our Lord Iesus.
Of these and many moe if wee might insist in them, it is
manifest that all haue not the loue of God in their hearts,
who this day pretend it.
The last tryall of Loue which novv we bring,The last is rea|dines to suffer for his cause. is readi|nesse 
to suffer affliction for the cause of God. The Apostles
being beaten for preaching in the name of Iesus, instead of
mourning, departed reioycing that they were counted wor|thy
to suffer for Christs sake, and all because they loued him.
For the loue of Rahel seauen yeeres of hard seruitude see|med
vnto Iacob but a short space. For the loue of Dinah
Sichem willingly sustayned the circumcision and cutting of
his flesh: much more to him in whose heart abounds the
loue of the Lord, vvill bitter things become sweet, and hard
things easie. This Loue hath made the holy Martyres step
out of their owne element into the fire, with greater ioy and
willingnesse, then worldlings haue when they fit downe to
their banquetting tables to refresh them, or lyes downe in
their beds to rest them. The Apostle who suffered all sorts
of affliction for the Gospell, giues this for a reason, that the
loue of Iesus constrayned him. Thus much concerning the
effects of holy loue, by which we are to make sure our cal|ling,
and consequently our election, for our euerlasting
comfort.
Euentothem that are called according to his purpose.A confirmatio~ of his third and last argument of comfort. Hi|therto
the Apostle hath summarily set downe his third prin|cipall
argument of comfort: and now in the end of this
verse he shortly breakes vp the confirmation thereof, which
is this: they who loue God are called according to his pur|pose,
therefore all things must work for the best vnto them.

The necessitie of this reason shall appeare if we consi|der
that the Lord cannot be frustrated of his end. Those
whom the Lord in his immutable purpose hath ordayned to
glory, and whom according to that purpose he hath called
in time, how can it be but all things must worke vnto their
good? for the working prouidence of God which is the
executer of his purpose, doth so ouer-rule all incidents which
fall out in the world, and doth so gouerne all secondary and
inferiour causes, that of necessitie they are directed to that
end, whereunto the supreame cause of all, to wit, the purpose
and will of God hath ordayned them. This is shortly set
downe in these words, and more largely explaned in the two
verses following. It is the last reason of comfort, and the
highest: for now the Apostle leades vs out of our selues,
and sets vs vpon that rocke which is higher than wee, hee
carries vs by the hand as it were out of the earth vp into
heauen, and lets vs see how our saluation is so grounded in
Gods eternall purpose, that no accident in the world can
change it.
We haue here then three things,Comfort, that the ground of our saluation is in God, the tokens thereof in our selues. euery one of them depen|ing
vpon another: the loue of God, flowing from the calling
of God, and the calling of God, comming from the purpose
of God: vnto which the Apostle here drawes vs, that vve
casting our anchor within the vaile, and resting in the Lords
immutable purpose, may haue comfort in all our present
tentations. It is most expedient for the godly to marke this,
that our manifold changes doe not interrupt our peace:
let vs consider that the Lord hath in such sort dispensed
our saluation, that the ground thereof is laid in his owne
immutable purpose, but the markes and tokens thereof
are placed in vs after our calling: the markes and tokens are
changeable, like a wee our selues in whom they are, are
changeable; but the ground holds fast, being laid in that vn|changeable
God in whom falles no shadow of alteration,Esay. 46.
I am God and am not changed:Ioh. 10. My sheepe none can take out
of my hand:2 Tim. 2. The counsell of the Lord shall stand, and his

foundation remaines sure. It is true that the tokens of election
cannot be fully taken away from any that is effectually cal|led;
nay not in the greatest desertion, yet haue they in vs their
owne intention and remission. And this should comfort vs
against our daily vicissitudes and changes, when wee feele
that our Faith doth faint, our life languishes, our hope ho|uers,
and we are like to sincke in the tentation with Peter,
and our feeble hands fall downe with Moses, yet let vs not
dispaire; no change in vs can alter Gods vnchangeable pur|pose,
he who hath begunne the worke in vs will also perfect
it.Mal. 3. 6. Because I am not changed (saith the Lord) therefore is it
that yee O sonnes of Iacob are not consumed.
This purpose of God is called otherwise the will of God.Our calling  conuersion flowes from Gods purpose  therefore all the praise of it belongs to the Lord.
and the good pleasure of his Will. In that the Apostle
saith our calling is according to his purpose, it teacheth vs
to ascribe the whole praise of our saluation to the good plea|sure
of his will, and not to our owne foreseene merits. That
poyson of pride which Sathan poured into our first pa|rents,
and by which they aspyred to be equall with God,
doth yet breake forth in their posteritie, the corrupt heart of
man euer ayming at this, to seeke vnto himselfe either in
part or in whole, the power and praise of his own saluation.
This is to start vp into the roome of God, and to vsurpe
that glory which belongs to the Lord, and he will not giue
to any other: than the which no greater sacriledge can be
committed against the Lord. O man content thee with that
which the Lord offers thee, and let that alone which hee
reserues vnto himselfe: My peace (saith the Lord) I giue
to you, my glory I will not giue to any other. The first Prea|chers
of the Gospell were Angels, they proclaymed glory
and peace, but glory they gaue to God which is on high,
and peace they cryed to the children of his good will which
are vpon earth. It is inough that peace and saluation is gi|uen
to be thine, but as for the glory of saluation let it remain
to the Lord.

Hee is for this called the father of mercy,For this cause he is called the Father of Mer|cy and not of Iudgement. because mercy
bred in his owne bosome. Hee hath found many causes
without himselfe mouing him to execute iustice, but a cause
mouing him to shew mercie hee neuer found, but the good
pleasure of his will:2 Tim. 1. 9. therefore the Apostle saith, the Lord
hath called vs with an holy calling, not according to our workes,
but according to his purpose  grace. Surely except the Lord
had reserued mercy for vs, we had beene like to Sodome
and Gomorrha: but it pleased him of his owne good will
of the same lumpe of clay to make vs vessels of honour,
whereof hee made others vessels of dishonour. And who
is able sufficiently to ponder so great a benefit? and there|fore
howsoeuer the blinded Pharisee sacrifice to his owne
net, and make his mouth to kisse his hand, as if his own hand
had done it, yet let the redeemed of the Lord praise the Lord;
let them cry out with a louder voyce than Dauid did, O Lord
what are wee that thou art so mindefull of vs? Not vnto vs O
Lord, not vnto vs, but to thy name giue the glory, for thy lo|uing
kindnesse and thy truth: for our saluation comes from
God that sits vpon the throne, and from the Lambe. To thee O
Lord be praise, and honour, and glory for euer.
Now as for the calling;Our calling is twofold, and the inward cal|ling is a decla|ration of our election. we are to know that the calling of
God is twofold, outward and inward. Hee speakes not here
of the outward calling, of which our Sauiour saith, many are
called but few are chosen, but he speakes of the inward calling,
which is the first intimation and declaration of our election.
For the decree of our election is alwaies hid and secret vnto
vs, till the Lord by calling reueile it, and make it knowne
vnto vs that we are of the number of those whom he hath
appointed to life. As in his secret counsell hee made a di|stinction
of the elect and reprobate: so by his calling he
beginnes the execution of this decree, seperating the one
from the other in this life in manners and conditions, who
are to be seperated in the life to come for euer in estate and
place.

He that will take a right view of all mankinde,All mankinde are considered standing in three circles,  they onely are blessed who are within the third. shall find
them standing as it were, in three circles, they onely being
happy, who are within the third. In the outmost circle are
all those on whom the Lard hath not vouchsafed so much
as an outward calling by his Gospell; and here standeth the
greatest part of the world. In the middle circle, which is
much narrower, stand they who are pertakers of an out|ward
calling by the Word and Sacraments. In the third
circle, which yet is of smaller compasse than the other two,
stand they who are inwardly and effectually called; these
are Christs little flocke; the communion of Saints; the few
chosen;Zach. 13. 9. the Lords third part, so to speake with Zachary:
the other two parts shall be cut off and dye, but the third
will the Lord fine as siluer and gold: the Lord will say of
them, this is my people, and they shall say the Lord is my
God. It is a great steppe indeed that wee are brought from
the first circle into the second, but it is not sufficient to sal|uation,
yea, rather they who stand in the second circle, hea|ring
the voyce of God calling them to repentance, and yet
harden their hearts and will not follow him, may looke
for a more fearefull condemnation then they who are in the
outmost rancke of all. Double stripes are for him who
knoweth his Maisters will, and doth it not. Sodome and
Gomorrha shall be in an easier estate than they. Content
not therefore your selues, that yee are brought within the
compasse of the visible Church, that yee haue beene bapti|sed
in the name of Iesus, and haue communicated at his holy
Table,Mat. 7. 21. Not euery one that saith, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
his kingdome: except yee finde also his inward and effectu|all
calling, that the arme of his grace hath drawne you with|in
the compasse of the third circle, and hath set you downe
among those, whom he hath chosen to be his owne peculiar
people.
And againe, that the calling of God is according to his
purpose yeelds vnto vs this comfort, that seeing his calling
is extended toward vs, we may be sure that from euerlasting

hee hath had toward vs a purpose of loue.Where euer the Gospell is prea|ched to cal men there God hath toward some a purpose of loue. Certainely
hee had not sent his Gospell among vs, were it not that he
hath here a number belonging to the election of his Grace;
hee hath lighted a candle among vs, and set it in an eminent
candlesticke, to assure vs that hee is seeking here some
peeces of money which were lost, and hee will not rest till
hee finde them. When the Apostle Paul should haue gone
to Bythinia, the Lord commaunded him to goe to Mace|donia,
what the purpose of God was, the euent declared,
namely,Acts. 16. that it was to conuert Lidia and the Iaylour. Who
may not see here Gods meruailous mercy towards his
owne, that for the conuersion of a few, will haue his Gos|pell
to be preached to a whole kingdome? which doth yet
more clearely appeare, in that when hee commaunded his
Apostle Paul to tarry at Corinthus, hee gaue this reason,
because (saith hee) I haue much people here:Acts. 18. 10. shewing vnto
vs, that the greater haruest hee hath, the longer doth hee
continue his Labourers among a people. This is the very
work of God which hee is working in the middest of you,
and for which hee continueth among you the preaching of
his glorious Gospell, it is because toward many of you, hee
hath a purpose of loue: some hath he called already, whom
hee will haue confirmed; others not yet inwardly called, hee
will conuert by the Gospell, before hee remoue it. Let euery
man looke to himselfe, whether hee haue part in that grace
which comes by the Gospell, or no; for woe will be to him
that shall be found in darknesse, after that the light hath shi|ned
vnto him.
Good were it yet for vs all,If this were co~|sidered, it wold work a greater reuerence of the Gospell. if wee could more deepely
consider this, that the Gospell of the Lord Iesus is come
among vs, not by accident, nor by the meanes of men, but
by the purpose of God: that in these dayes wee heare that
voyce, which many of our Fathers heard not, that in some
places of the world this Gospell is preached, and not in
others, that it is continued with vs, notwithstanding of the
manifold machinations of the Children of darknesse to

subuert it, yea, that by such and such persons the Gospell
hath beene preached vnto vs, if vvee did consider that all
these fall out according to Gods determinate purpose, it
would waken in vs a more reuerent hearing of the word of
Grace, and a greater care to take heede to the smallest oc|casion
of grace, when it is offered: but all the contempt
thereof which now is among men floweth from this, that
they doe not looke vnto the hand of God sending out such
a message to them, by such persons, at such a time, in such
a place, as hee in his eternall purpose hath concluded with
himselfe. But as Samuell before hee knew the Lord, thought
the voyce of God to be but the voyce of Eli, and therefore
went againe to his rest: so the great multitude of them who
heare it, not as the word of God, but as the word of men,
esteeming that it commeth by the meanes of men, and not
according to the determinate purpose of God, it is no mer|uaile
if still they returne to their old sinnes, and remaine dis|obedient
to the heauenly vocation.
And further out of the ground laid already,A fearefull to|ken of Gods departure, whe~ he ceaseth to call a people any more. that the cal|ling
of God is according to his purpose, we are taught, that
the least intermission of Gods calling should be vnto vs a
great matter of our humiliation; seeing the Lord calleth
men to be Preachers, and hath them in his hand as starres,
holding them out sometime to one part of the world, and
sometime to another, that hee may communicate light to
them who are sitting in darknesse; the remouing of them
from a people is a fearefull token of the Lords departure,For no hus|bandman will want labourers in his field, as long as the har|uest is not ended.
and translating of his kingdome. The Husbandman calles
not his Labourers out of the field in the middest of the
day, vnlesse the haruest be done: and if the Lord remoue
his Seruants from a people, it is because his purpose is fini|shed;
for the ground is sure, that his calling is according to
his purpose: but the Lord forbid that the tearme of the end|ing
of this calling should euer come in our dayes.
And to the ende that wee haste it not vpon our selues,
wee are to know that as the Gospell comes not to a Land

by mans procurement,As the Gospell comes not by mans procure|ment, so no power of man can remoue it. so no power of man is able to re|moue
it. The Lord who set the Sunne in the Firmament,
and gouernes it in such sort, that it giues light to one part
of the world when another is in darknesse, and no malice of
the euill doer is able to obscure it, howeuer hee hates it,
hath also set his Gospell in the firmament of his Church,
to giue light to Goshen, while as Egypt is in darknesse;
and all the courses of politikes, though they were filled
vvith Achitophels wisedome, are not able to stay it: one|ly
our owne vnthankfulnesse, and abuse of the time of
Grace is to be feared; if therefore wee loue the light let vs
cast away the vvorkes of darkenesse, and walke in the light
while as yet wee haue it: let vs welcome those messengers
of peace, that come to vs in the name of the Lord, endeuou|ring
by all holy meanes to transferre this Kingdome of
God to our Children after vs, that they also may see the
beautie of the Lord, (which vvee haue seene) to their euer|lasting
saluation.


Verse. 29.
For those whom hee knew before, hee also
predestinated, to be made like vnto the image of his
Sonne, that he might be the first borne among many
brethren.
_THe whole Booke of God is full of heauenly
consolation,What a treasure of comfort is to be digged out of this Verse. euery parcell thereof hath in it the
words of eternall life; but this place of Scrip|ture
wherein now wee are trauailing, may be
called aboue the rest a treasure of comfort, for
here the Apostle leadeth vp the Christian to the register of
God, and lets him see his owne name written in the booke
of life, his saluation established in Gods immutable decree,
exhibited now by Gods effectuall calling, to be performed
and perfected to him by his endlesse glorification. So that
in all the booke of God, there is not so cleare and certaine a

sight of saluation giuen to the Christian as in this place.Not so cleare a sight of saluati|on in all the booke of God. It
comforted Stephen when he was in the vally of death, that he
saw the heauens opened, and the Lord Iesus standing at the
right hand of his Father: and it should no lesse comfort vs
in all our tribulations that the Apostle here lets vs see the
third heauens opened vnto vs, to make knowne vnto vs the
will of God concerning our saluation.The linckes of the Chaine of saluation: Election: Cal|ling: Iustifica|tion: Glorifi|cation, are knit inseperably.
This comfort the Apostle brake vp shortly as we heard
in the end of the last verse, and now more largely explanes
it in these two verses: in the which hee sets downe in order
the causes of our saluation, and lets vs see how our present
effectuall calling is so inseperably knit with our election 
glorification by the hand of God, that no power in earth
nor in hell is able to sunder them: whereof the certaintie of
his former comfort appeares cleerely, that of necessitie all
things must worke together for the best vnto them that
loue God, euen to them that are called according to his
purpose. Which shall yet be more manifested if wee consi|der
how that this golden Chaine of our saluation reaches
(so to speake it) from eternitie to eternitie; the beginning
of it, albeit without beginning, is our Election; the end of
it, albeit without end, is our Glorification. And these two
ends of the chaine the Lord keepes them sure and secret in
his owne hand, but the two middle linckes thereof, to wit,
our Calling and Iustification, the Lord lets them downe
from heauen to the earth, that wee for our comfort might
gripe and apprehend them, and being sure of the two mid|dle
linekes, we might also be sure of the two ends, because
the Lord hath knit them inseperably together.
Thou then who wouldst be comforted with the assu|rance
of thy saluation,He that hath a sure hold of the middle linckes, Calling and Iustification, is sure of the o|ther two, Ele+ction and Glo|rification. make it first knowne to thy owne
conscience, by breaking off the former course of thy sinnes,
and by well doing for the time to come, that God hath cal|led
thee and iustified thee. Gripe sure as it were with the
one hand the lincke of Calling, and with the other the
linck of Iustification: fasten both thy hands vpon the middle

linckes of this Chaine, that by them thou mayst be pulled
out of this dungeon and raised vp to heauen to see that
thou art one of them who was elected before time,  after
time shall be glorified. To make this yet more plaine we are
to know that this mortall life of ours is a short interiected
point of time,Our present life is a point of time betweene two eternities. betweene two eternities (so to call it,) in the
which some in feare and trembling working out their salua|tion
passes from Gods eternall election to endlesse glori|fication:
others againe in wantonnes and carelesse securitie,
drincke in iniquitie with greedinesse, and so steps from the
decree of reprobation, that most iustly they procure their
owne condemnation: So that euery man hath to consider
of his euerlasting weale or woe by his present disposition
in this life.
Oh that we had sanctified memories,If in this life we fall we may rise againe, but if in death we step downe|ward we shall neuer mend it. alwayes to remem|ber
this: so long as we are here, if of weakenesse wee fall wee
may rise againe, and if in one day we haue not learned well
to repent, we haue leaue of the Lords patience, to learne it
better another day: but he who in the day of his transmigra|tion
steps the wrong step, will neuer get leaue to amend it:
where the tree fals it shall lye there:Eccles. 11. 3. the wicked who die in their
sinnes, step downeward to the deepe pit and gulfe, out of
the which there is no redemption. Let vs therefore be well
aduised before we leape; let vs fasten the one foote vpon the
border of that Canaan, before we go out of the body; let vs
make sure that wee shall be receiued into those euerlasting
habitations. This shall be done if we make our whole life a
proceeding from election to glorification, and that through
calling and iustification, which two haue inseperably fol|lowing
them the sanctification and renouation of the whole
man. The Lord make vs wise in time that we may consider
the course of our life, and thinke of the end whereunto it
leads vs: for as Moses protested to Israell, so doe I vnto
you, I haue laid this day life and death before you:Deu. 30. 15. the Lord
giue you grace to make choise of the best.

In these causes of our saluation linked together in this
Chaine,Prescience and Predestination how they are here distingui|shed. we haue first to looke vnto Gods decree, consisting
in his foreknowledge and predestination: secondly, to the
execution thereof, which is made by his Calling, Iustifica|tion,
and Glorification. The decree hath in it these two acts
or preordinances (so to call them) Prescience and Predestina|tion,
which this manner of way are to be distinguished: by
foreknowledge the Lord sets before him the whole number
of mankinde, whom of the good pleasure of his owne will
he purposed to saue: so that the first preordinance is this,
these are they whom I will saue: by predestination againe
he concluded to saue them by such and such meanes; so that
the second preordinance of the decree is this; those whom
I haue decreed to saue I will saue this manner of way; so that
prescience lookes to the person to be saued, predestination
to the meanes whereby they are to be saued. Where wee
must consider that this decree of God is thus distinguished
by the Apostle in these two words for our capacitie, who
being but mortall creatures endued with reason, conceiues,
vnderstands, and discernes one thing after another, and can|not
doe otherwise: but it is not so with the Lord our God,
who being himselfe a most perfect vnderstanding, by one act
without prioritie or posterioritie, knowes, conceiues, and
discernes all things.
We come first now to speake of Gods foreknowledge:Prescience im|properly ascri|bed vnto God.
the properties of God are either absolute, as namely, that
he is a Spirit, simple, and infinite, or else such as haue a re|lation
to the creature. And of this sort is foreknowledge,
which improperly is ascribed vnto God: for properly there
is no fore not after in God, nothing past, nothing to come:
but foreknowledge is ascribed to God in respect of the crea|ture,
because he knew vs before that wee were. This fore|knowledge
is two wayes considered:Prescience two manner of wayes conside|red, generally, and specially. first, generally, as it is
extended to all his creatures, and so it is compared to a com|mon
booke of register, wherein the Lord hath written all
things which were afterward to be: and of this speakes the

Psalmist,Psal. 139. 15 My bones (sayth he) are not hid from thee, though
I was made in a secret place and fashioned beneath in the earth,
thine eyes did see mee, when I was without forme: for in thy
booke were all things written, which in continuance of time were
fashioned, though they were not before. Of it also speakes the
Apostle,Heb. 4. 13. All things are manifest in his sight with whom wee
haue to doe. This manner of way foreknowledge is Gods
vniuersall eye, by which vvith one looke hee knoweth all
his creatures vvithin and vvithout, their nature, their shape,
their actions, their beginnings, their ends, but foreknow|ledge
this manner of vvay considered, is not a lincke of this
Chaine, it being certaine that there is not one of these lincks
more patent, not largely extended than another, as yee shall
afterward heare.
Foreknowledge then in this Chaine of Saluation,In this Chaine it is specially considered as it lookes to the Elect onely. is spe|cially
considered, as it is conioyned cum , with the
loue and liking of God, as it is all one with Election, exten|ded
to none but vnto the children of his good will: this way
it is affirmed of the Godly,Iohn. 13. 18. the Lord knoweth who are his,
but denyed of the wicked,Mat. 7. 23. depart from me yee workers of ini|quitie,
I know you not, that is, albeit I know your persons,
yea, your most secret actions, yet your selues I know not,
so that I loue you: and this way foreknowledge specially
considered, is called the booke of life, vvherein the Lord
hath written the names of those vvhom hee hath ordayned
to life.
Predestination is also two manner of wayes considered,Predestination is also two wayes conside|red.
first, as it is generally extended to all his creatures, for as he
knew them all before they were, so he appointed them by
middes vnto their owne end; other artificers when they haue
made a worke, know not what will be the end of it; hee that
buildeth an house, knowes not how long it vvill stand, whe|ther
fire shall consume it, or the winde ouer-turne it, or the
earth-quake vndermine it; but the Lord as hee hath made
his creatures, so hath he appoynted them to an end, which
hee knoweth himselfe: but here Predestination is specially

considered, and is no larger than Election, respecting the
Elect onely, whom he hath ordayned vnto life by his owne
middes: for the word , here not onely signifieth
to ordayne to an end, but also to appoynt all the limits, bor|ders,
and middes, within and by which thou art to come to
that end.
Where,Foreseene me|rits falsely col|lected out of this place. before wee come to the doctrine of instruction,
wee vvill shortly encounter vvith our aduersaries, who read
these words in this manner; that the Lord predestinated
those whom hee fore-knew to be conformed to the image
of his Sonne, that so they may establish here out, their er|rour
of fore-seene merits. It were sufficient to bring against
them the best learned of their owne side, some wherofread
these words no otherwise then wee doe; as the Iesuis of
Rhemes: others plainely impugne that reading, and the er|rour
of foreseene merits founded vpon it, for so Caietane
writeth vpon this place.This errour is improued by their own men as Caietane. Ad confutandum dogma illorum,
qui primum salutis nostrae locum, tribuunt diuinae praescientiae
futurorum, qui praescientiam meritorum ponunt rationem defi|nitionis
diuinae ad confutandum inquit haec, primum nostrae salu|tis
locum tribuit diuino proposito, dicendo ijs qui secundum pro|positum
vocati sunt. To confute (saith hee) the doctrine of
those, who giue the first place of saluation to Gods fore|knowledge
of mans merits, which hee was to doe, and so
puts his prescience as a reason and cause of his predestina|tion;
to confute these I say, hee giues the first place of salua|tion
to the purpose of God, while hee saith, to them that
are called according to his purpose.and Aquinas. Aquinas in like man|ner
writing vpon this same place, sayth: Ponere quod aliquod
meritum ex parte nostra praesupponatur, cuius praescientia, sit
ratio praedestinationis, nihil est aliud quam ponere gratiam dari
ex meritis nostris,  quod principium bonorum operum est ex
nobis,  consummatio ex Deo. To affirme that any merit vp|on
our part must be presupposed, the prescience whereof
was the cause of predestination, is no other thing but to af|firme
that grace were giuen of our merits, and that the

beginning of good workes were of our selues, and the con|summation
thereof were of God: therefore (saith hee) the
words are to be read this way more coueniently, whom he
fore-knew them hee also predestinated to be made like vn|to
the image of his Sonne, vt ista conformitas non sit ratio prae|destinationis
sed effectus, that so this conformitie be not a
cause of predestination but an effect.
But beside these,Sanctification is an effect of predestination and therefore not a cause of it. this errour is conuinced by manifold
proofes of holy Scripture: the Apostle saith, hee hath chosen
vs in Christ, therefore not in our selues: he saith againe, that
wee should be holy and without blame, hee saith not, hee chose
vs because hee foresaw that wee would be holy; so hee sets
downe sanctification as an effect of Predestination.Eph. 1. 4. Now it
is certaine that one effect of Predestination may well be the
cause of an other posterior effect, as the preaching of the
word is a cause of faith, and faith is a certaine cause of insti|fication,
but no effect of Predestination can be cause of it.
Againe he saith,2. Tim. 1. 9. The Lord hath saued vs, and called vs with
an holy calling, not according to our workes, here yee see, that
in our calling our workes and Gods purpose are manifestly
opponed, so that the putting of the one is the remouing of
the other: thus neyther in our Election before time, not
in our calling in time, hath the Lord regarded our works,
or foreseene rectitude of our will, but the good pleasure of
his owne will.
And I pray you what other thing could the Lord fore|see
in vs,The calling of God sinds eue|ry man in an euill estate. than that which hee foresaw in the Israelites? I
knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck an iron sinew, and
thy browe brasse:Esay. 48. 8. I knew that thou wouldest grieuously trans|gresse,
therefore I called thee a transgressor from the wombe,
yet for my Names sake will I deferre my wrath, and for my
praise will I refraine it from thee, that I cut thee not off: yea, in
so many places of holy Scripture doth the Lord plead the
cause of his owne glory, that it cannot be but a most feare|full
sacriledge against so cleare a light for a man eyther in
part or in whole, to make his own merits a cause of saluation.

When the Lord called Abraham, hee found him an Ido|later:
when hee called Paul, hee found him a persecuter:
when hee called Matthew, he found him a Publican: when
hee called Mary, hee found her possessed with Diuels; all
that euer receiued grace, stand vp as so many witnesses of
his glory.Psal. 115. 1. Not vnto vs O Lord, not vnto vs, but to thy name be
the praise.
And to these obiections which the braine of man hath
brought out against this truth of God,Obiections of men against Gods predesti|nation, answe|red. to cleare themselues
and charge the Lord with vnrighteousnesse, they are all
sufficiently answered by the Apostle, that the Lord by rea|son
of his absolute authoritie ouer all his creatures, hath
power of the same lumpe to make one vessell of honour,Rom. 9. 20. for
to shew the glory of his mercy, and an other vessell of disho|nour,
to shew the glory of his iustice: seeing this power is
not denyed to the potter ouer his clay, how dare man speake
against it in the Lord ouer his creature? O man who art thou
that pleadest with God? Woe be to him that striueth with his
Maker. If I dispute with thee O Lord, thou art righteous,
how euer I iudge of thy counsell and of the manner of thy
working,Aug. in Ioan. tract, 26. thou art alway righteous. Si non vis errare, if thou
wilt not erre, saith Augustine, iudge not the Lord: why one
is saued the Apostle tels you, I haue mercy on whom I will
haue mercy,Aug. Epist. 59 ad Paulin. Misericordia eius misericordi causa: why ano|ther
is reiected, Causa potest esse occulta, iniusta esse non potest,
the cause may be secret, but cannot be vniust: qui in factis
Dei rationem non videt,Gregor. in Iob. cap. 9. infirmitatem suam considerans, cur
non videat, rationem videt, hee that seeth not a reason of the
Lords doing, let him looke to his owne infirmitie,  he shall
see a reason why hee seeth it not. The Lord hath hid euen
from most wicked men the purpose of their owne reproba|tion
till it come to the execution, and then shall they re|ceiue
an answere from their owne consciences, to stop their
mouthes, which now they will not receiue from man. Euery
one of the damned shall be compelled to acknowledge, that
the iudgement executed vpon them is righteous.

But now to returne to the doctrine,Predestination takes not away the second cau|ses and meanes of saluation. we haue first to ob|serue
out of the signification of the word which I marked
before, that the Lords determinate counsell and predestina|tion
takes not away the nature, properties, nor necessities
of secondarie causes and meanes of saluation, but rather esta|blishes
them: for those whom God hath appointed to sal|uation,
hee hath also appointed to those meanes which may
bring them vnto it. It is therefore a blasphemie which is fre|quent
in the mouthes of carnall professers, if I be elected
howsoeuer I liue I shall be saued, and if otherwise I be a re|probate,
liue as I will I cannot mend it: this is no other
thing but Sathans diuinitie:Sathans diuini|tie teacheth A|theists to de|spise the means of saluation. if thou be the sonne of God
cast thy selfe downe from the Temple: thou shalt not dash
thy foote against a stone: as if the sonnes of God were licen|sed
to despise the second and ordinary meanes, and not ra|ther
bound to vse them: but in very deed as it is against the
nature of fire to be cold, so is it impossible that the elect
man effectually called can reason after this manner, yea the
more hee heares of election, the more hee endeauours to
make it sure by well doing, knowing that no man can at|taine
to the end of our Faith, which is the saluation of our
soule, but by the lawfull and ordinary meanes.
Both temporall and spirituall blessings the Lord will haue
vs to seeke them by the lawfull and ordinary meanes:God giues his blessings by meanes, there|fore they should not neglect the meanes who seeke the bles|sing. the
Cornes cannot serue Israell except the earth beare them; the
earth cannot beare them except the heauens giue raine; the
heauens can giue no raine except the Lord command them.
Therefore when the Lord promises a blessing, In that day
(saith the Lord) I will heare the heauens, and they shall heare
the earth,Hos. 2. 21. and the earth shall heare the corne, and the wine, and
the oyle, and they shall heare Israell. And that hee keepes the
the same order in bestowing spiritual blessings we are taught
by the Apostle,Rom. 10. 13 when he saith, that before wee be saued we
must call on the name of the Lord, before wee call on his
name we must beleeue, before we beleeue we must heare, be|fore
we heare there must be preaching: whereof it is euident

that they who neglect and contemne the ordinary meanes
of saluation, doe giue out a very hard sentence against them|selues,
which is, that if they so continue they doe not apper|taine
vnto election.
And againe for our further comfort wee haue here to
marke the certaintie and soliditie of our saluation:Comfort, our election before time cannot be disanulled by any creature made in time. it is nei|ther
to day nor yesterday that the Lord concluded to be
mercifull vnto vs; our election beganne not with our selues:
before the mountaines were made, before the earth and the
world were formed, euen from euerlasting to euerlasting the
Lord is our God. What creature then is able to disanull
that which God hath willed, before that euer a creature
was? onely let vs labour that as our election is sure in it
selfe, so we may make it sure vnto vs, by walking in a good
conscience before the Lord, and then we shall not care what
man or Angell say to the contrary against it; they are but
posterior creatures, and what intrest can they haue to gaine
say that which God hath done before that they were?
Happy are they who are rooted, grounded, and builded
vpon this rocke; no stormy waue of the sea shall ouerturne
them, no rage of tentation, nor power of the gates of hell
shall preuaile against them.
Lastly,Sauing grace is communicated to few,  there+fore should be the more estee|med. we are taught here by the holy Apostle that all
men are not foreknowne, all are not predestinated to life,
otherwise there were not an election: there is onely a cer|taine
and definit number which belong to the election of
Grace; a fulnesse both of Iewes and Gentiles; a number not
knowne to vs, but knowne to the Lord; not one more nor
one lesse shall be pertakers of saluation. Many (saith out
Sauiour) shall come from the East and from the West, and
shall sit with Abraham,Mat, 8. 11. Isaac, and Iacob, in the kingdome of
God: he saith not all the children of the East shall come,
but many shall come. This should waken in vs a holy care
so long as the calling of God continues among vs, to take
heed to our selues, striuing to thrust in at the doore of the
kingdome of heauen: for it suffers violence, and the violent

take it; the fewer there be to be receiued into that kingdome,
the more we should about to be of that number.So is it in na|ture that rarest things are most regarded. We see that
in nature, things that are common were they neuer so ex|cellent
are not esteemed: the Sunne because common to
all, is regarded of few, though it be a very excellent and pro|fitable
creature; but parcels of the earth possessed by men
in propertie, are much more remembred and regarded by
those to whom they belong; riches and honour are in greater
account among men because few attaine vnto them: and if
we were as wise in spirituall things, that grace of Christ
which brings saluation would be more pretious and deere
vnto vs, because it is communicated to few. The Lord giue
vs grace to consider rightly of it in time.
To be made like to the image of his Sonne.Predestination is vnto glory by a conformi|tie with Christ in our present life. The Apostle
insists not in the rest of the linckes of the Chaine; hauing
touched them he leaues them, onely he insists in this lincke
of Predestination: teaching vs that he vseth not here the
word of Predestination generally, but restraines it to Pre|destination
vnto life; as also that we cannot step from electi|on
to glory but by a conformitie with Christ, which is most
necessary for vs to marke: for albeit there be great comfort
in the consideration of Gods immutable purpose ordayning
man to life, as also in the consideration of that glory where|unto
we are ordayned, yet neither of them can comfort vs
vnlesse we be sure that our life is a proceeding from electi|on
to glorification by the right meanes.
The first and neerest end of election in regard of man,
is his sanctification:Eph. 1. 4. for the Lord hath chosen vs that wee
should be holy:As Christ is the life, so is he the way, nei|ther can wee come to life but by the way the second and furthest end is mans glori|fication.
The same Lord Iesus who said I am the life, said in
like manner I am the way and the veritie: if thou wouldst be
at life, lye not still in thy sinnes, but rise and walke in the way,
and if thou knowest not the way, learne it from him who is
veritie.Ioh. 14. 6. Let not presumption which slayes the wicked ouer|take
thee; they passe ouer the matter of their saluation with
a wanton word; their hearts are prophane, yet they boast

with their tongues that they are sure to be saued; but this
is a vaine reioycing: for he that walkes not in the way, how
is it possible that he can come to the end? assuredly he shall
neuer come where Christ is to liue with him, that walkes
not after Christ in newnesse of life.
This conformitie with the Lord Iesus whereunto wee
are predestinated,Conformitie with Christ wherein it stands. is partly in this life, partly in the life to
come. Our conformitie in the life to come shall stand in li|uing
and raigning with Christ, which is our glorification,
whereof he speakes hereafter. Our conformitie in this life
stands in liuing and suffering with Christ, and of this hee
speakes here; to liue godly after the rule of Christ, to suffer
patiently after the similitude of Christ, are the two parts of
our present conformitie with him. The Lord Iesus is giuen
vs of the Father both to be a Sauiour, and an example, vn|lesse
we make him an example to follow him in our doing
and suffering, he shall not be vnto vs a Sauiour.
Here we are to marke that the workes done by Christ in
our nature,Workes done by Christ are threefold: 1. personall workes of Re|demption: 2. Miracles: 3. workes of a godly life. are threefold: first, his personall workes of Re|demption;
as that he was borne of the Virgin; that he suf|fered
the cursed death of the Crosse, for the expiation of
our sinnes; that hee rose the third day for our iustification;
that hee ascended triumphantly into Heauen, leading capti|uitie
captiue. Secondly, his workes of miracles; as that hee
fasted forty dayes; gaue sight to the blinde; life to the dead,
and such like. Thirdly, his workes of godlinesse and san|ctification;
as that he was subiect to his parents; louing to
his brethren; painefull in his calling; perseuering in prayer.
To practise to follow him in his personall workes of Re|demption
is blasphemie, or in his workes of Miracles is im|possibilitie,
but to follow him in the workes of a godly life,
is true pietie. In the first Papists are blasphemous, that on
good Fryday makes a play to the people,In the first and second Papists are apish imi|tators. by counterfaiting
the sufferings of Christ. In the second Papists are ridicu|lous,
that practise to counterfaite him in his fortie dayes
fasting, as if that might ordinarily be done of men, which

once Iesus did for a Miracle. In the third let all those who
are truely religious striue to follow him: as Children loo|king
to their coppy learne to mend their letters; so let vs
by looking daily to our example, learne to amend our
liues.
Imitation in the first two Iesus did neuer require,In the third onely should we follow the Lord Iesus. onely
hee craues that wee should follow him in the third: there
is his voyce, Learne of me that I am lowly and meeke, he did
not bid thee (saith Augustine) learne at him how to make
the world,Iohn, 13. 15. or how to raise the dead, but how to be lowly
and meeke, for this cause did our blessed Sauiour wash his
Disciples feete, that hee might giue vs an example, how
one of vs should serue another,Iohn, 15. 12. as I haue loued you (saide
Iesus) so loue yee one another: yea, in that vpon the Crosse
hee prayed for his enimies, hee hath also taught vs how to
practise that precept,Mat. 5. 44. Pray for them who persecute you. In pa|tience
likewise hee is proposed vnto vs for an example,
for so are wee exhorted,Heb, 12. 1. Let vs runne with patience the race
that is set before vs, looking vnto Iesus the author and fini|sher
of our Faith: these and such like are the workes where|in
vve are commaunded to conforme our selues vnto him.
We must also follow the Lord Iesus in suffering.
The other poynt wherein stands our conformitie with
him, is in patient suffering with him for righteousnes, which
wee shall not be able to doe, except wee liue first after the
similitude of his life: what liker suffering to the suffering of
Christ, than the suffering of that reprobate theefe, who
dyed with Iesus at the same time, the same kinde of death?
yet because his life was neuer like the life of Christ, his suf|ferings
shall neuer be accounted the sufferings of Christ.
Similis in poena,Augustine. dissimilis in causa. But as for the other whom
the Lord Iesus conuerted vpon the Crosse, to declare to all
the world that euen in death, hee retayned the power of a
Sauiour, able to giue life to them who are dead, hee brought
out in the last houre of his life, the first fruites of amende|ment
of life; hee liued long a wicked malefactor, but short
while a conuerted Christian; yet in that same space hee

abounded in the fruits of Godlinesse, confessing his sinnes,
giuing glory to the iustice of God, rebuking the blasphe|mies
of the other, and pleading the cause of his innocent
Sauiour; thus being turned from his sinne, hee began, euen
on the Crosse to liue with Iesus, and therefore heard that
ioyfull sentence,Luke. 23. 43. This night thou shalt be with me in Paradise.
Now that wee may be moued to embrace this conformi|tie
with Iesus,Reasons mo|uing vs to a co~|formitie with Christ. let vs remember that the image of God, by
which wee were created conforme vnto him, is the most
 auncient glory to which we can make claime:The Image of God is our most auncient glory, stollen from vs by Sa|than and which we should seek to recouer. and therefore
if there be in vs any peece of manhood and spirituall wise|dome,
wee ought to endeauour to recouer it, which our
enimie craftily and maliciously hath stollen from vs. O what
a pittie is it to see that man cannot doe that in the matter of
saluation, which he can do in the smallest things pertaining
to this life? There is no man among vs vvho knoweth that
any tenement of land, or portion of earth possessed now vn|iustly
of another, did of old pertaine to his Fathers, but if
hee can, hee vvill seeke to recouer it; seeking by iustice to
bring that home to himselfe, which oppressors vniustly had
taken from him. Is it not then most lamentable, that where
the Lord Iesus the King of righteousnesse, and Prince of
peace, offers to restore vs to our most auncient glory, which
is his owne image, that vvee vvill not call the oppressours
of our soule before him, nor seeke to be restored to that
glory, which most deceitfully our aduersry hath stollen
from vs? but this commeth also vpon man by the subtiltie
of Sathan, that hauing once spoyled vs of the image of God,
hee doth what he can so to blinde vs, that vve should neuer
seeke it againe, nor doe so much as receiue it when it is of|fered
vnto vs.
Iacob complained of Laban that hee had deceiued him,Sathan a dou|ble deceiuer.
and changed his wages ten times; and Esau complained of
Iacob, as of a supplanter, who first had stollen from him
his birth-right, and then the blessing also: but more cause
haue vvee to turne these complaints vpon Sathan, who hath

not onely stollen from vs the Image of God, but daily stea|leth
away the blessing, vvhereby it is restored vnto vs. Oh
that vve had vvise and vnderstanding hearts, that we might
be stirred vp to an holy anger against the enimie of our sal|uation,
seeking in despite of him to be restored to that right,
vvhich by creation belonged to our fore father. But alas,
what a beastly stupiditie is this, that man will not doe so
much for recouerie and maintenance of the image of God,
as hee will doe for preseruation of his owne portraiture
drawne on a peece of timber? if any man pollute it, incon|tinent
hee is offended, and stomacks it, as an iniuie done
to himselfe, but as for man who is the image of God: he lyes
downe like a beast, content that Sathan should tread vpon
him, pollute,  defile him with all kind of abhomination, all
which proceeds from a pittifull ignorance of his own glory.
The second reason vvhich should moue vs to conforme 
our selues to Iesus,Iesus Christ hath first con|formed him|selfe vnto vs. is that hee hath first of all conformed
himselfe vnto vs, hee vvas not ashamed to take vpon him
the shape of a seruant, and to become man like vnto vs in
all things, sinne excepted; and shall wee refuse to conforme
our selues vnto him? let it be farre from vs, but rather put|ting
from vs that foolish emulation, by vvhich vvee striue
to conforme our selues vnto this world, let vs consider
vvhereunto vvee are called, euen to be pertakers of the di|uine
nature, and may thinke it our greatest glory to be like
vnto our head and husband the Lord Iesus.
Thirdly,We cannot be saued except we be comfor|med to him. necessitie so craueth, seeing vvee cannot be sa|ued 
vvithout conformitie vvith him. It is not Caesars money
which hath not vpon it Caesars image and superscription; he
is not the Sonne of God vvho carryeth not the image of his
Father: for vvhom the Lord begets in the regeneration, he
communicateth to them his owne spirit, which transformes
them into the similitude of his owne Image. No vncleane
thing shall enter into heauenly Ierusalem, neither shall any
man see him in his glory, who by grace is not made like vnto
him.

That hee may be the first borne among many brethren. The
Apostle insists here in the explication of his former pur|pose,
adding that it is necessary wee should conforme our
selues vnto him, for ratifying that superioritie and priui|ledge
of the first borne, vvhich God the Father hath esta|bished
vnto his Sonne the Lord Iesus Christ; and he ma|keth
it very properly to serue his purpose: for seeing it is
so that Iesus our elder brother, and Prince of our saluation,
hath beene consecrated by affliction, and by suffering hath
entred into his kingdome, shall wee refuse to follow him
in his tentations, if so be vvee desire to sit vvith him in his
glory?
The name of the first borne is ascribed vnto Iesus Christ
three manner of wayes:The name of the first borne three wayes as|cribed to Christ: 1. as God: 2. as man: 3. as a mediator first, as hee is God: secondly, as he
is man: thirdly, as hee is both God and man, our mediator,
and the head of his misticall body, vvhich is his Church. As
hee is God, hee is called by the Apostle, Primogenitus om|nis
creaturae, the first begotten of euery creature; and that
by such a generation as none (saith Esay) are able to ex|presse.Col. 1. 15.
Now before the creature was, what could there be?
surely nothing but the Creator. Secondly, as hee is man S.
Luke calleth him the first borne that opened the wombe
of the Virgin.Luke. 2. 7. Thirdly, as Mediator and head of his my|sticall
body, as Prince of that kingdome vvhich is the com|munion
of Saints: hee is here called the first borne among ma|ny
brethren,1. Cor. 15. 20 and in an other place the first fruites of them who
rise from the dead.
The priuiledges of the first borne were two:Priuiledges of the first borne are two: 1. ex|cellencie of strength: 2. ex|cellencie of dignitie. first, ex|cellencie
of strength, for hee had a double portion: second|ly,
excellency of dignitie, for he vvas the Prince and priest
of the rest of his brethren: now both these most properly
appertaines to our eldest brother Christ Iesus. Excellencie
of strength is his, hee hath receiued the double portion: for
hee receiued not the Spirit in measure as wee doe, but the
plentitude and fulnesse thereof was communicated vnto him,
and the comfort thereof redounds vnto vs: for he receiued

it not for himselfe but for vs, that of his fulnesse we might
all receiue grace for grace. Excellencie also of dignitie is his;
for beside that glory which hee had with his Father from
the beginning,Mat. 28. 18. hee is also as our head crowned with glory
and dignitie; all power in heauen and earth is giuen him,
and he is set ouer his brethren, as the onely high Priest of
the liuing God, who makes attonement for the sinnes of
his brethren; as the onely Prophet and teacher of the whole
familie of God,Mat. 3. 17. for so hath the Father authorized him: This
is my beloued sonne, in whom I am well pleased, heare him.
Let vs therefore submit our selues vnto him,Miserable are they in this age who doe not acknowledge Christs prero|gatiue. seeing God
the Father hath set him ouer vs, let vs not be disobedient to
that heauenly proclamation (heare him.) Woe be to them
that subscribes not vnto the excellencie of his dignitie. But
alas, if the world proclaime such pleasures as shee hath to
giue by any sport or play, or such profits as she can yeeld
at her fairest fayres and markets, O what a frequent con|course
of people is made vnto her? but if the Priests of the
Lord stand as they did of old in the west part of Ierusalems
temple, on their seuerall turrets, to blow their two siluer
Trumpets, and warne the people to resort vnto the house of
the Lord, or if now any other manner of way signification
be made vnto them to enter into the courts of the Lord with
praise, how few shall hee finde flocking vnto the house of
God in respect of them who abides without, and followes
the world; and which is yet more to be lamented, there are
many of those who heare the word of Christ, and yet doth
not change the manner of their conuersation for any com|maundement
he can giue them; speake what he will, they
doe what they like: they come to the holy assemblies of his
Saints, but are like those vncleane beasts which entred into
the Arke of Noah, they came in vncleane, and went out vn|cleane.
Neither of these vnlesse they amend, shall be perta|kers
of that saluation which Iesus the first borne hath pur|chased
to the rest of his brethern.
But to let them alone, and to returne to the instruction

of Gods children;Whatsoeuer excellencie our elder brother hath it is for our benefit. though apostae Israell fall from him as a
people that haue no portion in Ishai, nor inheritance in the
sonne of Dauid, yet let Iuda cleaue to their king; let vs ac|knowledge
his supereminent excellencie,  reuerence him
for our first borne  elder brother. Among other brethren
the more the elder hath, the lesse remaines to the younger;
whereof it falles out that many a time there is strife among
them for diuision of the inheritance: but here the more our
elder brother hath, the greater is our good, seeing whatso|euer
he hath receiued as mediator, he hath receiued it to be
communicated vnto vs: hee hath receiued strength not to
subdue vs, or ouergoe vs, but to protect vs from our eni|mies,
which he hath also done; for he hath broken the gates
of hell, and carryed them away more triumphantly vpon
his shoulders than Sampson did the gates of Azzah. Wee
who are poore in our selues are made rich in him: we who
are weake are in him more than conquerours, and therefore
let vs resolue for euer to abide in him.
Among many brethren.Brethren in Christ are ma|ny wayes knit together. This brotherhood of our with
Christ consists not in the communion of the same flesh and
blood, for so euery man were Christs brother, but it stands
in our spirituall vnion with him by regeneration: those are
the sonnes of God, and consequently the brethren of Christ,
who are borne not of blood,Ioh. 1. 13. nor of the will of flesh, nor of the will
of man, but of God, by the operation of his Spirit, and immortall
seede of the word. In the carnall brotherhoode though the
parents be one, yet the inheritance is not one; though the
seede of flesh be one, yet the soule that quickneth the bo|dy
in both is not one: but in the spirituall brotherhood the
parents are one, the inheritance one, the seede whereof they
are begotten is one,  the spirit which quickneth them all is
one. It is not then Baptisme nor externall profession which
proueth a man to be the kinseman and brother of Christ;
it is the spirit of Iesus, which whosoeuer hath not, the same
is not his, and whosoeuer hath him, it is certaine they be|come
new creatures.

Great is that dignitie certainly whereunto we are called;The greatnes of Christs loue toward vs in making vs his brethren.
and matchlesse is that loue which the Lord Iesus hath car|ried
toward vs; who not content to make vs his seruants,
hath made vs his brethren. If hee had shewed vs no more
kindnesse then Abraham did Lot his kinseman, yet euen for
that had hee beene worthie to be loued for euer: but be|hold
what a greater loue our Lord hath shewed vnto vs,
we forsooke him more vnkindly than Lot did Abraham,
yet did hee still retaine his kindly affection toward vs,
when we were carried away captiue by spirituall Chedarlao|mer,
he did not onely hazard, but laid downe his life of our
Redemption. Moses is greatly praysed for that when hee
was honourable in Aegipt, hee left the court of Pharaoh to
visit his brethren, esteeming the rebuke of Christ in his
people, greater riches than all the treasures of Aegipt: and
Ioseph is also commended, that being second person vnder
Pharaoh in the kingdome of Aegipt, yet he was not asha|med
of his Father and brethren, albeit they for their trade
being sheepekeepers, were abhomination to the Aegiptians.
But all these are not comparable to that loue which the
Lord Iesus hath borne toward vs, in that notwithstanding
our base estate, hee hath not beene ashamed to call vs his
brethren. The Lord make vs thankfull, and shed abroad
in our hearts the sense of that loue which hee hath borne
toward vs, that we neuer be ashamed of him for no Crosse
that for his sake can be laid vpon vs.



Verse 30.
Moreover whom he predestinated, them also
he called, and whom he called them also he iustified,
and whom he iustified, them also he glorified.
_THere is no part of holy Scripture which is
not stored with the words of eternall life;What a cleare sight of saluati|on is here dis|couered to the Christian. but
as that part of earth which is rich of minerals
of gold and siluer, is more esteemed than other
land, were it neuer so fruitfull; so ought this
place of holy Scripture to be accounted of vs all, as contay|ning
in it a most rich minerall, not of gold, siluer or pre|tious
stones, but of a more precious saluation, wherein the
deeper thou art able to digge, the stronger, clearer, and grea|ter
sight of saluation ariseth vnto thee: there is not in all the
booke of God a place of holy Scripture, which presents
to the childe of God so cleare and certaine a sight of his
election and glorification, as this place doth, wherein now
we are trauailing: for the holy Apostle in this golden chaine
of Saluation doth in such sort knit our effectuall Calling
with our Election and Glorification, that the Christian vp|on
earth may euidently see what God in the heauens hath
decreed toward him: vve haue spoken of the first two lincks
of the Chaine, Prescience and Predestination: now we pro|ceed
to speake of the third, to wit, our Calling.
Where first of all for our greater comfort,The preroga|tiues of a Chri|stian are farre more honou|rable than any that worldlings can claime to. let vs stand
and consider how great and glorious are the benefits which
God hath bestowed on the Christian: before time the Lord
hath chosen him; after time the Lord will glorifie him; in
time the Lord doth call and iustifie him. Worldlings also
haue theirowne prerogatiues wherin they place their glory:
those among them that haue most ample and auncient inhe|ritances
are counted most honourable: but thou who art
named a Christian, if thou be so indeed, looke to thine
owne priuiledges, and thou shalt see that the glory of a
Christian doth far exceed the glory of the most honorable

Worldling: as the Psalmist spake of Ierusalem, so may we of
the Christian,Psal. 87. 3. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou man
of God.
Election is the first and most auncient charter of the
right of Gods Children,The most sure and auncient Charters of a Christian to his inheritance to their fathers inheritance: Calling
is the second, by it wee are knowne to be the Sons of God,
and our Election secret in it selfe, is manifested to vs and
others: Iustification is the third, by it vvee are infeft in Ie|sus
Christ, and made pertakers of all that is his: Glorifica|tion
is the last, by it wee are entred heyres to our Father,
and fully possessed in his inheritance. No King vpon earth,
can produce so auncient a right to his Crowne: though
with the Egyptian thou shouldest reckon thy beginning so
many yeeres before the creation of the world, yet canst thou
not match the Christian: he hath the most auncient char|ter
of the most ample inheritance: neyther can any man
vpon earth be knowne his Fathers heyre vpon such suffici|ent
warrand as the Christian; for in the regeneration, the Fa|ther
communicateth to him his Image, his Nature, his Spi|rit,
whereby hee beginneth from feeling to call God his fa|ther,
and in life and mauners to resemble him. No free|holder
so surely infeft in his lands, nor hath receiued so ma|ny
confirmations thereupon, as the Christian iustified, who
vpon his gift of righteousnesse and life, hath also receiued
the earnest, the pledge, the seale, and the witnesse of the
great King. And last of all, the Christian shall be entred
to the full possession of his Fathers inheritance, with such
ioy and triumph in the glorious assembly of the Saints, as
the like was neuer seene in the world, no not in Ierusalem,
that day wherein Salomon entred heyre to his Father Dauid,
then the earth rang for ioy but nothing cmparable to that
ioy, wherewith the heauens shall ring, when all the Sonnes
of God, shall be caught from the earth into the ayre, to meet
the Lord Iesus, and to be inuested in the Kingdome of their
Father.

But now wee are to speake of this Calling, wherein con|sists
all our comfort:Calling is the first manifesta|tion of our E|lection,  fore|runner of our Glorification. for it is the middle lincke of this indi|uisible
Chaine; he that hath it is sure of both the ends. Our
Calling is the first manifestation of our secret Election, and
and it is a sure forerunner of our Glorification, being in ef|fect
the voyce of God, foretelling vs that hee will glorifie vs.
As the best way in a maine land to finde the sea, is to walk
by a riuer which runneth into it; so hee that would proceed
from Election to Glorification, let him follow this Calling,
which is (so to call it) a riuer flowing out of the brasen
mountaines of Gods eternall Election, running perpetually
vpward till it enter into the heauen of heauens, which doe
altogether ouerflow with that great and vnbounded Ocean
of diuine Glory: but wee are still to remember that vvee
speake now of the inward Calling: for the linckes of this
Chaine are so comely framed by that most skilfull Arti|ficer,
that they are all of a like compasse, none of them
larger nor narrower than another: so that this Calling
doth extend to no more nor fewer, than those whom God
hath chosen.
This inward Calling is the donation of Faith,What the in|ward calling is. by the prea|ching
of the Gospell, or communication of the sauing grace
of Iesus, by which wee are moued to answere the Lord, and
follow the heauenly vocation: for as the Lord by the prea|ching
of the Gospell offers vnto all, that are in the Church
visible, righteousnesse and life by Christ, if they will repent
and beleeue: (wherein consists the outward Calling) so by
his holy Spirit, hee giueth to his Elect children iustifying
Faith, by which he openeth their hearts as he did the heart
of Lidia, to receiue the grace offered by the Gospell, and
herein consists the inward Calling.
The word  whereby the Apostle expresseth it,In this Calling there is a taking of some,  lea|uing of others.
signifieth to euocate and chose out some from among o|thers:
this shall make the greatnesse of Gods mercy toward
vs appeare the more clearely, if wee doe consider that wee
and the reprobate were alike by nature, borne blinde rebels,

and transgressors from the wombe, and did walke on with
them in the same course of disobedience, which leadeth to
damnation: but it pleased God to call vs out of their fellow|ship,
and enter vs in a better couse that wee might be saued.
A notable example where of wee haue in the calling of Lot
out of Sodome: the Lord hauing concluded to consume
Sodome with fire, for her abhominable filhinesse, hee first
of all sent two Angels to call Lot out of it; but Lot not
knowing the danger, lingred and delayed to follow their
calling, till at the length they put hands vnto him and for|ced
him to goe out; but when hee was set vpon the moun|taine,
and knew the fearefull destruction of Sodome, then
no doubt hee acknowledged the wonderfull mercy which
God had shewed vpon him:God hath ta|ken vs out from amo~g the chil|dren of wrath, as he took Lot out of Sodome it is euen so with vs, wee are
here soiourning in a Sodome which God will destroy, and
we haue our conuersation among those whose portion shall
be in the lake that burns with fire  brimstone from which
the Lord being purposed to saue vs, hath sent his Angels to
vs, not two but many Ministers of the Gospell of Grace,
exhorting vs to flye from the wrath which is to come: but
alas, because wee know not the danger, we flye slowly, and
delay to follow the heauenly vocation, but in that day wher|in
wee shall be set vpon the mountaine of Gods saluation,
and shall stand at the right hand of Iesus, and heare that fear|full
condemnation of the wicked, Depart from mee, c.
when vvee shall see the earth open and swallow them, then
shall wee reioyce and prayse the mercy of our God: O hap|pie
time wherein the Lord sent his messengers among vs,
to call vs from the fellowship of the damned.
There is no difference by nature betweene the Elect and
reprobate,No difference by nature be|tweene elect men  repro|bate, till our calling make it neyther in inward nor outward disposition till
God make it by grace. Paul as bloudy a persecuter as euer
was Domitian or Iulian. Zacheus as vnconscionable and co|uetous
a Worldling, as was that rich Glutton damned to
hell. The elect and reprobate men, before Grace make a
difference, are like two men walking in one iourney, with

one minde and one heart, like Eliah and Elisha, walking
and talking together, when a chariot of fire did incontinent
seperate them, and Eliah is taken vp into heauen, Elisha left
vpon the earth: not vnlike is it when the vnlooked for cal|ling
of God commeth and seperateth those two who before
were walking together, yea, running in the same excesse of
ryot; the one changing the course of his life, returneth back
againe to the Lord, from whom hee had stollen: whereas
the other not touched with the same Calling, meruailes that
his former companion hath forsaken him, and walketh still
on stubbornely in the former course of his sinnes to his con|demnation.
Apply this vnto your selues and see whether
this effectuall Calling hath seperated you in your conuer|sation
from the wicked or not, an euident argument that ye
shall be seperated from them in their condemnation: Bles|sed
is hee, that walketh not in the counsell of the wicked, nor
stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornfull.
And if wee finde after tryall that the Lord hath called
vs,The time of our calling is to vs as the de|liuerance from Egipt, or the yeere of Iubily to Israel. then should wee alway shew forth his prayses, who
hath translated vs from darknesse into his meruailous light.
The Lord shewed a great mercy to Israell when he deli|uered
them out of the house of bondage; he set the remem|brance
of that benefit in the forefront of his law, as a bond
euer oblieging them vnto thankfulnesse: but their bondage
was not so horrible as ours. Pharaoh oppressed their bodies
and compelled them to worke in bricke and clay, yet their
spirits were free to sigh and cry to God for the bondage:
but here so long as we were the slaues of Sathan, he com|pelled
vs to worke the abhominable workes of darknesse
and vncleannesse, and therewithall did so captiue our spirits
that we could not so much as cry and sigh vnto God for
the bondage, and therefore our deliuerance should neuer
goe out of our remembrance, and our hearts and mouthes
should euer be filled with the prayses of our redeemer, when
we think of this yeere of Iubilie, wherin he hath opened the
doore of the prison, and set vs at libertie as the freemen of

God, who were the captiued and bond slaues of Sathan.
The author of this calling is the Lord,Calling being a new creation is onely wrought by God. euen hee who
calles things which are not, and makes them to be. Caling
is a new creation and the first resurection. The Lord that
commanded light to shine out of darkenes, is he who hath
giuen to our mindes the light of the knowledge of his glory
in the face of Iesus Christ. It is he who creates in vs a new
hart, and puts in our bowels a new spirit, that we may walk
in his statutes. As man when hee was not, could not helpe
to create himselfe; and Lazarus when he was dead helped
not to raise himselfe: so a stranger from Grace helpes not
to call himselfe to the fellowship of Grace: the Lord who
makes the barraine wombe a mother of many children,
makes also the barraine hart to be fruitfull. The praise of
our calling belongs to the Lord onely.August. de verb. Apost. Nemo dicat ido me
vocauit, quia coli Deum, quomodo coluisses, si vocatus non
fuisses, let no man say therefore hath God called me because
I worshipped him, for thou couldst not haue worshipped
him vnlesse he had called thee.
The calling of God findes euery man either vainely or
wickedly exercised.Man hath not so much as minde of it when it comes to him. When God called Paul to be a Prea|cher,
he found him a persecuter: when he called Matthew
he found him sitting at the receipt of custome: when he cal|led
Peter and Andrew they were mending their nets, no
such minde had they as to be fishers of men. As Saul was
seeking his Fathers Asses, when Samuel came to call him
to the kingdome: and as Rebecca had no errand to the
well but to water her fathers goods, when Eliezer came
to seeke her in marriage vnto Isaac: so if wee doe en|quire
at our owne consciences how we were exercised when
God called vs, we shall finde our harts were set vpon the
trifling things of this world, and that we had no minde of his
kingdome: let the praise therefore of our calling bersrued
to the Lord onely.
As this worke of calling is the Lords onely, so hee ex|tends
it to none but vnto those who are chosen: it makes a

perticular seperation of a few from the remanant,None are cal|led by this cal|ling but they who are elect. and doth
so distinguish betweene man and man in all ranckes and
estates, that of two brethren as Iacob and Esau, of two Pro|phets
as Moses and Balaam, of two Kings as Dauid and
Saul, of two Apostles as Peter and Iudas, of two theeues
the one is taken, the other is reiected. The first distinction
betweene man and man was in Gods eternall counsell, and
this is secret: the last distinction will be in that last day
wherein the one shall stand at the right hand of Iesus, the
other at the left, and that shall be manifest: the middle di|stinction
is presently made by this calling of God; his Gos|pell
is the arme of his Grace, being extended sometime to
one corner of the world, sometime to another, according to
his owne dispensation, to seuer out his owne from among
the remanent of the world.
Whereof it comes to passe,What a wonder+full distinction this calling makes among men. that this sauing grace of the
Gospell enters into a land, but not into euery Cittie; it enters
into a Cittie, and not into euery familie; it enters into a fa|milie,
but comes not on euery person of the familie. Of
Husband and Wife, of Maisters and Seruants, of Parents
and Children, of Brethren and Sisters, the one is taken, the
other reiected. It came to Iericho and chose out Zacheus:
it came to Philippi and chose out Lydia and the Iaylour: it
entred at Rome into the Court of Nero, but lighted not
vpon Nero: it entred into the Familie of Narcissus, but not
into the heart of Narcissus. As the Lord so gouernes the
cloudes that he makes them raine vpon one Cittie and not
vpon another: so doth hee dispense the dew of his grace,
that he makes it drop vpon one hart,  not vpon another.
The Gospell is preached to many, but the blessing that
comes by the Gospell abides onely vpon the children of
peace. Let euery one among you see to himselfe, this prea|ching
of the Gospell among you assures vs that the Lord
hath a haruest here, that is, a number that belongs to the
election of Grace: but who they are that are his the Lord
knoweth, but as for vs we may lament as Augustine did of

the hearers of his time, In aperto est vnde doleam, c, the
matter of our griefe is manifest: for wee see many of you
who hitherto haue receiued the word of grace in vaine: but
the matter of our comfort is not so apparant; yet doe wee
not doubt but that among this chaffe the Lord hath some
good Wheat, whom he will perfect by our Ministrie, and
gather into his garner, to his glory and our comfort, when
wee shall see that fruit of our labour, which now we can|not
see.
Alwayes of this which we haue spoken we exhort you
who as yet stands strangers from grace,Miserable are they whom this calling hath not sepe|rated. to consider how mi|serable
your estate is. It should peirce thy very hart for griefe,
to consider that the grace of God hath conuerted so many
in the cittie, yea perhaps in the familie wherein thou dwel|lest,
and hath not lighted vpon thee, but left thee in thy
old sinnes. If the Lord should so doe to you as hee did to
Israell in the dayes of Achab, cause it to raine for three
yeeres and a halfe vpon all the land about you, and not vp|on
your land, would you not take it as a token of Gods
anger aganist you? O hipocrite that can discerne the face
of the skie, and can marke the tokens of his anger in the
creature, canst thou not discerne the state of thy own soule?
nor consider this sensible curse of God, that these thirty or
forty yeeres the showres of his sauing grace hath discended
vpon othe round about thee, but neuer vpon thy selfe:
thou possessest still a hard, a barraine, and fruitlesse heart.
What shall I say vnto thee? to cut thee off from hope of
mercy, and to send thee to dispaire, I haue not that in com|mission,
there is euer some hope of a better as long as God
calles vpon thee: but of this one thing I can certifie thee,
that for the present thy estate is lamentable, and if this grace
goe by thee in time to come, as it hath done for the time
forepassed, it had beene better for thee that thou hadst ne|uer
beene borne.
The time of our calling is but short and limited, let it
not goe by vs without grace, but let vs striue to redeeme it

It is called sometimes an acceptable yeere,The time of our calling is called a yeere, a day, to tell vs it is but . and sometimes a
day of saluation: some dayes are longer and some are shor|ter,
but they haue all an end. The lewes had a faire long
sommer day of Saluation, sixteene hundred yeeres did the
Lord offer grace to the house of Sem: but now the bright
shining Sunne of righteousnesse hath gone downe vpon
them, and darknesse is vnto them instead of diuination; and
other sixteene hundred yeeres hath the Lord been offering
grace to the house of Iapheth, perswading them by the Gos|pell
to come and dwell in the tents of Sem, and that by their
seuerall families: hee beganne at the Churches of the East;
they had their owne day, although but a short winters day
compared with that of the Iewes. From them in the East
the light is now come, praised be God, to vs in the West;
now is our day, how long it is to continue with vs who can
tell?Ioh. 12. 35. While therefore the light is with you walke in the light,
least darkenesse come vpon you.Rom. 13. 11 Let vs consider the season,
for if once the day of grace goe by vs, wee shall neuer finde
it againe.
For suppose this day of saluation were to shine vpon
this land still on to the worlds end,No Grace will be offered to vs after this life. yet what is it to thee,
seeing the day of grace endeth to thee in the day of thy
death? after that, the Lord shall neuer any more offer mer|cy
vnto thee: in that the Apostle wils vs to doe good while
we haue time, he tels vs that after this there is no time; let
vs not thinke quod apud inferos ad faciendos fideles at libe|randos,Aug. Euodio. Epist. 99.
euangelium praedicatum sit, vel adhue etiam praedicetur
quasi  ibi sit Ecclesia constituta, that the Gospell euer hath
ben or yet is preached in hell, to worke Faith in men there
for their deliuerance, as if there also were a constitute church
in it. Here by preaching grace is offered to thee, that if thou
wilt beleeue thou mayst be saued; but if now thou dispise it
there remaines nothing but a fearefull looking for of iudge|ment.
And no lesse deceitfull is that opinion, that by suffe|ring
hereafter thou mayst redeeme that life which here thou
hast not obtayned: Vita hic aut amittitur, aut tenetur, cum

istinc excessum fuerit,Cyprian. nullus paenitentiae locus, nullus satisfacti|onis
effectus, Now life is eyther kept or lost, for when wee
goe out of the body there is no place of repentance, no effect
of satisfaction.
It is a principall pollicie of Sathan to steale away from
man the time of Grace:Sathans princi|pall pollicie is to steale away from men the time of grace. he will not simply say to any man,
yee neede not to repent at all hee knoweth the most pro|phane
man will abhorre that, hee seekes onely a delay; thou
needest not (saith hee) to repent as yet, and so stealeth away
one day after another, till the day of Grace be gone. When
Pharaoh was stricken with Frogges, and Moses offered
to him, that when hee would bid him, hee would pray to
God that hee might be deliuered from them, it was but an
vnwise answere hee gaue him,Exod. 8. 10 Pray for mee to morrow, it
had beene better for him to haue said, Pray for me presently:
but more miserably blinded are they, to whom the Lord
presently offers saluation, they delay not till to morrow
onely, but till the next yeere, yea, for many yeeres; they are
called vpon in their youth, but they refuse to repent till they
be old, seeking first leaue to kisse their father, that is, to fol|low
their owne pleasures, before they will resolue to follow
the Lord Iesus; and so lets their dayes one after another, be
stollen away from them, till at length they be taken away
in their sinnes, and the day of Grace be closed vpon them.
And whom hee Called,Iustification posterior to Calling in or|der, not in time them also hee Iustified. Hauing
spoken of our Calling, wee come now to speake of our Iu|stification.
This is a new benefit different from the former
benefit of our Calling, posterior to it in order of working
but not in time: for in the same moment wherein the Lord
by effectuall Calling giues vs faith to beleeue, he doth also
iustifie vs.
That wee may vnderstand what a benefit this is,The word of Iustifying three wayes taken. we are
to know that the word of Iustifying hath three principall
significations. First, to iustifie is all one with this, to sanctifie,
or to infound by grace new qualities into the soule of man,
and so Iustification is , seu motus ad Iustitiam, as

Dan. 12. They who iustifie many, shall shine as Starre for
euer; and in this sense the Papists take it in this question,
 but wrongfully.Luke. 7. 29 Secondly, to iustifie, is to acknowledge or
declare one to be iust: so it is said that the Publicans iusti|fied
God; of force wee must expound it, they acknowledged
or confessed him to be iust: so S. Iames saith that a man is
iustified by workes, that is, declared to be iust by his workes,
or as S. Iames expounds it himselfe, his Iustification is shew|ed
 by his works. Thirdly, the word to Iustifie, is a iudiciall
terme, and it signifieth to absolue in iudgement, and is op|poned
to condemning: so Salomon vseth it, He that iustifies
the wicked, and condemnes the iust, are both alike abhominaton
to the Lord: and in this sense the Apostle vseth it here, for
he oppones it to condemnation.
This right vnderstanding of the word,Iustification is opponed to co~|demnation. will lead vs to
know what the benefit of Iustification is: for what euer con|demnation
be, Iustification must be the contrary: they are
both iudiciall termes, vsed in iudgement holden on matters
of life and death. Condemnation (no man will deny) is the
sentence of a righteous Iudge, adiudging a malefactor to
death for some capitall crime whereof hee is found guiltie
in iudgement: Iustification then is the sentence of God, a
righteous Iudge, absoluing the man that is in Christ from
sinne and death, and accepting him to life for the righteous|nesse
of Christ, which is his.
So that it is euident,How the state of the contro|uersie of Iustifi|cation stands betweene vs and the Papists the state of the question in the con|trouersie
of Iustification will be this: how is a man iustified
before God? that is, what is it that a man must bring be|fore
Gods tribunall, for the which hee shall be pronoun|ced
innocent, absolued from death, and adiudged to life?
whether is it our workes of sanctification inherent in vs, or
is it the righteousnesse of Christ giuen vnto vs, and made
ours? The question being this way taken vp, shall giue great
light to the controuersie that is betweene vs and the falsely
named Catholikes of our time: for we denie not that there
is in Gods children an inherent sanctification, and that they

are changed from vnrighteousnesse to righteousnesse, but
this inherent righteousnesse (say we) is not able to purchase
to vs an absoluitorie sentence from death.
To make this yet more cleare,Foure names giuen to that righteousnesse, by which wee are iustified. let vs know that the righ|teousnesse
by which wee are Iustified, receiues foure names:
first, it is called the righteousnesse of Christ: secondly, the
righteousnesse of God: thirdly, the righteousnesse of Faith:
fourthly, our righteousnesse. The righteousnesse of Christ,
because it is conquered by him, and inherent in him, as in
the proper subiect: The righteousnesse of God, because he
onely in his meruailous wisedome found it out: it is called
the righteousnesse of Faith, because Faith is the instrument
by which wee apprehend it: and it is called our righteous|nesse,
because it is giuen vnto vs of God to be ours, by im|putation
on Gods part, by acceptation of it by Faith vpon
our part, for these two wayes that acquisite righteousnesse
of Christ is made ours.
This wee haue to marke for our comfort,The conside|ration that Christs righte|ousnes is ours, stoppeth the mouth of all that impugnes our Faith. against those
obiections, which eyther inwardly by Sathan, or outwardly
by men of a contrary opinion are obiected vnto vs. If they
to trouble our peace, and weaken our Faith, aske, how can
yee be iustified by a righteousnesse which is not yours? we
answere, the righteousnesse of Christ is ours, and ours by
as great a right as any other thing that we possesse is ours,
to wit, by the free gift of God: seeing it hath pleased God
to giue vs a garment who were naked, and to giue vs, who
had none of our owne, a righteousnesse answerable to his
Iustice, vvhat intrest can eyther man or Angell haue to re|sist
it?
The euasions and obiections,Works not of the vnregene|rate onely, but of the regene|rate also exclu|ded from the act of Iustifi|cation. whereby the aduersarie
impugnes this doctrine, are chiefely these: First, the Apo|stle
(say they) excludeth the works of nature, not the works
of Grace; the workes of a man vnregenerate they confesse
cannot iustifie him, but the works of a man regenerate, say
they, doe iustifie him: but this is false, as is proued first
by examples: for Abraham whose example the Apostle

bringeth in to confirme the doctrine of Iustification, was
a regenerate man and effectually called; yet as witnesseth
both Moses and S. Paul,Proued by ex|amples. his faith was counted to him for
righteousnesse. Dauid after hee had beene a regenerate man
yet saith, Lord enter not into iudgement with thy Seruant, for
in thy sight shall no flesh be iustified. The Apostle Paul pro|tests
of himselfe, I haue in all good conscience serued God
vnto this day; neyther know I any thing of my selfe, yet
am I not thereby iustified: hee was more abundant in good
workes than all the rest of the Apostles: hee did also beare
in his body the markes of Iesus; and was renouned through
his manifold sufferings: If euer any regenerate man could
haue beene iustified by his good workes, it was this holy
Apostle, yet hee tels you himselfe, for all that I haue done,
for all that I haue suffered, yet am I not thereby iustified.
The same is proued by reason:The same pro|ued by reason. that which by order of
nature followes our Iustification before God, cannot be said
to iustifie vs in the presence of God; cannot be said to iusti|fie
vs in this sense: but so it is, good works by order of na|ture,
followes our iustification before God, Non praecedunt
iustificandum sed sequuntur iustificatum.Augustine. Againe, such works
as are not perfectly agreeable to the rule of Legall iustice
cannot iustifie vs, but rather fals vnder that curse, Cursed is
hee who fulfilleth not euery ot of the Law: but so it is, that the
workes euen of men regenerate, are not able to answere the
perfection of the Law.Eccles. 7. There is no man (saith Salomon) iust
in the earth, that doth good and sinneth not. If I would dispute
with God, I could not (saith Iob) make answere vnto one of a
thousand. All our righteousnesse (saith Ieremie) is but like a
menstruous cloath: and our Sauiour hath taught euen regene|rate
men to pray daily for the remission of their sins. Quid
ergo de peccatis nostris fiet,Bern. in fest. omniu~. sanct. serm. 1. quando ne ipsa quidem pro se re|spondere
poterit iustitia nostra? what then shall become of our
sinnes, when our righteousnesse is not able to answere for
it selfe? Vae hominum iustitiae quantumuis laudabili, si remot
misericordia Dei iudicetur: woe to the righteousnesse of man

were it neuer so lowable, if God setting aside mercy enter to
iudge it.
But they insist,How it is that workes of men regenerate doe not merit, see|ing they are workes done in vs by the spi|rit of Christ. the workes of regenerate men are the
workes of Christ, for it is hee who by his spirit workes
them in them, therefore they are meritorious and iustifies. I answere, the workes of Christ iustifies, it is true, if yee vn|derstand
his personall workes, done by himselfe in his own
person; as the Apostle teacheth vs, He hath purged our sinnes
by himselfe. But as for those workes which hee workes in vs
by his spirit of grace,Heb. 1. 3 hee workes them not for our iustifi|cation,
that as I haue said he hath done already by himselfe
and in his owne person, but for our sanctification. Secondly,
the good workes of men regenerate are so wrought by
Christ in vs that they are also wrought by vs, and we haue
our working in them, and therefore by reason of our im|perfection
cannot be perfect: for as the fountaines of the
actions are, so must the actions be themselues, the fountaines
are mixed being partly good, and partly euill: for our mind
is not so illuminated that there is no darknesse in it; neither
is our hart so sanctified that there is no vncleannesse in it, and
therefore the actions flowing from thence cannot be per|fect
workes of light and sanctification.
They insist yet further and obiects,Faith  works are not simply opponed to other, for they are inseperable but opponed onely in the act of Iustification if the Apostle say
they in his conclusion, we are iustified by Faith without the
workes of the Law, did vnderstand the workes of Grace,
then it would follow that he oppones things which are not
to be opponed: for workes and Grace, workes and Faith,
workes and Christ, are not opposite but agrees very well
together, as the cause and effect, as the tree and the branch.
To this we answere that Faith and workes agrees well to|gether,
but there is no thing in the world which agree so
well the one with the other, but in some things they may be
opponed: as for example; the tree and the branch agrees
very well together, but if the question be moued whether
the tree beares the branch or the branch the tree, in this
they are opponed; that which is affirmed of the one must

be denyed of the other. Againe, there is a very sweet har|mony
betweene a naturall Father and the sonne, the one of
them cannot be without the other: for hee is not a Father,
who neuer had a sonne; neither is he a sonne, who neuer had
a father: but if this be the question which of them gaue
beginning to another, here we must oppone them, affirm|ing
that of the one, which wee deny of the other. In like
manner there is a very sweet harmonie and agreement be|tweene
Faith and good workes; but if this be the question,
for which of them it is that God doth iustifie vs, there wee
must oppone them, affirming with the Apostle that we are
iustified by Faith, and not by workes: alway the opposition
is not simple, but .
Their second euasion is a distinction of the workes of the
Law,Workes not of the Ceremoni|all law onely but of the Mo|rall also exclu|ded from Iusti|fication. Morall and Ceremoniall. It is true say they that the
workes of the law ceremoniall iustifies not, but the workes
of the Law Morall iustifies. But the Apostle in his con|clusion
excludes from iustification the workes of the Law
Morall, for these reasons: he excludes those workes of which
he hath proued both Iewes and Gentiles to be guiltie, but
so it is he hath proued them to be guiltie of the transgressi|on
of the Law Morall, as is euident out of the sins where|with
he charges them, therefore, c. Secondly, he excludes
from iustification the workes of that law by which comes
the knowledge of sinne; but so it is the knowledge of sinne
comes by the law Morall, therefore, c. I had not knwne
(saith the Apostle) that concupcence is a sinne, except the
law had said thou shalt not couet. Now it is euident that this
is a pecept of the law Morall.
Their third euasion is by a distinction of the first and se|cond
iustification,The distincti|on of the first and second Iustification improued. the first whereof say they is by Faith,
but the second is by workes. But this twofold iustification
is also forged: for iustificatio est actus indiuidius  simul totus,
there is no first and last in the act of iustification: hee that
is once condemned iudicially stands so, and hee that is ab|solued
stands so. Againe, this distinction confounds two

benefits,Iustification  Sanctification distinct bene|fits. iustification  sanctification which to them is the
second iustification. That they are distinct benefits the A|postle
doth teach vs, Christ is made to vs righteousnesse and
sanctification; but they inconsiderately confound them: for
if these new qualities infused by Grace into the soule of
man, and good workes flowing there from be the matter as
they say of mans second Iustification, then let them tell vs
what is the matter of his sanctification.
To conclude this,Iustification  Sanctification inseperably conioyned. these are two inseperable benefits, to
whomsoeuer the Lord imputes the righteousnes of Christ,
and giues them Faith to accept it as their owne, like as for
it hee absolues them from sinne and death, and adiudges
them vnto life; so also incontinent workes he in them by his
holy spirit, an inherent righteousnesse, by which they be|come
new creatures: so that our iustification hath insepe|rably
annexed with it sanctification. But this sanctification
of our is so imperfect, that howsoeuer it be accepted of the
Father for the righteousnesse of Christ, yet is it not so per|fect
nor sufficient that for the merit thereof wee dare seeke
to be absolued from our sinnes, and receiued into fauour.
Them he also glorefied.Glorification our last and highest estate out of which we shall neuer be changed. Glorification the last lincke of the
chaine is the last and highest benefit that we haue by Christ,
by which both our soule and body shall be restored to a
greater glory and more happy, than euer wee enioyed in
Adam. Hee had his owne most excellent priuiledges; hee
had this inward glory, that he was created to the image of
God, hee had also for outward glory a dominion and Lord|ship
ouer all the creaures of God: the heauens were made
beautifull for his sake; the earth made fruitfull; Paradise
assigned to him as a speciall garden of pleasure, and all the
creatures ordained to serue him: but by our second creation
we are beautified with more excellent priuiledges; that same
image is restored to vs; new heauens and new earth created
for our sake, and with all these we shall haue the Crowne
of perseuerance, which Adam had no: for glorification is

our last and highest happie estate, out of which wee shall
neuer be transchanged, and therefore the Apostle goes not
beyond it.
And herein appeares the Lords wonderfull power and
goodnesse,How the glori|fication of our bodyes shewes Gods wonder|full goodnesse and power. who of the fall of man takes occasion to make
man better than hee was before the fall. Our bodyes shall
not be raised like to Adams body, for euen in the state of
innocencie hee was mortall; but they shall be raised vp like
to the glorious body of Christ. Salomon built a Temple,
the Chaldeans destroyed it, and it was neuer againe resto|red
to the former glory, which moued the auncient men to
mourne, when they saw how the glory of the second Tem|ple
was not like the glory of the first; but it shall be the
great ioy of our auncient Father Adam, when hee shall see
how farre the glory of the second creation shall exceed the
glory of the first.
Of this Glorification the Apostle speakes in the time
past,Three degrees of eternall life. partly to declare the certainetie thereof, and partly, be|cause
it is already begunne: for there are three degrees of
that Glory. The first in this life, and that is our sanctifica|tion,
called by S. Iohn, the first resurrection, and by S. Paul
our transformation into the glorious image of God. The
second is in the houre of death, and that is a neerer vnion of
our soules with Iesus. The third will be in the last day, wher|in
both soule and body shall be glorified; this is the highest
step of Salomons throne, vnto the which we must ascend by
the former degrees.The first de|gree is in this life,  hath in it these three. 1. Righteousnes 2. Peac. 3. Ioy. As for the beginning of this glory, which
now wee haue, it consists in these three; Righteousnesse,
Peace, and Ioy: there is a ioy which is no presumption,
flowing from a peace which is not securitie, bred of righte|ousnesse
which is not hypocrisie: in these three stands the
beginning of eternall life here vpon earth, and in the perfe|ction
of them shall consist the perfection of eternall life af|terward
in heauen: perseuerance in righteousnesse, peace,
ioy and glory being adioyned vnto them.

This Ioy which is the highest degree of eternall life,A three-fold ioy we haue in this life. wee
can attaine to here vpon earth, hath also these three de|grees:
first, there is a Ioy which ariseth of beleeuing, wee
haue not as yet seen the Lord Iesus; yet doe wee beleeue in
him,1. Pet. 1. and reioyce in him with Ioy vnspeakeable and glorious.
Secondly, there is a Ioy which ariseth of feeling and tasting,
taste and consider how gratious the Lord is, and this feeling
is much more than beleeuing. Thirdly, there is a ioy which
ariseth of sight and of spirituall embracing; such vvas the
ioy of Simeon when hee saw that promised saluation, and
embraced the Lord Iesus in his armes.
Hereof ariseth to vs first a lesson of comfort:By the ioyfull first fruites of eternall life, we may iudge of the fulnesse thereof. if the be|ginnings
of this glory be so great, that as S. Peter saith, they
bring to vs ioy vnspeakable and glorious, what shall the ful|nesse
thereof be? let this waken in vs a loathing of these
vaine perishing pleasures, and a longing for that better and
more enduring substance,Bern. in cap. iiun. Ser. 2. Certe non sunt tibi not a futura
gaudia, si non renuit consolari anima tua donec veniant, thou
knowest not those ioyes which are to come, if thy soule do
not refuse all comfort till they come vnto thee.Basil. ser. in Gord. Mart. Certe si sem|piterna
essent haec terrena, tamen prae coelestibus essent commu|tanda,
Certainely albeit these earthly things were eternall,
yet were they to be exchanged with those that are heauenly.
And therefore let the little tast of that ioy which wee haue
now worke in vs a greater hunger and thirst after the fulnes
thereof.
And againe we are here to be remembred,This ioy is not found but in the depth of a contre heart. that as pearles
are found in the bottome of the water, and gold is not got|ten
in the superfice, but bosome of the earth: so this ioy is
not to be found but in the inward parts of a broken and
contrite spirit: many speake of this ioy who neuer felt it.
Righteousnesse is the mother of Peace, and Peace the mo|ther
of Ioy: they who haue not learned to do well, and can|not
morne for the euil which they haue done, how shall they
taste of the ioyes of God? wee must pearce by the hammer

of contrition into the very inward of our harts, or euer we
we can finde the refreshing springs of Gods sweet consola|tions
arising vnto vs. It deceiues many that they thinke eter|nall
life is not begunne but after death, but assuredly except
now thou get the beginnings, thou shalt neuer hereafter
attaine to the perfections thereof, and therefore looke to
it in time.
As for the second degree of this glory,Of the second and third de|gree of eternall Life. which is a neerer
vnion of our soules with Iesus Christ after our dissolution
by death, it is not my purpose now to insist in it. As for
the third degree which consists in the glorification both of
our soules and bodyes, we haue spoken of it before, speci|ally
in the 18. verse. Now the Tabernacle of God is with
men, but then shall our securitie be without feare, and
our glory consummated, when we shall dwell in
the Tabernacle of God: vnto the which
the Lord bring vs all for Iesus
Christs sake. Amen.








THE
GLORIFICATION
of a Christian.
VVhere you may see the counsaile
of GOD concerning mans Saluation more
cleerely manifested.
THEY THAT HAVE EYES MAY COME
and see the Christian possessed and crowned in his
heauenly Kingdome: Which is the greatest and
last benefit wee haue by Christ
Iesus our Lord.
Come and see.
Written by M^r^. William Cowper, Minister of
Gods word at Perth.
LONDON:
Printed by Thomas Snodham for William Firebrand,
and are to be sould at his shoppe in Popes-head
Pallace. 1609.




TO THE MOST EX|cellent,
Vertuous, and Gra|tious
Prince, Henry, by the Grace
of God, Prince of Wales, and Heyre Apparent
vnto the most famous Kingdomes of Eng|land,
Scotland, Fraunce, and Ireland: All
happinesse in this life, and eternall
Glory in the life to come.
_THat which the Apostle hath seue|rally
deliuered in the two for|mer
Discourses, dedicated to
your most Royall Parents, hee
now in this last Treatise collects
and conioynes in one, which ther|fore
of right can appertaine to
none more then to you Sir, who
being by them both the happy fruite of heauenly proui|dence,
and decrest pledge of their mutuall loue, and ioy,
may iustly challenge interest in the smallest good ouer
which their names are named. Sir, here is the way to
that Crowne of Triumph, which the more you know,
the more (I hope) shall you place your glory in it. Crownes

of earthly Kingdomes are indeede the gfts of God, but
such as bring not so much Honour as they breed vnquiet|nesse.
O nobilem magis quam foelicem pannum (said
Antigonus.) If the cares which dwell in the Diadem
wre knowne, no man would stoope to the ground to
take it vp (said Seleucus.) And albeit, it be not giuen to
all to know this in their entrie to Honour, yet are they
all compelled to acknowledge it in the end. Seuerus Mo|nrch
of the world, found his Crownes but comfortlesse
to him in death, ,
I haue (said hee) beene all things, and it profiteth mee
nothing. Not onely the teares of Xerxes, but the laments
of Salomon may witnesse to all the world, that the end
of the worme-eaten pleasures of this life, is heauie dis|pleasure:
yea, the golden head of Babell had at length
worms spread vnder him,  worms to couer him. Esa. 14
For all flesh is grasse, and the glory thereof as the
flowre of the field: Onely, The word of the Lord en|dures
for euer. By which that same God who hath called
you to be an apparant Heyre of the most famous King|domes
on earth, doth also call your Grace to a more cer|taine
inheritance of a better Kingdome in heauen, which
cannot be shaken: whereby aboue other Princes, and
Rulers of the earth yee are blessed, if so be yee answere
your Calling, endeauouring to be no lesse than you are na|med:
Principem te agnosce neseruias affectibus. It is
vnseemely in any, but most of all in a Prince, to become
asruant, eyther to the corrupt humours of men with|out
him, who creeping in into the Courts of Kings, like
wormes into the bosome of excellent trees, doe nothing

but consume them: whom Godly Constantine properly
called Tineas  Sorices palatij, subtile peruerters of
the good inclination of Princes in manners and Religion,
where they can preuaile: or yet to the disordered affecti|ons
of his owne heart, which if they be not restrained
doe quickly turne the glory of a man into shame. What
did it profit Cham that hee was the Sonne of Noah,
the Monarch of the world, and Patriarch of the Church
in his time; or that hee was the Heyre of the third part
of the world?Chrisost. vitia siquidem voluntatis vicerunt pri|uelegia
naturae, his owne vndantoned will bursting out
in contempt of his Father, brought vpon him that curse,
and shamefull name, A Seruant of Seruants, which was
neuer taken from him. Seeing God (as saith the Apostle)
is the glory of man, what honour can make that man glori|ous,
who caryes not the Image of God, consisting in righte|ousnesse,
and true holinesse? but especially a King, whom
the very Ethnicks called Animata Dei imago in terris,
should carefully keepe that Image which keeps his glory.
Naturally facilius alijs, quam nobis imperamus, but
in very deed he shall neuer be a skilfull Ruler of others,
who is not first taught of God to rule himselfe,Basil. decet
eum qui alijs praefectus est interiora sua decenter
adornare.
The best remedie against both these euils, is to embrace
that wholesome counsell giuen by God to the Gouernors
of his people, Let not the booke of the Law depart from
thee, but meditate in it day and night, that thou
maist do according to all that is written therein: turne
not away from it to the right hand nor to the left, so

shalt thou make thy way prosperous, and shalt haue
good successe. Beware of those Lucifugae, haters of the
light, because it discouers the darknesse of their errours,
Qui cum a Scripturis redarguuntur,Tertull. in accusationem
Scripturarum se conuertunt. As the wise men follow|ing
the Starre, were at length led by it to Christ, so if
according to Peters counsell, yee take heed to the light
that shineth in darkenesse, not onely shall the day star
arise in your heart, but that cleare shining Sunne of
Righteousnesse (so named by Malachie) euer rising and
neuer going downe, shall illuminate you with his bright|nesse.
And herewithall take to you the domestique exam|ple
of your Royall Father, who stands before you as a
paterne of pietie, viuum omnis virtutis examplar: it
shall be no small proofe of your progresse in vertue, and
greatest praise among your godly Subiects, that yee be a
follower of him. And so praying Almightie God that your
happie deeds may exceed all that great hope which is con|ceiued
of you, I humbly take my leaue.
Your Graces humble Ser|uant
and daily Oratour
William Cowper,
Minister at Perth.





THE
GLORIFICATION
of a Christian.
HERE FOLLOWES BY WAY OF CON|clusion
the third part of the Chapter, contay|ning
the Christians triumph against all
sorts of Enimies.

Verse 31.
What shall we then say to these things? If
God be on our side, who can be against vs?
_NOW followes the conclusion
of the whole Chapter:The conclusio~ of the whole Chapter, con|sisting first of a generall, se|condly of a particular tri|umph. where|in
the Apostle breaking off the
course of his former speach,
gathers vp all that he hath spo|ken
into a short summe, he be|gan
at the first and lowest be|nefite
which God in Christ
hath bestowed vpon vs, to wit,
deliuerance from condemnati|on:
this is indeede the least of his mercies, yet so great that
if we had receiued no more, we are neuer able to yeeld vn|to
the Lord that praise which is due for it. Yet as I said it is
but little in respect of that which God hath done vnto vs,

and therefore the Apostle beginning at it ascends continu|ally
ll he comes to the last and highest, which is our estate
of glorification; and so hauing tunne so high in the enume|ration
of Gods mercies towards vs that he can go no higher,
he bursts out into an exclamation, as if he did say, more can|not
be spoken, further comfort cannot be giuen, but con|tents
himselfe to make a briefe recapitulation of all that hee
had said; wherein first he triumphs generally, verse 31.  32,
thereafter perticularly: and that first against sinne, Who
shall accuse, who shall condemne? verse 33. 34. Secondly a|gainst
affliction, who shall seperate vs from the loue of God?
outward and visible enimies cannot doe it, by no sort of trou|ble,
verse 35. 36. 37. Inward and inuisible enimies are not
able to doe it, verse 38. 39. Thus like a valiant man stabli|shed
on Christ, in his owne name, and in the name of the
rest of Gods children, hee proclaimes a deiance to all his
enimies visible and inuisible whatsoeuer.
The generall triumph contayned in these two verses con|sists
in these two.The first part of his generall triumph, no|thing can bee against the Christian to hurt him. In the first he glories that nothing can be
against the Christian to hurt him, the reason is, because
God is with him. In the second he glories that the Christian
can want nothing that is needfull for him, the reason is, seeing
the Lord hath giuen vnto vs his owne sonne, which is the
greatest gift, that can be giuen, he will not let vs want any
of his inferiour gifts.
If God be on our side.Worldlings euill iudges of Gods presence who measure it by externall prosperitie. His meaning is if God be with vs,
electing, calling, and iustifying vs, that he may glorifie vs, as
hath beene said, then we may be sure that nothing can be
against vs. This I marke because worldlings iudge of Gods
presence with men by the wrong rules, to wit, as Abimelech
and philoc iudged of Abraham, we see say they that God is
with thee,Gen. 25. 22. because thou prosperest in all that thou doest. That
which they iudged was true, for GOD was present with
Abraham indeed, but the rule by which they so iudged was
not sure: for if this rule were sure, how often might the
wicked be iudged to be blessed? who prosper in all they put

their hand vnto:Not by in|ward Grace. the rich gluton might be thought more
happy than poore Lazarus: but the presence wherof the A|postle
speaks is not to be tryed by grace, which grace flow|ing
from thy effectuall calling, is a surer argument to proue
that God is with thee, then if he should giue thee, as he did
Esau, the fatnesse of the earth for thy portion, and multi|ply
vpon thee in neuer so great aboundance the things of
this world.
And that we should not be deceiued to iudge otherwise,The presence of God ex|empts not his children from trouble both inward and outward.
our blessed Sauiour hath forewarned vs both by his word
and example, how that great troubles outward and inward
are to follow them which follow him. In the world (sayth he)
yee shall haue trouble, in me yee shall haue peace. So soone as
our Sauiour was borne Herod raged against him, seeking his
life; to warne vs saith Chrisostome, that so soone as wee are
borne Christians wee should looke for trouble: Iacob gat
no sooner the blessing but incontinent Esau persecutes him.
Sosthenes before he was a Christian was a ruler of a Syna|gogue,
but after that he imbraced the Faith of Christ, they
depriued him of his office, and scourged him. Paul a per|secuter
is in great worldly honour, commissioner of the
high Priest and Elders of Ierulalm; but when he becomes a
Preacher, his former friends becomes his enimies. The same
is also true in inward tentations: when our Sauiour beganne
to discharge the publicke office of the Messiah, sathan began
to tempt him: of his two most excellent Apostles, the one
was winnowed by Sathan, the other buffeted by the Angell
of Sathan and all to tell vs that notwithstanding the Lord
be present with vs, yet we may be tempted as our Sauiour
was, winnowed as Peter was, buffeted as Paul was; and
therefore let vs dispise the iudgement of worldlings, and
lying conclusions of Sathan, who would make vs to esteeme
our inward and outward tentations to be tokens and argu|ments
of Gods departure from vs.
Againe,The whole world consists of two contra|ry factions perceiue here hovv in the vvorld are two con|trary
factions, the one alway militant against the other.

This inimitie was proclaimed by God in Paradise, and hath
continued since, like as it shall for euer without reconcilia|tion;
onely let vs take heede vpon what side we stand if we
stand vpon that wherein God is Captaine, and all the Saints
of Christ are souldiers, we are happy, for here the victory is
certaine:Miserable are they who are militant vnder the Prince of darknesse. otherwise they who are among the children of dis|obedience,
militant vnder the Prince of the aire, are most
miserable, their end is darkenesse, shame, and confusion.
It is a comfortable Oration which Abijah King of Iud,
hauing in his armie foure hundreth thousand, made to Iero|boam
King of Israell,2 Chro. 13. 8  his army of eight hundred thousand,
with you (said he) is the multitude, but with them yee haue the
golden calues: but with vs God is a captaine, and his Priests, to
sound with the trumpet an Alarum against you: therfore O Israel
fight not against the Lord God of your fathers, for yee shall not
prosper: but this comfort much more appertaines to the true
Israell of God, howsoeuer there be many which are against
vs, the golden calues are with the~, that is, strange gods, which
shall be their destruction. As Moses when he was to plead
the cause of God, stood in the gate of the Campe  cryed,
whosoeuer pertains to the Lord let him come to me, so daily
by the word of God doe we exhort you which are on Gods
ide to gather you together into one, not that it is possible ye
can be seperate from them in this life in regard of personall
conuersation,1 Cor. 5. 10. for so saith the Apostle, ye behoued to goe out of
the world, but that by difference of your words and deedes
from them, yee declare that ye are not of their communion.
They who are one the side of Iesus are knowne chiefely
these two manner of wayes:Why all the followers of Christ are pursued of Sa|than with rest|lesse malice. First, Sathan fights against
them: Secondly, they are also warriours against him: the
first without the second is nothing; for man euen as hee is
a naturall man is an obiect of Sathans malice, but where the
grace of God hath made the man a new creature, there Sa|than
doubles his hatred; for hee enuies most the glory of
Gods mercy, whereof hee knowes he shall neuer be perta|ker.
As Nabuchadnezers countenance changed, and his

rage encreased when the three Children refused in his face
to worship his image, and thereupon commaunded to make
his Ouen seauen times hotter than it was before: so is Sa|thans
malice most intended against those who plainly re|fuse
to fall downe and worship him.
But that the godly be not discouraged with his malice,What comort christians haue of this that they finde Sa|than an enimie to them.
let vs remember that first hee was an enimie vnto God, or
euer he was an enimie vnto vs, and that wee haue cause to
reioyce in that we finde that Apostate spirit an enimie vnto
vs, whom God from the beginning hath proclaymed to be
an enimie vnto himselfe. Secondly, we are to collect of his
inuasion and our resistance that there is in vs some measure
of the grace of Iesus Christ: for against those doth he mul|tiply
his malitious assaults, on whom hee sees that the Lord
hath multiplyed his graces: like to a crafitie Pirate, who pas|sing
by the emptie vessell, sets vpon that which is loadned.
Thirdly, howeuer he being compared with vs hath many
vantages; as that he is more subtile in nature, being of grea|ter
experience and more auncient, being now almost sixe
thousand yeeres old: and hath also vantage of place; for he
is the Prince of the Aire, assisted with armies of spirituall
wickednesse, who for their number are legions, for their
strength principalities  powers, for their subtiltie serpents,
for their fiercenesse dragons: yet stronger is he who is on
our side, than they who are against vs; the serpents head is
bruised, some life remaines in him, but hee hath no power
to inflict death on them which are in Christ.
But what euer inimitie Sathan exercise against vs,If so be that they also liue at inimity with Sathan. it is not
sufficient to comfort vs, vnlesse wee also liue as enimies vnto
him. It was a notable speach of Azariah to Prophet to
Asa, the Lord is with you, while yee be with him: if thou
stand with the compleat armour of God,2 Chro. 15. 2 pleading the cause
of God, fighting against the enimie of God, than mayst thou
say in a good conscience, God is with thee, and thou art with
him. But alas we see in this generation many wearing Christs
liuerie, and bearing Sathans armour, professing friendship

to Christ yet fighting against him: these two factions are
entred already into the battaile pelmell, so that in the smallest
fellowships some ye shall finde aduancing the kingdome of
the one,This comfort taken from car|nall men who professe friend|ship to Christ, and are ser|uants to Sathan though very few to fight for the glory of the other.
What a shame is this for vs, who say we are on the Lords
side, that a wicked man seruing Sathan shall in our audience
open his mouth to blaspheme God, and we will not open
our mouthes to rebuke him? we see carnall men so shame|lesse
that they stand vpon no circumstances to dishonour
God, and we who professe we loue him, for feare wee faile
against curtesie, and I cannot tell what circumstances, dare
not open our mouthes to praise him. Our coldnesse in this
point hath neede to be admonished, that we may be stirred
vp not by profession onely, but by conuersation also, to
make it knowen to the world, that wee belong wholy to
the Lord Iesus.
Who can be against vs?A Christian wants not eni|mies. It may seeme strange that the
Apostle should vse any such interrogaorie: what Christian
wants enimies inough against him? yea saith not the Apo|stle
of himselfe,1 Cor. 15. 32 that hee had beasts at Ephesus with whom
he behoued to fight? was there not an Angell of Sathan
sent to buffet him?2 Cor. 12. 7. did not Nero at length behead him?
how is it then that he askes who can be against him? But
wee are to know that the Apostles meaning is not that
godly men haue no enimies, but that no enimie can take
from vs that for which wee striue:But none of them can take from vs that for which we striue. it is not for the mainte|nance
of our bodily life that wee fight, when our enimies
haue taken that from vs, they haue done no more than Po|iphars
wife did to Ioseph, when she pulled the garment from
him. There are three notable things for which we striue,
and which the world is neuer able to take from vs: the
loue of God which he hath borne to vs: the grace of God
which hee hath communicated to vs in our calling: the
glory of God and eternall life, which hereafter doth abide
vs: no power of man nor Angell is able to depriue vs of
these things.

An example whereof we haue in that notable warriour
of God,This is decla|red in the ex|ample of Iob. Patient Iob, whom the Lord set vp as an obiect of
all Sathans buffets, and against whom hee was permitted
to vse all the strategems of the spirituall warfare that pos|sibly
hee could: hee crossed him not onely in his goods, in
his children, and in his owne body, but also in his minde;
by his wife hee tempted him to blasphemie; by his friends
to diffidence; yet by none of these could hee ouercome him:
In his outward troubles his resolution was,Iob. 1. 21. the Lord hath
giuen, the Lord hath taken, blessed be the name of the Lord
for euer: in his inward terrours his resolution was, Albeit
the Lord would slay me,Iob. 13. 15. yet would I trust in him: so impossi|ble
is it for Sathan by any tentation whatsoeuer, to seperate
from the loue of God, his Children, chosen, called, and iu|stified.
To cleare this,The Lord is present with his children to keepe them, somtime from trouble, some|time in trouble let vs yet know that God is many manner
of wayes present with his children in trouble: first, hee is
with them by preuenting the danger, so that hee will not
suffer the intended euill of the enimie to come neere them:
so he brought Senacherib to see Ierusalem without, but suf|fered
him not to shoot so much as a dart against it within.
Somtime again the Lord enters his children into the trouble,
as Daniel into the den, Ioseph into the prison, the three Chil|dren
into the fire; but deliuers them in such sort that both his
glory, and their comfort is greater than if they had not
beene in trouble at all: Sometime hee suffers his children
to end their mortall liues in trouble, and yet is with them
strengthening them by his glorious might to all patience
and long suffering, filling them with such a sense of his
loue, that in death they rest vnder the assurance of life.
The practise of this see in the examples of Eliah and
Paul:This also is de|clared by ex|amples. when Iezabel vowed to haue the life of Eliah, yee
shall see that the Lord is with him, sometime to hide him,
that albeit Achab and Iezabel seeke him they cannot finde
him: sometime God lets Achabs captaines see where hee
is, but consumes with fire them that came proudly to take

him: Sometime hee presents him to Achab and Iezabel, but
bridleth the tyrants that they haue no power to stirre him.
The Apostle Paul in like manner being sent prisoner to
Rome,2. Tim. 4. 17. the Lord assisted him in such sort that hee deliuered
him out of the mouth of the Lyon Nero; and yet the second
time suffered him to fall by the sword of the same tyrant:
shall wee thinke that the Lord was not with the Apostle
to assist him the second time as well as the first? let it be
farre from vs. The Lord was with him indeed to make his
death a seale and confirmation of that Gospell which hee
had preached in his life. The comfort then remaines, that
howeuer God worke with his children in trouble, no ad|uersarie
is able to take from vs that for which wee striue, to
wit, grace, and glory, they may be vnto vs as the sharpe
rasers of God, to cut away our superfluities, but shall neuer
be able to bereaue vs of the end of our Faith, which is the
euerlasting saluation of our soules.


Verse. 32.
Who spared not his owne Sonne, but gaue
him for vs all vnto death, how shall he not with him
giue vnto vs all things also?
_NOw followeth the second part of the Apo|stles
generall triumph,The second part of his ge|nerall triumph, the Christian can want no|thing that is needfull for him. wherein hee gloryeth
that the Christian can want nothing needfull
for him; for seeing the Lord hath giuen vnto
him, the greatest, and most excellent gift, to
wit, his owne Sonne, is it possible that he will denie him any
secondary or inferior gifts needfull for him? Sathan who is
a lyer from the beginning, accused the Lord of two things:
first, of an vntruth: albeit the Lord hath said it, yet ye shall
not dye: secondly, of Enuy. In the first Sathan is proued
false and the Lord is found true: for are they not dead to
whom the Lord said, yee shall dye? In the second Sathan is
found a calumniator: for what good tree will the Lord

refuse to his owne, who hath giuen vnto them this excellent
tree of life, which brings with it vnto them all things need|full
for them.
To amplifie this great loue of God,The great loue which God hath shewed in giuing his Son for vs. the Apostle saith
not simply, that hee gaue his Sonne for vs, but that hee spa|red
not to giue him. O wonderfull loue! the Naturall
and onely Sonne of God is not spared, that the adoptiue
sonnes may be spared: for our sins being imputed to him
by the ordinance of God his Father, and voluntarily accep|ted
by himselfe,Esa. 53. 5. so the punishment of our sinnes and chastice|ment
of our peace was laid vpon him, that by his stripes wee
might be healed. The bitter cuppe due to vs was propined
to him, for the which albeit hee prayed to his Father, that
if it were his will,Mat. 26. 39. this cuppe might passe by him, yet the Fa|ther
spared him not, but held it to his head, till hee dranke
out the vttermost dregs thereof. So straite is the Iustice of
God, that sinne being imputed to the Sonne of God, who
had no sinne of his owne, is pursued to the vttermost. The
greatest example of Iustice that euer the Lord declared in
the world, the drowning of the originall world, the burning
of Sodome; the plaguing of Egypt; were terrible proofes of
the straitnesse of diuine Iustice, but nothing comparable to
this.
Which I marke partly for a comfort to the Godly,Comfort for the Godly that the iustice of God shall not, nay cannot strike vpon them. and
partly for a warning to the wicked: it is our great comfort,
that the saluation which Iesus hath purchased vnto vs, hee
hath obtained it with a full satisfaction of his Fathers Iu|stice,
so that now wee that are in him, are not any more
to feare it. The great Iudge of all the world will not doe
vnrighteously, to require that againe from vs, which our
Christ, whom hee himselfe hath giuen vnto vs, hath payed
for vs.
And as for the wicked who are not in Christ,Miserable are the wicked who in their owne persons beare the punishment of their sinnes. how mi|serable
will their state and condition be, for they must beare
the punishment of their owne sinnes in their owne persons?
If the burden of that wrath due to our sinnes, caused Iesus

to sweat bloud,Mat. 26. 38. and to say, that his soule was heauy vnto
the very death. O how shall the burden of this wrath presse
downe the wicked! it is euen a horrour to think of it: their
faces shall be confused without, and their spirits oppressed
within, with tribulation and anguish; hee that spared not
in his owne Sonne sinne imputed vnto him, will hee spare
in thee sinne committed by thy selfe? no, no, when he be|ginneth
to smite thee, hee shall neuer lift vp his hand from
thee, but double his stripes vpon thee, and there shall be
no end of thy sorrow. As the ioyes prepared for the godly,
so the paines prepared for the wicked, are such as the eye
neuer saw, the tongue cannot vtter, nor the heart conceiue.
That place of the damned is the great deepe, the Ocean of
all the iudgements of God, all his temporall plagues are
but like little riers and strands running into it.
If therefore the beautie of Sion doth not allure vs,How both Si|ons beautie  Sinaies terror should moue vs to repent. let the
terrour of Sinai afray vs. The Lord proclaimed his Law in
a fearefull manner vpon mount Sinai, but in a more terrible
manner will hee execute it: if Moses who was so familiar
with the Lord, trembled when hee heard it proclaimed,
what horrible feare shall ouer-take the wicked when they
shall see it executed vpon themselues? Let therefore the
children of wisedome hearken in time to the ioyfull tidings
of peace which are daily proclaimed on mount Sion; let vs
drinke of the still and peaceable waters of Siloh, which flow
from it; let vs embrace that mercy which Iesus by the me|rit
of his death hath conquered vnto vs, that so wee may be
saued from the wrath which is to come.
His owne Sonne.How Christ is Gods owne Sonne. Iesus Christ is called Gods owne Son
both in respect of his diuine and humane natures: for as
hee is God, he was begotten of the Father by so vnspeak|able
a generation that as Esay saith,Esay. 53. 8. none are able to declare
it: and as hee is man, hee is the Sonne of God, conceiued
by the holy Ghost, made man indeed, but not after the man|ner
of other men, but of this: see Verse. 3.

But gaue him for vs all.The price of our redempti|on tels how much the Lord hath esteemed of vs. This is very often alleadged in
holy Scriptures, as an argument of the great loue of God
toward vs, that he gaue his sonne to death for vs: and so it is
indeed, for it is not by any corruptible thing, as Gold and siluer
that he hath redeemed vs, but by the precious blood of his owne
Sonne,1 Pet. 1. 18. the Lambe vndefiled, and without spot. There is no
man will giue much for that whereof he esteemes but little,
we measure the price of a thing according to the worth of
it in our iudgement: euen so of the greatnesse of that gift
which our God hath giuen for vs, wee may estimate the
greatnesse of his affection toward vs. Pretious indeed in the
sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints: who to redeeme vs
from death spared not to giue his dearest sonne vnto the
death.Gen. 22. 12. It was the Lords reasoning to Abraham, now I per|ceiue
thou louest mee, because for my sake thou hast not spared
thine onely sonne: and haue we not much more cause to turne
ouer the same reasoning to the Lord; now Lord we perceiue
thou louest vs, because for our sake thou hast not spared thine
onely one sonne. The Lord shed abroad in our hearts more
aboundantly the sense of that inestimable loue, that we may
be carefull to requite the kindnesse of the Lord, putting his
holy will before all things in our affection, and endeauou|ring
in holy loue to serue him, who hath saued vs.
Shall hee not with him giue vs all things also?All things be|long to the godly in regard of right, albeit not in regard of possession. Wee are to
vnderstand all things that are needfull for vs: And here it is
necessary that we put a difference betweene our right and
our possession. The children of God haue the right and
propertie of all Gods good creatures, for Christ their Lord
is the heire of all, and hath made them with himselfe fellow
heires:1 Cor. 3. 5. All things are yours (saith the Apostle) and yee are
Christs, and Christ is Gods. But as for the possession of them,
the Lord giues it or with-holds it, according as hee sees may
be for the good of his children. We know our father Abra|ham
had the right of Canaan when he had not the posses|sion
of it, and are not therefore to thinke it strange that the
Lord giues not alwayes possession of that to his Children

whereof they haue the right. But as for the wicked they haue
possession without a right, and therefore shall be punished
as theeues and robbers, and violent vsurpers of Gods crea|tures,
whereunto Iesus Christ who is the heyre of all hath
neuer giuen them a right.
Secondly,Seeing all things are gi|uen by God, let vs moderate our care, and take nothing but out of his fatherly hand. wee marke here that the giuing and dispensa|tion
of earthly things is from God; if wee could remember
this it would moderate our care, and make vs in our callings
first to seeke the Lords blessing, loath any manner of way
to take the things of this world, vnlesse we see they be giuen
vs out of the hand of God. For we are to know that Sathan
who is a counterfaiter of God, doth also arrogate to himself,
though falsely, to be the giuer of things: hee that durst say
to the sonne of God,Mat. 4. 9. all the kingdomes of the earth are mine,
I will giue them to thee, if thou wilt fall downe and worship me:
will hee stand in awe to speake it vnto sinnefull man? No
indeed, it is his daily tentation, by which he circumuents ma|ny,
intangling their hearts with the loue of worldly gaine,
that to obtaine it they care not to lye, to steale, to sweare,
to oppresse, to deceiue one another: which in effect is to
fall downe before Sathan and worship him.
Thus Sathan rules in the kingdome of Babell,Sathan another Nabuchadne|zer, and a Ba|lak, offers also gifts to men. like a spiri|tuall Nabuchadnezar, presenting to his subiects his great
image of gold, accompanied with all sorts of musicall instru|ments,
that is, worldly pleasures, vvealth, and prosperitie,
which bewitch the simple and makes them fall downe and
worship, yeelding themselues seruants to Mammon. But
happy are those children who refuse so to do, and can stand
vp vvith their father Abraham, lifting vp his hand to hea|uen
can say,Gen. 14. 22. I will not haue so much as the latchet of a shoe
from the king of Sodome: I will haue nothing by any crooked
or indirect meanes, out of the hand of Sathan or any of his
instruments: the buddes of Balak shall not hire me to doe
euill, neither the wages of iniquitie, nor the reward of So|dome
for doing good, shall euer cleaue to my hands, I will
looke for my portion from the Lord.

Againe, seeing God is the giuer of all things,Seeing God is giuer of all let vs stand con|tent  not mur+mure if others get a more por|tion than we. let vs learne
with the Apostle in whatsoeuer state we are to be content,
remembring that euery mans portion of vvorldly things is
measured vnto him from the Lord. We see that a steward
in a familie ministers not alike vnto all that are in it, the
aged and the young, the seruant and the Lord receiues not
a like portion, yet no man gainsayes it; and shall vve not re|uerence
the Lords dispensation, who is the great steward of
his familie in heauen and earth, shall vve murmure against
him if he giue Beniamin a double portion, and bestow vpon
some of his children these worldly things in greater aboun|dance
than he doth vpon others? farre be it from vs: for he
dispenses these perishing things in great vvisedome and loue
toward vs,He hath no cause to com|plaine to who~ the father hath giuen his Son for an irreuo|cable gift. as hee seeth may be best for vs. Certainely
vve ought so to reioyce in that great gift the Lord Iesus,
whom the Father hath giuen vs, and in vvhom he hath bles|sed
vs vvith all spirituall blessings, that vve take no thought
for any other thing vvhatsoeuer vvhich hee hath thought
expedient to hold from vs. Oh that vve could giue vnto the
Lord this glory, as to say vvithout grudging, O Lord Iesus
I can vvant nothing, seeing I haue thee to be my portion.
And further seeing all these things are dispensed and
giuen by God,Our care and labour is but vaine without his blessing. let vs (as I said) in our callings aboue all
things seeke his blessing. Adam may make himselfe a gar|ment,
but it shall not couer his nakednesse: Ionas may build
himselfe a booth, but it shall not defend him from the heat
of the Sunne: Peter fihed all night and hee profited no|thing
till Iesus spake the word.Psal. 127. 2. Though we rise earely and lye
down late, and eate the bread of sorrow, yet shall we labour in vain
vnlesse the Lord giue the blessing. Let vs therefore so vse the
meanes that with them we ioyne prayer, moderating our care
let vs commit the successe to the Lord. It is true that Re|ligion
allowes not carelesnesse, yea by the contrary it com|maunds
vs to be carefull for those vvhom God hath com|mitted
vnto vs:1 Tim. 5. 8. If any man care not for his household hee is
worse than an infidell. This is , a moderate foreseeing

of things which are needefull:Two sorts of cares. but there is an vnlawfull care
the daughter of distrust, whereby men are carryed either
beyond lawfull meanes, or else if the meanes be lawfull be|yond
the measure of a temperate affection; as though a
man had not a Father in heauen to care for him, or were
able to compasse things by his owne wit. This care is not
vnprofitable onely but full of many perturbations, for which
our Sauiour compares it to thornes, which are most easily
gouerned when they are most lightly touched, where as he
who gripes them hardly inuolues them and makes them
more perplex; and hurts himselfe also. Our Sauiour cor|recting
Martha for too much care of the worldly part,Luk. 10. 41.
ioynes these two, thou art carefull about many things, and art
troubled: telling vs that which we finde in experience, that
many worldly cares breedes many troubles. Let vs walke
therefore in the right way, vsing the meanes in sobernesse
let vs cast our care on the Lord.
Last of all,Christ is the chiefe gift, all other gifts are but pendicles giuen with him it is to be marked here that the Apostle aith
that God with Christ giues all things vnto vs: so then Iesus
Christ is the maine and great gift, and all other things are
but pendicles annexed vnto it. Other gifts without Christ
haue a shew of comfort, but renders no solide comfort in
the end: they shall be deceiued at length who glories in o|ther
things, vvere they neuer so excellent, vvhile as they are
strangers from Christ. When God said to Abraham, feare
not I am thy buckler,G. 15. 1. and thy exceeding great reward: not con|sidering
vvhat the Lord offered to him, he answered in his
weaknes,Verse 2. O Lord what canst thou giue me seeing I go childlesse?
Euen he vvho vvas the Father of the faithfull could not con|ceiue
hovv great good God promised to him, vvhen he pro|mised
himselfe to be his reward. And therefore let vs sus|pecting
our vveakenesse that it carry vs not into the like er|rour,
vvatch ouer our owne hearts, that they be not set vp|on
Gods secondary gifts more than vpon himselfe. Albeit
the Lord should giue vs pleasant Canaan for an inheritance,
and multiply our posteritie as the starres of heauen, yet will

we say, O Lord all these shall not content vs, vnlesse thou
dost giue vs thy selfe: It doth more reioyce vs, that thou
hast giuen vs thy Sonne Iesus to bee our Sauiour, than
that thou hast subdued all the workes of thine hands vn|der
vs.


Verse. 33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods chosen? it is God that iustifies.
_THe Apostle in his generall triumph,The Apostles perticular tri|umph, first, a|gainst sinne: se|condly, against the crosse. contained
in the last two Verses, hauing proclaimed a
defiance to all the enimies of a Christian,
doth now begin to challenge them perticular|ly,
triumphing first against sinne, Verse 33. 34.
thereafter against all sort of afflictions that come vpon vs,
by whatsoeuer instruments visible or inuisible. Wee begun
first at his triumph against sinne, who (saith he) shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods chosen? hee excepts no person,
neyther is any eyther in heauen, in earth, or in hell able to
doe it; hee reserues no sort of sinne, seeke what they will,
there is nothing to be found in the Christian to accuse him
and condemne him, his interrogation is plaine, his answere
is supprest, his reason is subioyned, It is God that iustifies,
where the supreame Iudge absolues can any inferior iudge
whatsoeuer condemne?
Where first wee haue to consider,A man relieued of the burden of sinne, is fil|led with ioy. who is hee that this
manner of way triumphs? Is it not Paul, who before his
conuersion was a persecuter, a blasphemer, and an oppres|ser,
who confesseth himselfe to be the chiefe of all sinners,1. Tim. 1. 15.
and the least of all Saints? yea indeed the same is hee:1. Cor. 15. 9. but
marke, such a one hee was indeed, but hath gotten mercy,
and therefore now like a man relieued of a heauy burthen,
which before oppressed him, hee reioyces and triumphes.
Certainely no greater comfort can come to man, than to
feele his sins forgiuen him, this onely causeth true reioycing.

See this in Dauid, as long as the burden of his sinne lay
vpon his conscience, it prest out the very naturall moy|sture
of his body; hee had no rest night nor day, but from
the time that once Nathan proclaimed to him remission,
and that in his owne conscience he felt his sin forgiuen him,
then hee cryed out:Psal. 32. 1. O blessed is the man whose wickednesse
is forgiuen, whose sinne is couered, and vnto whom the Lord
imputes not his iniquitie.Luke. 5. 25. As hee that lay sicke sixe and thirty
yeeres of the palsie, arose with great ioy when Iesus relieved
him:Acts. 3. 8. and hee that was a creple, when hee found that his
feete, which had failed him so long, did not serue him, lea|ped
for ioy, and followed the Apostles into the Temple to
praise God: so that soule which findes it selfe freed from
the guiltinesse and seruitude of sinne, of all burthens that
euer lay vpon man the heauiest to beare, will with much
more abundant ioy exult and triumph in that mercy of
God which hath made it free.
Secondly,Both by pro|mises and ex|amples doth the Lord con|firme poore pe|nitent sinners. let the Apostle here stand vnto vs as an exam|ple
of the like mercy of God to be shewed vpon our selues,
how great sinners soeuer wee haue beene, if wee follow him
in the like faith and repentance. The Lord our God, is not
content by his word to promise mercy vnto penitent in|ners,
but also confirmes vs by the examples of his manifold
mercies shewed to others before vs: when wee looke vpon
them, let our weakenesse be strengthened; let vs not think
that the Lord will close that doore of mercy vpon vs, if we
knock aright, which hee hath opened to so many before vs;
hee who hath beene found of them who sought him not,
will hee hide himselfe form vs, if forsaking our sinnes wee
seeke him in spirit and truth? Let his mercies shewed to o|thers
be vnto vs as cordes of Loue to draw vs among the
rest,Hos. 11. 4. and like oyntments powred out, the sweet smell wherof
may delight vs to run after him: for that meeknesse which is
in thee O Lord Iesus, we wil follow thee, we haue heard that
thou despisedst not the poore sinner; thou abhorredst not
the penitent theefe; nor the sinfull woman that powred out

teares before thee; nor the Cananitish woman, that made
supplication to thee; nor the woman deprehended in adul|trie;
nor him that sae at the receipt of custome; thou abhor|redst
not the Disciple that denyed thee; yea, the persecu|ter
of thy Disciples thou receiuedst to mercy,Cant. 1. 3. In odore ho|rum
vnguentorum curremus post te, In the smell of these thy
sweet ointments wee will run after thee O Lord.
But wee are to marke that before the Apostle came to
this triumphing,The Apostle fought long be|fore he came to triumph. hee was long exercised with fighting; he
confesseth to the Corinthians that his preaching was a|mong
them in great feare and trembling,1. Cor. 2. 3. that in his perso|nall
conuersation hee was beaten and buffeted with an An|gell
of Sathan; that hee had terrours within and fightings
without: and what terrours are wee to thinke did trouble
him? out of doubt the sight of his sinnes, the greatnesse of
the iudgement to come did terrifie him, whereof we are war|ned,How can they triumph that haue not. fought nor re|sisted so much as to shedding of teares, farre lesse to the shedding of blood.
how wee must fight before wee triumph, and mourne
before the Lord comfort vs: if we cannot triumph with the
Apostle, it is because we haue not foughten with the Apo|stle:
for let be that we haue not yet resisted vnto the bloud,
how many among vs can say that they haue resisted vnto
the teares, that is, who striues with God as Iacob did with
prayers and teares to obtaine a blessing? Carelesse securitie
hath farre ouer-gone vs, and wee are become like those A|malekits,
who returning from the spoyle of Ziklag and sup|posing
they were past all danger,1. Sam. 30. 16. cast their armour from
them, and spread themselues, abroad into the fields to eate,
and drinke, and to sport themselues, when in the meane time
the deuouring sword vnlooked for came vpon them. It fa|reth
euen so with the multitude of this generation, they are
become so carelesse in the spirituall warfare, that as if there
were no more battels to be foughten, they walke without
the amour of God, and spread themselues abroad in the
fields of fleshly pleasures, and so not onely makes themselues
a pray to their deuouring enimie, but defrauds their soules
of that inward ioy arising of spirituall victory, which they

who continue in fighting findes at the end of euery battell.
Now to enter into the words.The tongue of the wicked is a fornace of fire wherein the godly are tryed The Apostle conioynes
these two interrogations together very conueniently, Who
will accuse? who will condemne? because howeuer there be
many forward enough to accuse vs, there is none who haue
power to condemne vs. It is not the Apostles meaning that
wee shall want accusations: for the world, Sathan, and our
owne conscience shall not cease to accuse vs. Laban searched
narrowly Iacobs stuffe,For sometime they accuse them publikely  in iudgeme~t. to see if hee could get any thing
wherewith to charge him, but more narrowly doe world|lings
search the words and deedes of the Christian, seeking
whereupon to accuse them, and where they can inde none,
yet vpon shadowes of euill they are bold to publish false
reports, or at least by priuate surmisings seekes to disgrace
them. Moses a man approued of God, yet accused as an v|surper:
Ieremie the Prophet, albeit he so loued his country
people, that in secret his soule mourned for their desolation
yet did they accuse him of treason, alledging that hee had
made defection to the king of Babell: Daniel a man belo|ued
of God, accused and condemned of Darius his coun|sellers,
as a rebell to the King: the Israelites who returned
from captiuitie accused by Tobie and Sanballat of sedition:
the Christians of the primitiue Church oppressed with hor|rible
slanders. The first weapon wherewith Sathan fights
against the Godly, is the tongues of the wicked: for hee
looseth their tongues o speake euill, before hee loose their
hands to doe euill to them:Aug. confes. lib. 10. therfore said Augustine, Lingua
impiorum est quotidiana fornax, the tongue of the wicked is
a daily fornace, wherein the Godly are tryed: let no man
thinke to serue God in a good conscience, but hee must be
purged in this ouen, ye are not of the world (said our Sauiour)
therefore it is that the world doth hate you,Ioh. 15. 19. and speake euill of
you.
As for their priuate surmisings they are of two sorts:
sometime they charge Gods children vvith euill vvhich they
haue done indeede but vvhereof they haue repented them,

and herein they are malitious,Sometime they speake euill of them priuately and that either maliciously charging them with sins they haue done, but haue repented. that the sinnes vvhich God
hath forgiuen they will not forget: but this should not pro|uoke
vs to impatience, seeing they blame vs for nothing for
which vve blame not our selues, vvhy shall vve be commo|ued?
let vs not thinke shame to say with the Apostle it is
true, I was such a one, but now I am receiued to mercy. I will
not so loue my selfe that I will hate him who reproues mee
for that which I haue reproued in my selfe, of vvhatsoeuer
mind he doe it,Aug. cont. lit. Petili. lib. 3. cap. 10. sed quantum ille accusat vitium meum, tan|tum
ego landabo medicum meum: but looke how farre hee
accuses my fault, so farre will I praise my phisition who
healed me.
Sometime againe their surmisings are most false,Or then falsely charging them with sinnes which they neuer did. they
charge vs vvith things vvhich vve neuer did; but these back|bitings
should be disdayned of vs like the barking of beasts:
hee who knowes with Iob that his witnesse is in heauen, and
can say with the Apostle, that hee hath a good conscience
vvithin him, what needes hee to care for the iudgement of
men vvithout him?Aug. epist. 6. Ital. viduae. Notitia nostri certior intus est, the surest
knowledge of our selues is vvithin vs. Neither are we to be
so base minded as to thinke that there is plus ponderis in alieno
conuitio,Amb. lib. 1. offic. cap. 6. quam in nostro testimonio? that there is more waight
in another mans calumnie, than in the testimonie of our own
conscience. Augustine being misreported of by Petilian gaue
an notable answere, for my selfe sayth he, I am not that which
hee hath called mee, if yee thinke that hee knowes me bet|ter
than I knovv my selfe, choose you which of vs you will
beleeue.
Let not therefore the detracting speaches of men inter|rupt
our peace,No speach of man can make vs any other thing then that which we are. remembring their tongues can make vs no
other thing than we are: it is not Ventilabrum areae dominicae,
the fanne of the floore of the Lord that can seperate the
chaffe from the Corne. Secondly, their euill speaking com|mends
vs to God,Mat. 5. 11. blessed are yee when men reuile you and
speake all manner euill of you for my sake, be glad and reioyce,
for great is your reward in heauen.Augustine. Qui volens detrahit famae

meae, nolens addit mercedi meae: he that with his will impaires
my name, against his will augments my reward. I haue spo|ken
the more of this purpose, partly because it is a common
craft of Sathans to oppresse good men with misreports,Ambrose. vt
qui conscientiae suae luce clarescunt alienis ruroribus sordidn|tur,
and partly because our weakenesse is easily ouercome
with this tentation. Seeing the Lord will haue vs to sustaine
the strife of tongues, let vs strengthen our selues, let vs so
walke through good report that wee be not puft vp, and
through euill report that we be not cast downe, but that by
weapons of righteousnesse on the right hand and on the left
we may ouercome.
Now as for Sathan he is stiled the accuser of the Saints
of God night and day;Sathan stiled a calumniator or accuser  why. sometime hee accuses God to man;
sometime man to God; and sometime man to himselfe.Reue. 12. 10 In
Paradise hee began and accused God, charging him with
enuie;He accuseth God vnto man and in the same trade of lying doth he still continue:
For sometime he lyes against the iustice of God, when hee
saith to the licentious liuer, albeit yee sinne yee shall not
dye, that so he may puffe him vp to presumption: sometime
he lyes against the mercy of God, as vvhen hee saith to the
vveake in faith, your sinne is greater than that God can for|giue
it, that so he may driue him to desperation: sometime
he lyes against Gods prouidence, as when hee saith to them
that are in necessitie, the Lord hath cast you off and will no
more prouide for you, that so hee may prouoke them to
put out their hand to wickednesse.
Secondly,Hee accuseth man vnto God he is a restlesse accuser of man vnto God, as
yee may see in the example of Iob: he heard the Lord com|mending
him yet he spared not to traduce him; when hee
could not gainesay his actions, hee gainsayd his intention
and affection, hee charged him to be a hireling and not a
sonne, a mercenarie worshipper, who serued God for his
gifts and not for himselfe, albeit after tryall he was found
a lyer. And herein we are to consider how faithlesse a tray|tour
Sathan is, for those same sinnes which man doth by

Sathans instigation, he is the first accuser of man for them
vnto God.A discouery of Sathans raite|rous dealing. Oh that man could remember that Sathan is
euer doing one of these three against him: first hee is a
Tempter of man to sinne; secondly when sinne is com|mitted
hee is an accuser of man vnto God for those same
sinnes which he tempted him to doe: and thirdly, hee is a
tormenter of man for them, vnlesse they be remoued by re|pentance.
But Iesus Christ our Lord is of a plaine contrary
disposition: first hee disswades vs from sinne, warning vs of
the danger, and then if of weakenesse wee sinne, hee offers
himselfe an aduocate for vs if wee repent:1 Ioh. 2. 1. These things my
babes I write to you that yee sinne not, but if any man sinne we
haue an aduocate with the Father, euen Iesus the iust. These
two compared lets vs see what a great difference there is be|tweene
them, that knowing the deceitfull malice of the di|uell,
we may learne to abhorre him; and the heartie vnfay|ned
affection of Iesus Christ toward vs, wee may loue and
follow him.
Thirdly,Hee accuseth man vnto him|selfe. Sathan accuses man vnto himselfe: he deceiues
the vvicked  beares them in hand that they are the sonnes
of God, and labours to perswade the godly that they are re|probates,
denying that they haue Faith or Repentance, or
any spiritual grace. There is nothing so true but Sathan dare
deny it: hee that durst call it in doubt to Christ himselfe
whether he were the sonne of God or no, will that shameles
lyar spare to doe it vnto others?Philip. 2. 12. But let vs worke out our
saluation in feare and trembling, and make sure our calling
by well doing, that we may haue within vs the infallible to|kens
of our election, and as for the rest let vs keepe this
ground; seeing the worke of our saluation is done by God,
in despite of Sathan; Sathans testimonie in it is not to be re|garded,
though hee would call vs as he did Paul and Sylas
the seruants of the liuing of God, yet are we not the better,
neither the worse, albeit hee pronounce vs to be such as are
abiect and cast away from the fauour of God.

And last, the children of God are accused of their owne
consciences: these are eyther such as proceede from suffici|ent
light, or from wrong information.Conscience ac|cuseth eyther vpon right or wrong infor|mation. If conscience accuse
vpon light which shee hath receiued out of the word of
God, her sentence is diuine, and wee are to regard it: if o|therwise
shee accuse vpon wrong information, it is the er|rour
of conscience, and wee are to remedie it by sending con|science
to seeke the warrant of her sentence out of the word
of God. It is very expedient that wee put a difference be|tweene
conscience and the errour of conscience:Conscience,  error of consci|ence to be di|stinguished. where con|science
discernes not according to the Law of the supreame
Iudge it cannot but erre, eyther in being ouer large, and
then shee pronounceth those things lawfull which are vn|lawfull,
or ouer strait, and so she declares those things vn|lawfull
which are lawfull: for if this be not obserued, wee
shall be disquieted while we hearken to the errours of con|science,
as if they were the iust and lawfull accusations of
conscience.
Sometime againe conscience presents to men sins which
they haue done many yeeres agoe,Why the Lord leaues remem|brance of a sin in the co~science after that it is pardoned. and whereof they haue
repented: for wee are to know that albeit the Lord after
repentance forgiue the guiltinesse of sinne, yet he will haue
the memorie thereof to remaine in that conseruing facultie
of conscience, called , that it may both serue to
humble vs for the euill wee haue done, as also to preserue
vs from sinne for the time to come. And sinne this manner
of way retained in the memory, I compare it to thornes 
bryers, which in the middest of a garden are hurtfull, and
hinder the grouth of good fruit, but being put in the hedge
are profitable to preserue them:Sin euill in the affection but good in the memory. so sinne as long as it is in
the affection is very pernitious; for then it chokes the seede
of the word of God in them, but being taken out of the af|fection
and set in the memory, is as a hedge to the soule, to
preserue it from wilde and raging beasts that would come
in and deuoure it: thus for our humiliation the Lord keepes
in vs a remembrance euen of those sinnes which hee hath

pardoned, but so that with the remembrance of the euill
which we haue done, our conscience doth also excuse and
comfort vs with the remembrance of our vnfained repen|tance
toward God.
And if otherwise the conscience accuse vs for those euill
deeds which wee haue done, and whereof wee haue not
repented,1 Cor. 11. 31 it is of Gods great mercy toward vs, who by
inward trouble wakens vs to iudge our selues now, that we
should not be iudged of the Lord in the world to come.
As this is the comfort of Gods chosen, so doth it point
vnto vs the contrary miserable estate of the reprobate,As no creature hath place to ac|cuse the godly, so by the con|trary all shall stand vp  ac|cuse the wicked.
for there is nothing in heauen and earth which shall not
stand vp against them to accuse them, the Lord himselfe
shall come neere them as a swift witnesse against them. O
miserable are they to whom the Lord is a Partie, a Iudge,
and a Witnesse:Malach. 3. 5. as our Sauiour said to the Iewes, Moses and
all the seruants of God shall be witnesses against them;Ioh. 5. 45. yea,
the dust of the feete of those who brought the glad tidings
of peace,Luke. 9. 5. shall witnesse against them;Iosh. 24. 27. the stones of the field
said Ioshua;Deut. 4. 26. the heauens and earth said Moses; their moth|eaten
garments said S. Iames;Iam. 5. 3. yea, they themselues said our
Sauiour,Math. 23. 3. shall witnesse against themselues: woe be vnto
them, they must be presented to iudgement, but shall haue
none eyther in heauen or earth to speake for them, nothing
without them, nothing within them, which shall not be a
witnesse against them: when they are iudged they shall be
condemned, and their owne conscience shall say, righteous is
the Lord and iust are his iudgements.
It is God that Iustifies. Of this ye may see cleerely, that
Iustification as the Apostle vseth it here, is a iudicial terme,
for he oppones it to accusation and condemnation: but lea|uing
that because wee marked it before, in the poynt of
Iustification, we will adde this more: that the Apostle brings
not the reason of his comfort from his owne innocencie,
but from Gods mercy;The argume~ts of our comfort are not brought from our inno|cency but gods mercy. he saith not, there is nothing in me
worthy to be accused or to be condemned, but his comfort

is, that whateuer it be, God hath pardoned it. This is it that
breedes vnquietnesse and perturbation in many weake con|sciences,
they seeke within themselues that which should
commend them to God, as if they could not be saued vn|lesse
they were perfect; this commeth of Sathans singular
subtiltie, who labours to creep in betweene vs and our war|rant,
as if our owne innocencie were the warrant of our sal|uation,
and not Gods mercy nor Christs merit. It is true, it
becomes vs for our greater comfort to nourish within our
selues the tokens of Grace, but to conclude, that because
they are weake, therefore wee cannot be saued, it is Sathans
sophistrie, with which wee should not suffer our soules to
be abused.


Verse 34.
Who shall condemne? it is Christ, which is
dead, yea or rather, which is risen againe, who is
also at the right hand of God, and maketh request also
for vs.
_THe Apostle insists in his perticular triumph
against sinne,The death, resurrection, ascention, and glorification of Christ assures vs of immunity from condem|nation. and hee demaunds now who shall
condemne? it may be, as wee heard there be
some bold to accuse; but is there any (saith the
Apostle) that hath power to condemne? none
at all; and that hee proues from the death, resurrection, ex|altation
and intercession of Christ: for as all these were
done for vs; so doe euery one of them render vnto vs the
sweete fruit of consolation. Of the comfort arising from
Christs death we haue spoken before.
The next is his resurrection,The great co~|fort we haue of Christs re|surrection. we haue comfort (saith the
Apostle) in his death, but much more comfort in his resur|rection:
therefore saith the Apostle, It is Christ who is dead,
or rather, who is risen againe, for if wee looke to Iesus dying
albeit in death hee shewed himselfe a powerfull Sauiour,
yet in his death his glory was greatly obscured vnder the

couering of mortalitie, which againe in his resurrection was
more clearely manifested: for hee was declared mightily
to be the sonne of God by his resurrection,Rom. 1. 4. and hath made
vs sure of the remission of our sinnes: for hee had not come
out of the prison of the graue, if hee had not payed the vt|termost
farthing of our debt.1. Cor. 15. 17 If Christ (saith the Apostle)
be not yet risen, then are we yet in our sinnes, thanks be to God
we may turne it to our comfort; Iesus is already risen, there|fore
wee are not in our sinnes.
As for his exaltation, the Apostle saith, hee sits at the
right hand of God:Of Christs ex|altation at the right hand of God. to speake properly, the Lord who is a
Spirit hath neyther right hand nor left, but by these bor|rowed
speaches the Lord who dwelleth in light inaccessible,
to whom wee cannot ascend by our selues, that wee should
know him, descends vnto vs, and speakes of his vnspeake|able
Maiestie vnto vs, in such manner as wee are best able
to conceiue it: so that when eyes, and eares, and hands are
ascribed to the Lord, wee are to thinke these hee hath per
effectum non per naturam. And this may rebuke that bolde
blasphemie of the Papists, who presume to paint the incom|prehensible
Maiestie of God, vnder the similitude of an
aged and worne creature,Papists blasphe|mous who set out the maiesty of God in the similitude of a corruptible man. expresly contrary to Gods com|maundement.
In that day (saith the Lord) that I spake vnto
thee out of the mountaine, thou heardest a voyce, but saw no I|mage,Deut. 4. 15.
beware therefore thou make none: and in many places
is the same presumption condemned by the Prophets.
Where if they excuse themselues that they paint the Lord
in such a similitude as hee appeared vnto Daniell,Their fact not warranded by any apparition of the diuine maiestie in the shape of man. and no
otherway. I answere, first this is false, for sometime (which
is horrible to speake) they paint him in the shape of an hu|mane
body hauing three heads; but albeit it were true, which
they say, yet doth it not excuse them: for the Lords extra|ordinary
facts are not to bee vsed as warrants to breake his
ordinary and eternall Commaundements; neyther doth it
any more excuse them, than that deed of the Lord, whereby
he caused the Israelits to take from the Egiptians their siluer,

gold, and Iewels which they neuer rendred, can excuse them
that doe borrow, steale, and robbe from others but neuer
restore.
But howeuer they excuse themselues, as long as the word
of the Apostle stands true, they shall not rubbe off them
the blot of idolatry:They are con|uinced by the Apostle of I|dolatry. they turne the glory of the incorrup|tible
God into the similitude of a corruptible man.Heb. 1. 11. The
Maiestie of God is eternall, the heauens waxe olde, but he
remaines the same; why then doe they paint him vnder the
similitude of a worne creature, weakned by the length of
dayes? The Iesuites of Rhemes conuinced of darknesse, are
ashamed of the light that shines in this place of Scripture,
and passe by it without an answer, they excuse the making
of the Image of Christ, and of his Saints, but speak not one
word to defend that grosse Idolatry, whereby they turne
the glory of the inuisible God into the image of a corrupti|ble
man. It had ben good for them they had beene as dumbe
in the defence of the rest of their abhominations, as they
are in this.
This speach therefore to sit at the right hand of God
is a borrowed speach, the Metaphor being taken from
Kings, who vse to set on their right hand those whom they
honour most,The sitting of Christ at Gods right hand im|ports his high honour and dignitie. as Salomon did his mother Bathsheba: and
so the phrase will import that high honour and dignitie,
whereunto Christ Iesus as man is exalted,1. Kin. 2. 19. being crowned
with glory both aboue Angels and men.
This right hand of God wherat Christ sits is expounded
by other places of Scripture, to bee the high and hea|uenly
places: which serueth to improue that paralogisme
of the Vbiquitaries,Errour of Vbi|quitaries im|proued. who will haue Christs naturall body
to be in euery place, because the right hand of God is in e|uery
place.Heb. 1. 3. It is true indeed, Christ sits at the right hand of
God,Eph. 1. 20. but so that hee sits in the high, and heauenly places.
The right hand of God, that is, the power and glory of
God stretches throughout the whole world, but wee are
plainly taught that the place of the residence of Christ Iesus

the man is in the heauenly places, and not in earthly places,
in the high places to which hee is ascended, and not in the
low places in which we soiourne:Act. 3. 21. for the heauens must con|tayne
him, vntill the day of refreshment come.
And makes request also for vs.Christ makes request for vs in heauen. Christ our Lord hath en|tred
into heauen not to enioy for himselfe a blessed life one|ly,
but to appeare in the presence of God for vs. As the high
Priest when he entred into the most holy place, had grauen
in stones vpon his breast the names of the twelue tribes of
Israell: so the Lord Iesus presents to his father the names
of all his elect, that by the merit of his death hee may pro|cure
mercy vnto them.
Here againe wee are taught that Iesus Christ is descry|bed
to vs in holy Scripture as our mediatour of intercession,No Mediator of intercession but Iesus Christ.
and that there is no other beside him recommended vnto vs.
In all the old testament no prayer is made to Henoch, Moses,
nor Eliah, who ended their dayes not after the common
course of men: no prayer to Abraham, albeit he was the
Father of the faithfull: yea no prayer to Cherubin nor Se|raphin;
though now the Apostate Church of Rome haue
made as many aduocates for vs in heauen, as there are Saints
departed, and hath framed perticular prayers vnto them,
and which is more ridiculous, hath parted among them the
patrocinie of sundry sorts of sicknesse and diseases.
It is true indeed that the Saints which are departed haue
not as yet all their desires fulfilled,Saints depar|ted haue their owne desires which they craue to be ful|filled, but knowes not our necessities. and shall not be perfe|cted
without vs: wherefore also it is that they long for the
full gathering together of the Saints, and for the restitution
of their bodyes, and for the last day of iudgement: but that
they know the perticular troubles of Gods children, our
greatest troubles being inward tentations and wrestlings of
conscience, neither knowne to man nor Angell but onely to
God, who is the searcher of the heart: or that we can in faith
vse them as mediators vnto God for vs, wee iustly deny it.
Where if they take them vnto their common refuge, that
ther is but one mediator of redemption, but many mediators

of intercession: to this wee answere that in the same place
wherin the Apostle saith there is one mediator betweene God
and man,1 Tim. 2. 5. the subiect whereof hee entreats is Prayer; so that
euen in prayer he will haue vs to acknowledge no mediator
of intercession but Iesus Christ.
And beside this Augustine doth so define a mediator of
intercession, that it can be competent to none but to Iesus
Christ.A Mediator of intercession as he is defined by Augustine is competent to none but christ. Aug. con. epis Par. l. 2. c. 8. It is commanded sayth he that euery Christian pray
to God for another: Pro quo autem nullus interpellat, sed ipse
pro omnibus, hic vnus verus mediator est, but he who requests
for all, and for whom none requests is the onely one true
Mediator.
And where againe they alledge that the Saints of God in
heauen are not ignorant of things done vpon earth,Three manner of wayes are things knowne 1 by sense: 2 by report of creatures: 3 by reuelation from God. we are to
know that things are knowne three manner of wayes: first
by hearing and seeing: Secondly, by reflex, as by looking
in a glasse those things are made knowne to vs which are
behind our backes: and thirdly by report. This second and
third way say they, there is no doubt but Saints that are in
heauen know those things which are done vpon earth, but
both of these are false, for if they say they know our estate
by report of Angels, or such as are departed this life, how
can that be? seeing wee know that when Hanna prayed in
the presence of Eli,None of these waies do saints departed know our miseries. yet hee knew not her trouble, yea those
who liue in one familie are not priuie to the tentations of o|thers,
that which they knew not in their life, how shalt thou
make them to know it when they are dead?
If againe they say that they haue it by reuelation from
God, then I pray you consider how that one errour of Pa|pistrie
dashes against an other, for sometime in the same
controuersie they say, that as in earthly courts we must first
communicate our petitions to those who must be our me|diators
to the King: now if it be so that they haue no in|telligence
of our estate but such as they receiue from God,
wherefore shall wee pray to them to commend our cause
vnto God who knowes it better than they,  pities it more

than they: as Augustine prettily obserues out of that Pa|rable
proponed by our Sauiour, wherein he who knocked
at midnight to seeke bread from his neighbour, found the
whole familie a sleepe, onely the Master of the house an|swered,
opened, and gaue him that which he craued. Nul|lus
de ianitoribus respondit,Aug. de temp serm. 171. quia omnes tenuerat sommus, non
Angeli, non Archangeli, non Prophetae, non Ministri. None
of the Porters answered, because they were all asleepe, nei|ther
Angels, nor Archangels, nor Prophets, not Seruants
made any answere: but O Lord albeit so it be, answere thou
me,Psal. 121. 4. for at thee I knocke, thou art the doore, licet puri tui
dormiant, tu non dormis, qui custodis Israel, albeit thy chil|dren
sleepe, yet thou that keepes Israell sleepes not.
But leauing them let vs pray to the Lord in whom wee
beleeue:An exhortatio~ to content vs with Christs mediation. let vs vse the mediation of Christ, whom S. Iohn
recommends to vs an aduocate with the Father, whom Saint
Paul calles in this place our intercessor,Ioh. 2. 1. and in that to Ti|mothie,1 Tim. 2. 5.
our onely one Mediator. For knowledge, his eyes are
like flaming fire,Zach. 4. 10. and his seauen eyes goe through the earth: for
compassion, hee came into the earth to seeke vs when wee
knew him not, and hee gaue his life for vs that wee might
liue: he speaks perpetually to his Father for vs by the me|rit
of his death, and cryes to vs by himselfe in his word,
Come to me all you that are weary and laden,Mat. 11. 28. and I will re|fresh
you. Let the Papist say what he will, to any other than
Christ, or any other before Christ will I neuer goe, so long
he as cryes Come vnto me.



Verse 35.
Who shall seperate vs from the loue of Christ?
shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine,
or nakednesse, or perill, or sword?
_WEe haue heard the Apostles perticular triumph
against sinne: now followes his perticular tri|umph
against the Crosse:His perticular triumph a|gainst the crosse: no crosse can cut vs off from the loue of God. he glories not in this
that Christians are without a Crosse, yea rather
he shewes it is the lot of Gods children to be
exercised with all sorts of crosses; but herein hee reioyces,
that no crosse can seperate vs from the loue of God. In this
quarrell the Apostle prouokes all enimies whatsoeuer, cor|porall
or spirituall, present or to come; and against them all
he takes vp the triumph in his owne name, and in the name
of all the children of God: Neuerthelesse in all these things
we are more then conquerours through him that loued vs.Verse. 37.
By the loue of Christ we are to vnderstand here,Our loue to God cannot fully nor final|ly be put out by any trouble, nor yet the sense of his loue to vs. that loue
wherwith God in Christ hath loued vs, for so he expounds
it himselfe, through him that loued vs. It is true also that the
sense of our loue to God once shed abroad in our harts by
the holy ghost, can neuer fully nor finally be taken from vs;
I say fully and finally because of those inward tentations
wherewith Gods children are so exercised, that the sense of
that loue in them is greatly diminished: but in all those spi|rituall
desertions  oppressions Faith ouercomes at length,
and lets vs see the face of God our mercifull father shining
toward vs in Christ,2 Cor. 4. 9. we may be cast downe but we cannot
perish; if Peter be ready to sincke Iesus Christ shall suc|cour
him.
But as I said,But here the Apostle vnder|stands the loue of God to vs which can ne|uer be altred. by the Loue of God I vnderstand that loue
which hee hath borne toward vs: from this most constant
loue it comes to passe, that wee who are weake and silly
creatures cannot be ouercome, notwithstanding the multi|tude
of mightie enimies that are against vs. If our saluation
were in our owne custodie, and wee stoode by our owne

strength, the smallest tentation would ouercome vs; our feet
are ready to slide, and then our feeble hands lets goe that
hold of mercy, which once wee had gotten; but howsoeuer
we loose our hold, the Lord holds it fast for vs: wee may
change, but hee remaines the same; because the Lord hath
loued vs,Iohn. 13. 1. and whom once he loueth, he loueth to the ende:
therefore is it that it cannot be but well with vs; hee loued
vs before wee were, yea, before the world was made. If we
search the beginning of Gods Loue towards vs, wee may
runne vp in our thought to the beginning of the world, but
cannot attaine to the beginning of this Loue,Psal. 90. 2. before the
mountaines were made, and thou hadst formed the world, euen
from euerlasting to euerlasting thou art our God.
Likewise we are taught here that the end vvhich Sathan
proposeth to himselfe in all tentations,The end of all Sathans tenta|tions is to sepe|rate vs from the loue of God. is to seperate vs from
the loue of God, vvhich notwithstanding he shall neuer ef|fectuate.
There is a couenant knit vp betweene God and
man, the band whereof is Iesus Christ, this Couenant Sa|than
doth what he can to dissolue it, by alluring vs to sinne,
and accusing vs to God: on Gods part he cannot preuaile,
on our part he assaults continually, but in vaine also, because
the Lord vvho hath made a couenant with vs, keepes vs also
vvith him, so that though vvee be tempted vve cannot be
ouercome. This is euident in Iobs tentations, it was neyther
the affliction of his body, the losse of his children, nor goods
which Sathan craued so much as to empty his heart of the
loue of God and make him to blaspheme.
If vve remembred this it vvould make vs endeauour to
possesse our soules in patience in all our troubles,If we remem|bred this, it would make vs strong in all tentations. for so oft
as those things vvhich vve loue are seperate from vs, Sa|thans
end is to seperate vs from our God, vvhom vve should
loue aboue all things. And in very deed this is a proper mark
of the Children of God, that hovveuer their outvvard estate
change, their heart is neuer changed from the loue of God;
they are Godly in prosperitie, but more Godly in aduersitie,
the more they are troubled the neerer they draw vnto the

Lord: as fire in not quenched with wind but made greater,
so the loue of God waxeth stronger in the hearts of Gods
children by tribulation; whereas the wicked not rooted in
Iesus Christ,Psal. 1. 4. are like vnto chaffe and the dust of the earth,
carryed away with euery winde; there is no pleasure so
small, nor profite so vaine which they preferre not before
God.
Now before the Apostle subioynes the answere,Christians are subiect to many crosses. he ma|keth
an enumeration of some perticular crosses, and de|maunds
if they will doe it: these crosses do eyther concerne
our bodies, our goods, our dwellings, or our mindes; for we
are not to thinke here that the Apostle beates the ayre, tri|umphing
against such enimies as we haue not. No, we haue
both crosses of body and of minde, which wee must pre|pare
our selues to suffer; so vsing all the helpes of this our
mortall life, as being content for the loue of God to want
them, for this is the tryall of true religion, we must not looke
to our houses,Our dwelling on earth is not the place of our rest, as the Iews thought; farre lesse the place of our glory as Nabuchadne|zer thought. as Nabuchadnezer did to his pallace of Babell,
as a place of his glory, but remember that which Micah
said to the Iewes, This is not the place of your rest: and what|soeuer
thing else wee vse for maintenance of this mortall
life,Micah. 2. 10 let vs so vse them,1. Cor. 7. 31. as if we vsed them not, that wee be
not found when it comes to the tryall louers of them more
then louers of God.2. Tim. 3. 4. Blessed is the man who loues nothing
otherwise but in God, Nam solus is nihil charum amittit, cui
omnia chara sunt in eo qui non amittitur.
Againe perceiue here in this enumeration,Gods indul|gence toward vs appeares in that he hath not laid on vs the greatest crosses. a gradation of
seauen steppes, by which the Apostle ascends: It is a great
thing to be in trouble, but to be troubled, and in anguish
also is yet greater, and for him that is in anguish to be bani|shed,
in banishment to sustaine hunger and nakednesse, and
with these to be in continuall perill, and last of all to dye by
the sword, euery one of these last is greater then the for|mer,
yet all of them (saith the Apostle) are not able to se|perate
vs from the loue of Christ. Our warning is here that
when we see vnto how many crosses Christians are subiect,

and how few of them God hath laid vpon vs, wee should
acknowledge the Lords fatherly indulgence toward vs, who
regarding our weakenesse hath hitherto dealt tenderly with
vs. And againe it should prepare vs for greater afflictions,
so long as wee haue not resisted to the bloud,Heb. 12. 4. nor laide
downe our liues for Iesus, we should remember that greater
battailes than any which as yet we haue foughten are before
vs, wherein we must fight, if it please the Lord to enter vs
into them.
Shall tribulation? Now hee commeth to the perticular
enumeration. The first is tribulation: the vvord ,
vvhich the Apostle vseth signifieth a pressing out, from the
effect vvhich it vvorketh in the godly,The afflictions of the Godly and wicked dif|fer in nature. to vvit, that it pres|seth
out and maketh manifest that grace of God which be|fore
vvas latent in them, like as in the vvicked it presseth out
their vile and filthy corruption, which before vvas secret:
for the afflictions of the godly and of the vvicked differs in
nature and in effects: the vvicked in suffering communica|teth
vvith the curse of Adam, cursed is the earth for thy sake,
in sorrow shalt thou eate of it all the dayes of thy life: but the
Godly in their suffering communicates with the Crosse of
Christ.For the one in suffering com|municates with the curse of A|dam, the other with the crosse of Christ.
They differ also in effects,They differ al|so in effects: for trouble makes the one to blesse, the o|ther to blas|pheme. for the godly man being pres|sed
by trouble, brings out the fruite of praise and thanks|giuing
vvith patience: Sicut aromata odorem, non nisi cum
accenduntur expandunt, As sweet spices spreads not abroad
their smell, till they be burnt or beaten; or as a graine of
mustard seede not stamped seemes to be soft, vvhere other|wise
being brayed,Greg. Moral. in Iob. lib. 2. it renders out a strong sauour: so the
children of God who otherwise seeme to be weake and void
of spirituall strength, when they are beaten by affliction,
sends out a sweete smelling sauour of rich and manifold
graces.Affliction is Gods wine-presse. And therefore I call affliction the wine-presse of
God the great Husband-man, by which hee so presses the
berryes of the fruitfull trees of his owne vine-yard, that
out of their iuyce hee may glorifie himselfe and comfort

others, but the wicked are like vnto a vile stinking puddle,
which the more it is stirred the worse it smelleth: for when
they are troubled they send out blasphemie, rayling, mur|muring,
and in their impatiencie foome out their owne
shame.
 The second is Anguish.The godly are not onely trou|bled but oft|times straited in trouble. The word he vseth is ,
which properly signifieth straitnesse of place, wherein a
man is so pinched, that hee is not able to turne him. Now
from the body it is translated to the minde, to expresse the
straitnesse of the afflictions of the children of God, out of
which ofttimes they the~selues can see no passage: that which
Dauid said to Ionathan,1. Sam. 20. 3 A the Lord liueth there is but one
steppe betweene me and death, so fareth it many a time with
the Children of God, but the Lord commeth in with vn|looked
for deliuerance in their most desperate distresse,
which not onely relieueth them for the present, but doth
confirme them for the time to come.2. Cor. 1. 9. 10. Wee receiued (saith
the Apostle) the sentence of death in our selues, because wee
should not trust in our selues, but in God who raiseth the dead,
who deliuered vs from so great a death, and doth deliuer vs, in
whom we trust that he will yet deliuer vs.
 The third is Persecution. The word , signifieth
that sort of affliction, by which the Children of God are
persecuted and chased from one place to another:They are per|secuted  cha|sed from place to place. the
world hath neuer thought them worthy of a roome among
them, and therefore haue they beene forced to liue in caues,
and dennes, and wildernesses: but our comfort is, that the
Lord hath alwayes shewed himselfe most familiar with his
Children,God most fa|miliar with his children, when they are bani|shed by men. when the world hath been most hard vnto them,
Iacob is banished from his fathers house by the crueltie of
Esau, and his heauenly Father receiued him into his house,
comforting him by such a familiar reuelation of his pre|sence,
as hee neuer had felt before so long as hee dwelt at
home: and Iohn being banished by Domitian into Path|mos,
found also the Lord reueiling himselfe vnto him more
familiarly than he had done before. What part of the world

is there, wherein Tyrants can banish the Children of God
from the acts of their Comforter? they know that in their
owne house they are strangers, as Abraham was in Cana|an
the Land of his inheritance, and therefore can be the
better content as strangers to liue in any other part of the
world. Basil being threatned by Modestus the Deputie of
the Emperour with banishment,Nazian de vita Basil. Nihil (inquit) horum quae
dixisti timeo, I feare none of these things whereof thou hast
spoken, nihil possidens ab exilij metu liber sum, vnam hominu~
cognoscens esse patriam Paradisum, Omnem autem terram com|mune
aspicimus naturae exilium, possessing nothing I am free
from the feare of banishment, knowing that Paradise is the
onely country of men, and the whole earth is a common
place of banishment to vs all.
The fourth is Famine,Famine is one of Gods ordi|narie plagues, and with it also the godly are tryed. which of it own nature is one of the 
plagues of God, but lesse than his other ordinary plagues of
the sword,  pestilence: therfore the Lord who best knows
the waight of his owne rods, accounts three dayes of pesti|lence,
three moneths of the sword, and three yeeres of fa|mine
equiualent. Many wayes hath the Lord by which hee
bringeth famine vpon a people: for sometime he maketh
the Heauen aboue as brasse,Leuit. 26. 19 and the earth beneath as yron,
so that albeit men labour and sow, yet they receiue no en|crease;Deu. 11. 14.
sometime againe he giues in dew season the first and
latter raine, so that the earth renders abundance, but the
Lord by blasting-winds, or by the Caterpiller, Canker|worme,
and Grasse-hopper doth consume them, who com|meth
out as exacters and officers sent from God to poind
men in their goods,Miserable are they whose gaine is to en|crease Famine, they are Cater|pillers in the Land. because with them they would not ho|nour
the Lord: which I marke by the way, that those vn|naturall
men who doe what they can to encrease famine in
the Land, may know they are but Caterpillers, scourges, and
roddes of the wrath of God, or as Basil calleth them Mer|catores
humanarum calumnitatum,Basil. ser. 1. in Auar. making their priuate gain
a common calamitie, and vsing that as a benefite to them|selues,
which God hath threatned as a plague to the people:

assuredly vnlesse they repent the Lord shall cast them at
length into the fire, as the roddes of his wrath.
But we are to know that famine,The lord who changed the Serpent into a flourishing rod hath changed cursed famine into a blessed crosse to his children. which in the owne na|ture
is a curse and plague of God, to the godly is changed:
the Lord who made the bitter waters of Marah sweet, and
turned a biting serpent into a florishing rod, hath changed
the nature of all those euils which sinne hath brought vpon
vs, now they worke for our good, and are become like
Waspes wanting stings, profitable to waken vs and exercise
our faith, but not able to seperate vs from the loue of God.
Among those famine is a great tentation, Nature being im|patient
of the want of necessaries; and therefore Sathan who
picks out the time and place of tentations as may be most
for his vantage, tempted our blessed Sauiour when hee be|gan
to waxe hungry.Mat. 4. 3. It is a rare grace in want to praise the
Lord and trust in his fatherly prouidence. Salomon neuer
felt it, yet hee knew it was a rare tentation, therefore hee
praied that the Lord would neither giue him pouertie nor
riches,Pro. 30. 8. least the one make him full, and cause him deny God,
and the other should cause him to steale, and take the name
of God in vaine: yet no extremitie of this tentation can se|perate
them from the loue of God, for either in their grea|test
necessities the Lord meruailously prouides for them, or
then strengthens them with patience and inward comfort to
sustaine it.
For sometime the earth hath beene as iron,How the Lord prouides in fa|mine for his children. but the hea|uens
hath ministred food to Gods people; as in that barren
wildernesse wherein Israell soiourned, the earth yeelded no
fruit, but the heauens rayned downe Manna and Quailes:
and sometime the heauens haue beene as brasse, yet in the
earth hath the Lord prouided nourishment, as he did by the
Rauens and the Widdow of Sarepta for Eliah: and if other|wise
it please the Lord by famine to inflict death vpon his
children, then he strengthens their spirits with the bread of
life, and comforts their hearts with hid Manna, so that they
can say to worldlings as our Sauiour said to his Disciples,

I haue bread to eate that yee know not of:Iohn. 4. 32. and so no famine
can seperate them from the loue of God.
Nakednesse.Christians try|ed also with Nakednesse. This is also a great tentation, partly for the 
shame, and partly for the decay of naturall life, which fol|lowes
it. Before the Iewes crucified Christ they striped him
naked of his garments. Basile makes mention of fortie Mar|tyres
who being striped naked were put foorth in the night
to be pined with cold, and afterward burnt with fire in the
day. Of these it is euident that nakednesse is one of those
tentations whereby Sathan seekes to trouble our faith and
patience: but he who hath put on the Lord Iesus for a gar|ment,
neither shame nor losse of naturall life procured by
nakednesse, can seperate him from the Loue of God.
Where we may perceiue how different the dispositions
of the Christian and the worldling are.The begged glory of world+lings is in their apparell. The men of this
world esteemes nakednesse their shame, and places a great
part of their glory in gorgeous garments; and no meruaile,
quia d proprio non habent decorem,Bern. in cant. serm. 41. necesse est vt aliunde men|dicent:
for hauing no glory of their owne they must bor|row
glory from others. From the Beasts of the earth they
borrow skins  wool; from the Fowles of heauen they bor|row
feathers; from the Wormes they borrow silk; from the
Earth siluer  gold; from the Waters pearles: and of these
doth man make vp his begged glory; whose glory in the
beginning was to be clad in the image of God: but what is
it?Ber. ad Soph. Virg. epi. 113 decor qui cum veste induitur,  cum veste deponitur, vestis
est non vestiti: that beautie which is put on and put off with
the garment, is not the beautie of the person, but of the
garment.
Yet are these but licitae quodammodo insaniae,Vnder pre|tence of hiding their nakednes they shew forth their Nakednesse. if they be
compared with the madnesse of others who alter by arti|fice
the shape and colour of the countenance which God
hath giuen them. Manus deo inferunt cum illud quod forma|uit
reformare conantur: for they put hands as it were into
God,Cypri. trac. 2. de habi. virg. while they prease to reforme that which God hath
formed. Nescientes quia opus dei est omne quod nascitur, diabeli

quod mutatur. I know they excuse their fact with the coue|rings
of comelinesse and necessitie,Cyril. catch. 4 but praetextu tegendae tur|pitudinis
in maiorem turpitudinem incidunt, for worldlings
are neuer so naked as when they are best apparelled. As
for men truely godly they will thinke shame of wickednes
but not of nakednesse:Nazian. sent. improbum vocarite pudeat non paupe|rem
aut ignobilem: blinde Egiptians may account sheepe
keepers abhomination, but true Israelits will thinke shame
to be prophane, but no shame to be poore: those godly ones
in the wildernesse clad with sheepes skins,Heb. 11. 37. and goates skins,
were more honourable in the eyes of God,Act. 12. 21. than Herod in
his royall robe of shining siluer, glancing the more brightly
by the shining of the Sun vpon it, if we will credit Iosephus.
But what of all this? our vnwillingnesse to want superstuitie
of apparell, argues that we are euill prepared to endure na|kednesse
for Christs sake.
Againe, we learne here that seeing nakednesse is one of
those crosses whereby the Lord tryes the faith and patience
of his children, and that then it is time for vs to endure a
crosse when God layes it vpon vs,Crosses should not be assumed by our selues but patiently borne when God layes them on. it cannot be good reli|gion
to impone it to our selues, where God layes it not vp|on
vs. It is a hard thing to keepe mediocritie, not to be ei|ther
too remisse in religion, or too superstitious. Wil-wor|ship
what euer shew of godlines it hath in the eyes of men,
is but abhominable idolatry in the eyes of God; and we are
not to place true religion in those things which he hath not
required: the false Prophets ware a rough garment, but it
was to deceiue:False Prophets weares rough garments to deceiue, so they did of old, and so they doe stil. the Priests of Baal spared not to lance
their owne flesh, but it is reiected by God as blinde zeale:
to walke bare footed, or weare a garment of haire without
linnen or wooll next the skinne: to carry on our head a
Franciscanes hood, and at last to be buried in it: If these
things haue in them such holinesse as they pretend, is it not
a meruaile their holy Father the Pope is not careful to make
himselfe more holy, by changing his triple Crowne with a
Franciscanes hood? or that his Cardinals are so inconsiderate

as to redeeme by so excessiue prices a Cardinals hat, the
haire garment being better cheape, and much more merito|rious
of eternall life?
Perills.The Christian in euery place subiect to perils. The life of a Christian is full of perils, euery 
place vnto him is a palaestra: in the sea, in the land, in the
citie, in the wildernesse, goe where he will hee shall encoun|ter
with perils. These are so many probations of our Faith
and Patience,2 Cor. 11. 26 of Gods truth and prouidence. Our preser|uation
depends on our protector, euen the Watch-man of
Israell who neither slumbers nor sleepes.Comfort for the Christian in all perils. As a Father hath
compassion on his children, so hath the Lord on them who
feare him: and wee know that a naturall father doth neuer
looke more pittifully vpon his childe, than when hee sees
him in greatest danger, and shall we expect lesse kindnesse
from our heauenly Father? The men of this world when
they send out their seruants in commission, goes not with
them, themselues knowes not their danger, and are not able
to preserue them, but the Lord our God when he sends out
his seruants foresees the perill  goes with them to preserue
them:Esay. 43. 2. Feare not, for when thou passest through the water I
will be with thee, and through the flouds, that they doe not ouer|flow
thee. The more perils we fall into the more experience
haue wee of Gods louing preseruing vs; for the which wee
may say, perils may well make vs grow in the sense of the
loue of God, but cannot seperate vs from him.
Sword. This is the last, and by it the Apostle expresses 
any kinde of violent death;The Christian subiect also to violent death. for vnto these also the seruants
of God and his best beloued Children haue beene subiect
euer from the beginning. The Apostle gloryes that no kind
of death can seperate vs from Christ; yea as he saith in an|other
place,Dan. 3. 25. it conioynes vs more neerely vnto him, as Nebu|chadnezzans
fire loosed the bonds of the three children, but
hurt not their bodyes: so death inflicted by man may loose
our bodily bonds, but cannot hurt our soules. Non sunt ti|menda
spiritui quae fiunt in carne, quae extra nos est quasi vesti|mentum:
let not our spirit feare those things which are done

in the flesh, which is as a garment without vs. Thus we see
how no kinde of crosse can seperate vs from the loue of
God.


Verse 36.
As it is written, for thy sake are we killed
all the day long, wee are counted as sheepe for the
slaughter.
_THe Nature of man doth greatly abhorre the
crosse,That the chri|stian is subiect to these crosses he proues by a testimonie of holy scripture. and therefore the Apostle here is the
more aboundant in furnishing vs with com|forts
against it, glorying in this that no crosse
can seperate vs from Christ; a comfort excee|ding
great indeed: for seeing we know that the Lords loue
towards vs in vnchangeable, hauing his fauour which is bet|ter
than life, what other losse should wee regard or make
mone for? Now because hee hath made an enumeration of
sundry sorts of crosses, hee proues here by a testimonie of
scripture, that it is the lot of Gods children to be subiect vnto
them; for seeing they are not exempted from the greatest
which is to be slaine by the sword, why shall wee promise
to our selues any immunitie from the smallest.
The testimonie is taken out of the 44. Psalme,Worshippers of God howso|euer disioyned in time or place yet are of one communion. wherein
the Church of God being heauily afflicted, as some thinkes
vnder Antiochus, complayned to God of her heauie trou|ble,
that albeit they had not fallen away from the pure wor|ship
of his name, nor lifted vp their hands to a strange God,
yet they were counted as sheepe for the slaughter:Psal. 44. 22. and this
testimonie the Apostle applyes to the estate of the Church
in his time, wherein the Apostle wil teach vs that howsoeuer
the true worshippers of God liue in sundry times and ages,
yet they are of one communion, maintayning all one cause:
therefore the Apostle vseth that which is spoken of the
afflicted Church of the Iewes, as competent to afflicted
Christians.

As it is written.A pleasant har|monie among the writers of holy Scripture. Albeit the Apostles had their immedi|ate
calling from God, and spake and wrote nothing of pri|uate
motion, but by diuine inspiration, yet is it their custome
to confirme their doctrine by testimonies of the Prophets.
This harmonie among the writers of holy Scripture is no
small confirmation of our Faith, that they who neuer saw
one another in the face, yet all together agrees to breath out
one truth.Ezech. 1. 11 As the Cherubines stretch their wings one to an|other,
so the Prophets and Apostles reach their testimonies
one to another:Luke. 5. 7. and as the Mariners in Peters ship hauing
a greater draught than they were able to haile in, beckned
to their companions to help them: so doe the Apostles call
on the Prophets, and require their helpe for confirmation
of the truth of God, that the more may be conuerted by
them.Euery Ecclesi|astique teacher is bound to confirme his doctrine by Scripture. And their fact stands for a rule to teach vs that what|euer
calling men pretend, they should confirme their do|ctrine
by that which is written: a necessary ground to be
holden in these dayes, wherein the name of the Church is
abused to impugne the truth of the Church. The Apostles
after the example of their Maister confirmed their doctrine
by scripture.Acts. 17. 11. Saint Paul was content that the Beraeans should
try his doctrine by the Scripture: what pertnesse then is it
that the doctors of the Romish Church challenge to them|selues
this singular exemption, as not to be iudged by the
word: as though they themselues and not that which is writ|ten
should be the warrant of their doctrine, and all men were
bound to beleeue them fide implicita.
Againe,No booke be|tweene Mala|chie and Mat|thew to be re|ceiued for Ca|nonicall Scrip|ture. we are to marke here how that one place of holy
scripture doth interpret and confirme another. Moses layes
a ground to the Prophets, the Prophets expounds them
and deliuers them clearer to the Apostles, the Apostles
builds vpon them a plaine and perfect doctrine for the edifi|cation
of Christs misticall body. The two Testaments are
as the two lippes of the mouth of God, by which hee hath
breathed out to vs his minde concerning his worship and
our saluation. And it is to be marked that out of these bookes

which the primitiue Church of old,  the reformed Church
now, hath esteemed Apochrypha, neyther Iesus our Lord,
nor any of his Apostles haue brought out any testimonie
for confirmation of doctrine, and therefore those Bookes
interiected betweene Malachie and Matthew are to be re|iected
as an vncouth breath. Malachie endeth the old Te|stament,Mal. 3. 1.
with a promise of the comming of the Angell:
euen the new Eliah, who should goe before the face of our
Lord to prepare his way, Iohn the Baptist, and Matthew
beginneth the New Testament, with a narration of the ac|complishment
of that Prophecie; but betweene these two
the holy Ghost employed no pene-man of the holy O|racles.
For thy sake.Three things obseruedin this testimonie. In the testimonie wee haue three things:
first, the greatnesse of the affliction of a Christian, when
hee saith, we are slaine, subiect not onely to smaller crosses
but to the greatest: Secondly, the continuance of their af|flictions,
All the day long, that is, not in one age, but in all
ages of the world hath it beene our lot: thirdly, the cause of
their suffering, for thy sake.
It is necessary for our comfort that wee marke the foun|taine,The causes for which God sends affliction should bee marked.
and from whence affliction proceedes to the Godly,
for the ignorance thereof makes many to erre with the
friends of Iob, and iudge wrong of the godly, as if they were
stricken alway for their sinnes, when indeed they are not:
wee are therefore to know that sometime affliction comes
to the Godly for sinne past; sometime for sinne to come;
sometime neyther for sinne past, nor sinne to come, but that
the workes of God may be made manifest.
The first way afflictions to them whom the Lord lo|ueth
are medicinall restoratiues,Afflictions laid on for sin past are medicinall restoratiues. by which they are wake|ned
to recouer their health by repentance for those sinnes
through which they haue become spiritually diseased: for
howsoeuer the Lord giue loose reines to the children of
wrath,Psal. 81. 12. and deliuers them vp to their owne hearts desire,Hos. 2. 6. yet
will he hedge in with thrones the wayes of those whom he

purposeth to saue, and will waken them by some sharp rod
or other, when he feeth them sleeping in securitie; so taught
hee Miriam by Leprose to leaue her murmuring; so wake|ned
hee Ionas out of his sleepe by casting him into the sea;
he cured Zachary of infidelitie by striking him with dumb|nesse;
hee diuerted Paul from his euill course by blindnes:
blessed is the man whom the Lord this way correcteth.
Sometime againe the Lord sends affliction,Afflictions laid on to preuent sin to come are wholesome preseruatiues. as preserua|tiues
to his children to keepe them from sinne, whereunto
hee seeth of their weaknesse they are ready to fall, if they
be not preuented: and so hee sent an Angell of Sathan to
buffet Paul,2. Cor. 12. 7. not for any sinne he had done, but for a sinne
that he might doe, least he should haue beene exalted out
of measure.
And sometime the Lord layeth on affliction,But euery affli|ction is not laid on the godly for sinne neyther to
correct sinnes past, nor to preuent sinnes to come, but that
the workes of God may be made manifest, which our Sa|uiour
plainely teacheth vs, when being demaunded concer|ning
him that was borne blind, whether it was for his owne
sinnes, or the sinnes of his Parents: aunswered it was for
neyther of them,Iohn. 9. 3. but that the workes of God might be made
manifest in him. And these workes of God manifested by
affliction are of two sorts; for not onely his meruailous
power and constant truth in preseruing and deliuering his
owne Church in all troubles against the power, falshoode,
and malice of the world, are manifested that all men may
see, it is not by the arme of man, but by the power of God
that his Church is continued vpon earth: but likewise these
manifold graces of God, wrought secretly by his holy Spi|rit
in the hearts of his children, are made manifest to the
world, such as their constant faith; their inuincible loue to|ward
God; their patience in the hardest sort of crosses. And
vnto these kindes of afflictions doe wee referre that which
here is spoken.
These afflictions which are for Gods sake, require these
two things, comprised by the Apostle in these words, Faith

and a good Conscience,1 Tim. 1. 19 that is a good Religion and a good
conuersation:Two things required in those afflictio~s which are suf|fered for Gods sake. though thy life be so good that it be vnreproue|able
in the eyes of man, yet if thou be not found in the faith,
thy suffering is not suffering for Gods cause; and albeit the
Religion thou professest be good, if thy conuersation be
euill, though thou wouldest giue thy body to be burnt for
Religion, yet shall not thy suffering be suffering for Chists
cause:1 Pet. 4. 15. Let none of you suffer as euill doers, but if any man suffer
as a Christian,Cyprian de duplici mart. let him not be ashamed. Non suppliciu~ facit mar|tyrem
sed causa: it is not the crosse makes the Martyr but
the cause.
There hath beene no Heresie so grosse,That Gods Martirs may be knowne from Sathans Mar|tyrs. but some men
haue beene bold to dye for it: which is not Christian forti|tude,
but miserable hardnesse of heart. As the Lord Iesus
hath his Apostles and Martyres, so Sathan hath his false A|postles
and Martyrs. Martires Satanicae virtutis: and there|fore
wee will conclude with Augustine,Aug. l. 1. con. Parmen. Epi. cap. 8.  9. Non est ex passione
certa Iustitia, it is not suffering that makes sure a cause to
be righteous: Sed ex Iustitia gloriosa passio, but it is righte|ousnesse
which makes suffering glorious.
For thy sake.It is common to al Christians to suffer with Christ, not so to suffer for him. It is common to all the Godly to suffer with
Christ as yee heard before: but to suffer for Christ is not a
honour communicated to them all; the rarer that it is, the
more heartely should wee welcome it when God sends it.
The Apostle reioyced in the bonds wherewith hee was
bound for Christs cause: the golden chaines of earthly am|bassadours
are nothing so honourable as chaines of yron
which are worne for Christs cause. The Emperour Con|stantine
honoured all the Fathers of the Counsell of Nice,
but made most of those who had suffered for the cause of
Christ; as in perticular, hee kissed the hole of Paphnutius
eye, which had beene put out in time of trouble for Christs
sake, yet did hee reuerence it as the most honourable and
precious part of his body: no face so beautifull as that which
is deformed; no man so rich as hee who hath sustained spo|liation
of his goods,Heb. 10. 34. if it be for Christs sake, neyther is any

death so glorious, as that which is sustained for his cause:
Si enim beati qui moriuntur in Domino, multo magis qui
pro Domino, for if they be blessed which dye in the Lord,
much more blessed are they wo dye for the Lord.
But now because no Christian is persecuted without some
cause alleadged against him by his persecuters,How causes falsely preten|ded by the wic|ked takes not from the chri|stian this com|fort that he suf|fers for Gods sake. and that also
in euery trouble his owne conscience saith that hee hath
most iustly deserued it; how can hee haue this comfort that
he suffers for Christs sake? The first is easily answered if we
put a difference betweene the pretended and the true cause
for which the wicked doe persecute vs. If Haman beare
malice to Mordecay, for his sake hee will forge a crime a|gainst
all the people of the Iewes: if Amazia can couer his
hatred against Amos by pretending that Amos hath con|spired
against the King: If the Princes of Darius enuy Da|niels
preferment, they can delate him as a rebell to the kings
proclamation: If Ieremie exhort the Iewes to goe out to
the King of Babell, hee shall be accused as a confederate
with the Chaldean. It is a common stratagem of Sathans to
staine the glory of Gods Children in their sufferings with
false pretended crimes, Vt qui conscientiae suae luce clarescunt,
flsis rumoribus sordidentur, that they who are cleared by the
light of their owne conscience may be defiled with false re|ports.
Sed bene sibi conscius non debet falsis moueri, nec putare
plus esse ponderis in alieno conuitio, quam in suo testimonio, but
hee who hath a good conscience ought not to be moued
with false things, nor to thinke there is more waight in any
other mans traducing, than is in his owne testimonie. Our
comfort doth stand sure,Psal. 96. 4. if wee can say with Dauid: They
hate me without a cause.Psal. 59. 3. And againe, They are gathered to|gether
against mee not for mine offence, not for my sinne, O
Lord.In suffering we must distinguish betweene that which men,  that which our owne consci|ence laies to our charge.
As for the other, the accusation of our conscience in trou|ble
charging vs with sinnes which no man can lay to our
charge, if wee will distinguish betweene the quarrell which
conscience hath against vs, and that wherewith the wicked

doe charge vs, it shall be manifest that the cause of our per|secution
is our disagreement with them in an euill course,
and not any sinne committed by vs against God, and so
shall our comfort still remaine that vvee are sufferers for
Christs sake.
We are killed.Death cannot hurt the man of God. How farre forth this killing extends our
Sauiour doth teach vs, when hee sayes they are able to kill
the body and doe no more.Mat. 10. 28. Qui pro Christo moriuntur ali|quid
mortis accipiunt,Aug. de ciuit. dei. li. 13. c. 8. ne tot a contingat: they may cast downe
this earthly tabernacle, but cannot hurt the man of God.
But here it is enquired seeing these godly ones were
aliue when they sent vp this complaint vnto God,A godly man not troubled in his owne per|son is pertaker of Christs af|flictions by sympathie. how is it
said they were slaine? To this I answere, that two manner
of wayes are the godly pertakers of Christs afflictions, euen
when they are not troubled in their owne persons: first by
lympathie with others that are troubled; for as the head of
the misticall body accounts himselfe persecuted when his
members are persecuted, so among the liuely members ther|of
the griefe and trouble of one, is the griefe and trouble
of the rest.Rom. 12. 15 If we mourne with them that mournes, and re|member
them who are in bonds as if wee were in bonds
with them,Heb. 13. 3. we are pertakers of their sufferings: but now the
want of this compassion in many who resting in their yorie
beds sorrowes not for Iosephs affliction,Amos. 6. 6. proues them to be
but dead and rotten members.
Secondly,All true chri|stians are Mar|tyrs in affectio~. wee communicate with the affliction of our
brethren, when in our affection wee are ready to suffer with
them, if so it would please the Lord to employ vs; as they
are Martyres in action, so will the Lord accept the others
as Martyres in affection;Cyprian de dup. Martir. Deus enim non estimat quenquam
ex euentu rerum sed ex affectu: for God esteemes not one by
the euent of things,How their rea|dy will is ac|cepted as a deed, is decla|red in the ex|ample of Aqui|la  Priscilla. but by their affection: Non fraudabitur
Martyrij gloria per quem non stetit quo minus Martyrium pe|regerit:
hee shall not be defrauded of the glory of martyr|dome,
in whose default it was not that he accomplished his
Martyrdome: therefore Aquila Priscilla are commended,

that for the Apostles life they had laide downe their owne
eckes;Rom. 16. 4. their good-will being reckoned vnto them for a
deede. But as Iacob hazarded some of his familie in the
hands of Esau before others: so the Lord sends out some of
his seruants to trouble before others. For the Lord is not so
prodigall of the liues of his children, that at one time hee
will hauock them all in the hands of the wicked: though
he send some out to the tryall, he will reserue others to be
as it were the seede of the Gospell.
All the day long.Persecuters in this last age are most miserable If we apply this testimonie to the whole
Church, then this day shall be the whole course of time
from the beginning to the end thereof. Earely in the mor|ning
Cain began to persecute his brother, and euer since
bloudy persecuters in all ages haue followed his way, but a|mong
them all the persecuters of this last age, which is the
euening, are most miserable: for all the blood shed since the
dayes of Abell shall light vpon them. As in a good course
his praise is greatest who is formost, so in an euill course his
iudgement shall be greatest who comes hindmost, because
he subscribes to the wickednesse of all those who hath gone
before him.
But if otherwise we apply this testimonie to euery chri|stian,The whole time of our life is but a day of suffering.
then this day must be called the whole time of our
life, from our birth to our death; warning vs that in no age
of our life we should promise to our selues immunitie from
affliction:Reu. 3. 10. yet our comfort is, that the time of our trouble
is here called a day,Or an houre of tentation. and in the Reuelation, the houre of
tentation, because it is but short. That rebuke which our
Sauiour gaue his Disciples when they were sleeping in the
garden,Mat. 26. 40. could you not watch with me one houre? may serue as
a checke vnto vs when wee faint in tentation; could yee not
suffer with me one houre? Againe, seeing our trouble is short
let vs not in it limit the holy one of Israell, to prescribe to
the Lord the time of our deliuerance.With what patience wee should endure in suffering re|ferring the time of our de|liuerance to the Lord. O how may wee be
ashamed of our impatience in trouble, when wee looke to
Noah, who entring into the Arke at the Lords commande|ment,

after hee had tarried a whole yeere in it, yet sought
not to come put till the Lord commaunded him. And Io|seph
the nourishing father of our Lord Iesus, when the An|gell
commaunded him to goe to Aegipt, and said further
vnto him tarte there till I tell thee,Mat. 2. 13. though Ioseph knew not
when hee should come out of Aegipt the place of banish|ment,
yet referring the time to the Lord, hee yeelded him|selfe
obedient to the holy commandement. The Lord work
in vs the like obedience of Faith.
And are counted.Worldings e|steeme christi|ans but vile persons, and what comfort wee haue a|gainst their contempt. This is added by way of amplifica|tion,
we are not onely slaine, but slaine as if we vvere slaues
nothing worth. Wicked men account the godly little worth,
and therefore doe handle them in a vile manner; but shall
we for that be discouraged? No, the Prince of our saluation
was esteemed among men no more worth then thirtie pee|ces
of siluer, and that for our sake: shall we then thinke euill
for his sake to be counted lesse than the doung or clay wher
vpon we tread?Mat. 26. 15. The Lord giue vs,1 Cor. 4. 13. true humilitie, that wee
may be content to be despised of men that wee may be ap|proued
of our God; he onely hath the ballance in his hands,
what euer waight worldlings haue in the eyes of men, when
the Lord beginnes to weigh them as hee did Beltasar, no
honour, no riches, no kingdome, shall help them to hold
out waight.
As sheepe for the slaughter.In what re|spects wicked+ment account the godly as sheepe. Wicked men accounts the
godly slaughter sheepe, because they thinke nothing is lost
when they are taken out of the way; yea also they reape a
benefit thereby: a proofe whereof wee may see in the pri|mitiue
Church; for when Famine, Pestilence and such like
calamities were inflicted by God vpon the Empire for the
contempt of his Gospell, the cause thereof was still imputed
by men to the christians, and therefore they were persecuted
to death, with no lesse opinion than that the putting them
out of the way was to put the plagues of God from the
whole Empire; yet did they not this way remedy the wrath
due to their sinnes, but procured thereby either double

stripes to themselues, or then were handled in the patience
of God like vnto Oxen fed for the slaughter.
And here it shall not be vnprofitable to oppone the
iudgement of the Lord concerning his children,How God also compares his children to sheepe, but in farre contrary respects. to the iudge|ment
of men. The Lord also compares his little ones to
sheepe, but vpon plaine contrary respects to those which
the world hath: first for their innocencie and simplicitie
they are not like other beastes, that haue either teeth in their 
head, pawes in their feete, or poyson in their bowels to
powre out when they are offended: secondly, for their pa|tience,
whereas other beasts being beaten vtter vnruly and
rowting voyces, they are dumbe before their shearers, yea
when they are iniured are farre from reuenge.Cyprian de simp. prael. The sheepe of
Christ (saith Cyprian) hath not the bloudy teeth of Wolues,
crueltie is an argument of bastard religion: and thirdly, for 
their vtilitie, for they do not onely giue their milk but their
Wooll and Skinne to the vse of man: teaching vs how pro|fitable
wee should be to our brethren; but alas the great
number of them who being voide of innocencie, wise to do
euill, voide of patience, not acquainted with the yoke, void
of charitie, being like that barren tree which had no fruit to
giue to Christ in his hunger, euidently declares how that
many in this age howsoeuer esteemed among men, yet are
not accounted of God the sheepe of Christ.


Verse 37.
Neuerthelesse in all these things we are more
then conquerours through him that loued vs.
_HEre the Apostle doth now subioyne an nega|tiue
answere to his former interrogations with
an amplification: these things whereof I haue
spoken are so farre from being able to seperate
vs from the loue of God, that by the contrary
in them all we are more then conquerours, that is, victors out
of all doubt.

In all these things.The Christian compared to a rock in the sea Then yee may perceiue that vnto all
those crosses enumerated before the christian man is subiect:
hee is not vnproperly compared to a Rock in the sea, which
being beaten on euery side vvith vvaues raysed by the wind,
yet stands vnmoueable, vnbroken it selfe, breakes them that
assaults it.
Againe yee see that the Apostle who speaking of the
estate of christians vpon earth,In death chri|stians are con|querours. sayd before wee are slaine all
the day long, saith now, we are more then conquerours: strange
it is that hee who is slaine should be a conquerour; but so it
is, the christian battell euery way is meruailous, patly be|cause
it is foughten within and against himselfe, and partly
because then is hee a conquerour, when ee seemes to be
vanquished, being the member of that head who obtayned
greatest victory vvhen hee suffered most shamefull death.A christian is not a single man standing by himselfe but a man incorpo|rate in Christ.
Through him that loued vs. The Apostle doth so giue
comfort to the christian that he reserues the glory vnto the
Lord, the strength whereby we preuaile is from him that
loued vs, not from our selues. It is very comfortable to con|sider
that a christian is not a man standing or liuing by him|selfe,
he hath his being in Christ, as long as there is life in
him we cannot die: it is true that sometime being deserted
and left to our selues we fall away for a time, as we may see
in Peter, vvho at the voyce of a Damsell denyed the Lord
Iesus; and this is to teach vs that the praise of our standing,
perseuering, and ouer-comming pertaines to the Lord.



Verse 38
For I am perswaded that neither death, nor
life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, 29. Nor height,
nor any other creature, c.
_THe Apostle continuing in his triumph, mounts
to an higher sort of enimies, and hee also pro|claimes
defiance to them, affirming that neither
death, nor life, nor Angels, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor any other creature whatsoeuer,
if any other be, are able to seperate vs from the loue of God.
Of the which wee haue first to learne,A Christian may be assured of his saluation in this life, con|trary to the do|ctrine of papists that a Christian
man in this life may be perswaded of his saluation, neyther
is it to be accounted presumption, for as much as in so do|ing
hee leanes not vpon himselfe, but vpon the word and
promise of God, which the Lord hath confirmed by an
oath, that hee may make sure to the heyres of promise the
stabilitie of his counsell. Where if the aduersary obiect, that
the word of the Lord out of all doubt is true, and that they
who beleeues and repents shall be saued, but euery one who
saith hee beleeues doth not beleeue, and so cannot be per|swaded
of his saluation? To this I answere, that hee who
repents vnfainedly and beleeues, knowes as certainely that
hee hath repentance and faith, as hee who hath in his hand
a iewell knowes that he hath i; and therefore may conclude
with himselfe that the promises of saluation made to the pe|nitent
beleeuers belongs vnto him: for albeit it be true, there
be many in the Church like vnto those fiue foolish Virgins,
who suppose they haue that which they shall not be found
to haue in the end, yet is there no reason to conclude that be|cause
some are deceiued, all are deceiued; because some
thinke they haue faith and haue it not, therefore none can
be sure that they haue faith.
Out of all doubt where the Lord Iesus dwelleth by his
Spirit, hee makes himselfe knowne to them in whom hee

dwelleth,This is proued from the nature of the holy spi|rit whom the Christian hath receiued. according to that Know ye not that Christ is in you
except ye be reprobates? and these names giuen to the holy
Spirit of Adoption doth also confirme the same truth: for
hee is called the Seale, the Witnesse, earnest penny of God,
which names hee receiues from his effects and operations
which hee workes in them to whom hee is giuen:2. Cor. 13. 5. eyther
therfore must the aduersary say, that there are none to whom
the Spirit is giuen, or they must graunt that they to whom
he is giuen are sure: the first they will not affirme, the se|cond
they cannot with reason deny:Rom. 8. 16. for what is this to say
that a man hath the Seale,2. Cor. 1. 22. the Witnesse, and the Earnest
of God giuen to confirme the promise of God, and yet all
these doe not make him who hath them sure of saluation?
But here least that which I haue said discourage them
who are of weake consciences,Comfort for the godly whe~ they cannot finde this assu|rance. let them know that this assu|rance
of saluation doth not alway continue with the Chri|stian
in a like measure: for here wee doe so beleeue, that we
want not our owne vnbeleife, and albeit our faith when it is
in the full strength ouer-comes all doubting, yet is it often|times
so weake, that it is againe disquieted with doubting,
for which if we pray instantly with the Father of that child,
Lord I beleeue,Mark. . 24. but helpe my vnbeliefe, wee may be sure at
length Faith shall ouercome: and thus farre teach we con|cerning
the assurance which the Christian man hath of his
saluation.
But as for that Religion which teacheth doubtings,A good religi|on may haue doubting, but it is an euill re|ligion which leaues men in doubt. and
pronounceth them accursed who hold that a man may be
assured of saluation, wee accurse it as a doctrine enimie to
Faith and Saluation; such as is the doctrine of the counsell
of Trent, Si quis dixerit hominem renatum teneri ex side ad
credendum se certo esse ex numero praedestinatorum, anathema
sit.Sess. 6. cant. 15. It is strange to see that where they teach a man is able to
fulfill the whole Law of God, and by his workes to merit
eternall life, yet they accurse him, if hee say hee is sure to be
saued: so directly doth one point of their false doctrine
impugne another. But indeed it is no meruaile if their

Religion can yeeld no comfort nor certaintie of saluation to
the weary conscience, because they draw men from off the
foundation Iesus Christ, in whom onely it is promised that
wee shall finde rest to our soules,Mat. 11. 29. and would make vs to
leane vpon rotten foundations, such as the merit of Masses,
the vertue of our workes,Why Papistry cannot make a man sure of sal|uation. and humane satisfaction; and be|cause
all these cannot yet satisfie the doubting consciences
of men, they suspend them with a vaine hope of greater
comfort which they shall finde in their forged and comfort|lesse
Purgatorie: thus doe they hold the poore people com|fortlesse
both in life and in death. But as for vs wee will a|bide
on the rocke, renouncing all purgation, but the purga|tion
of his bloud;It is not pre|sumption, but faith to shew what we haue receiued. wee will content our selues with Iesus
Christ, in whom the Father is well pleased, that in him we
may finde rest to our soules, which neyther in our selues,
nor in any other creature shall wee euer be able to finde.
Let them call it Presumption,Aug. ser. 28. Non arrogantia est, sed fides
praedicare quod acceperis, non superbia est, sed deuotio, it is not
presumption but Faith: or otherwise if wee say vnto him
who hath begotten vs by the lawer of regeneration, Pater,
bona praesumptio est, Father, this said Augustine is a good
presumption.Bernard in Septuag. And to the same effect said Bernard, Propter
hoc data sunt signa quaedam manifesta salutis, vt indubitabile
sit um esse de numero Electorum in quo ea signa permanserint,
This is the truth of God agreeable to Scripture and aun|ciet
Fathers which wee doe affirme, howeuer they doe ac|curse
it.
That neyther life.Vanitie of worldly plea|sures discouered By life vve are to vnderstand the plea|sures
of this life, strong tentations indeed: for in the hearts
of many they preuaile against the loue of God: that we may
learne to despise them, and to count with the Apostle, all
things to be doung in regard of Iesus, let vs looke vnto those
two things which discouers vnto vs the vanie of worldly
pleasures:The abunda~ce of them makes the~ loath some. first, they are most loathsome to them, who haue 
them in greatest abundance, and ae most admired of those
who haue them not. A proofe of this we haue in Salomon,

who wanted nothing delectable vnder the Sunne,Eccles. 2. 10. yet by
the very vse of them, he found the vanitie of them, and was
moued to abhorre them. It is far otherwise with heauenly
pleasures, the more we tast of them, the more wee esteeme
of them, hungring still for more, we cannot be satisfied with
that which wee haue gotten already.
 Secondly,If they be con|tinuall they be|come painfull. worldly pleasures are of this nature, that if
they be continued without intermission they turn into pains;
therefore is it that those same things which now we choose
for recreation, incontinently they become wearisome vnto
vs, and wee cast them away, so that it is not so much by
themselues, as by the change of them that we are delighted,
Sola vicessitudine recreamur: being weary of walking, we re|fresh
our selues with sitting; againe being vveary of fitting,
we rise to refresh our selues with walking, and so fareth it
with all the recreations of this life, being continuall they be|come
wearisome. So oft therefore as Sathan by worldly
pleasures would steale away our hearts from the loue of
God, let vs consider how vaine and small a pleasure it is
vvhich he would giue vs, in respect of that vnspeakeable ioy
which he would take from vs.
Nor death.Remembrance of death profi|table to keepe vs vncorrupted with the plea|sures of this life By death vvee vnderstand not onely death it
selfe, but all those paines that goe before it, and terrous
which accompanie it. There vvas neuer life so long, but it
hath beene concluded by death: no life so pleasant but the
paines of death shall swallow vp all the pleasures therof. As
the seauen leane Kine deuoured the seauen fat,  the seauen
yeares of famine consumed the fruit of seauen yeares of
plenty: so shall the dolours and terrours of death eate vp
all the pleasures and delectations of this vvretched life. If
vve suffer the pleasures of this life to bewitch vs, be sure the
terrours of death shall confound vs. It were therefore good
that as Ioseph of Aramathia had his sepulcher in his Gar|den,
so vvee season all the pleasures of our life with re|membrance
of our death, this is summa Philosophia.

Yet our comfort is,Comfort for the godly a|gainst death. that if wee liue in Christ, no terror
of death can seperate vs from him; yea, death conioynes vs
neerer to the Lord Iesus then wee were before: wee see oft|times
by experience that the children of God haue so tri|umphed
in the very dolours of death, and reioyced in the
sense of Gods loue, that they haue forgot all their bodily
paines. As the top of mount Pisgah,Deut. 34. 1. was to Moses the place
of his death, and the first place, wherein euer hee got a sight
of Canaan, so shall death be to the children of God, where
we lay downe the sight of this world, there shall wee take
vp the sight of eternall life, which shall neuer be taken
from vs.
Nor Angels.Reprobate An|gels how they are God mes|sengers and to what end. By Angels here I vnderstand not elect
Angels, for they are not enimies to vs but ministring spirits
for our saluation, but reprobate Angels: for these names of
Angels, principalities and powers are common both to good
and euill Angels. And they are so called partly from the
power which God hath lent them, and partly from the mes|sage
vvherein hee imployes them: for sometime they are
sent out as messengers of his wrath to punish the wicked;
and so an euill spirit was sent from the Lord to punish Saul:1 Sam. 16. 14
and sometime to exercise the godly; and so an Angell of Sa|than
was sent to buffet the Apostle Paul for his humiliati|on:2. Cor. 12. 7.
we are not exempted from their tempting, but praysed
be God,Two sorts of Sathans ope|ration.. we are exempted from their tyrannie  dominion.
Their working in regard of the wicked is ,
the efficacie of errour; for the Lord hath giuen them vp in|to
the hands of Sathan: but their working in regard of the
godly is but , tentation. Alwayes seeing so long as
we liue wee must wrestle against so strong enimies, let vs
watch and be sober;Eph. 6. 11. let vs stand with the compleat armour
of God vpon vs.In Christ we are restored to a better estate, tha~ that which Adam had in Paradise,
Againe we mark here how that our estate in Christ is bet|ter
than the estate of Adam by his first creation; for then an
apostate Angell drew Adam to an apostasie also from God,

but now no Angell is able to seperate vs from the loue of
God; the reason is, the couenant which God made with
Adam was without a mediatour; hee had the keeping of his
owne saluation in his owne hand: but the couenant of grace
with vs is bound vp in the mediator Christ Iesus,Iohn. 17. 12. to whom
the Father hath committed vs, that hee might redeeme and
saue vs; hee hath taken vs into his hand and none are able to
take vs from him; our saluation depends not on our selues,
it is not in our keeping but in his, and therefore is it most
certaine.
Principalities nor powers.How names of power are gi|uen to repro|bate Angels. These names are not to terri|fie
or astray vs, seeing as I said these reprobate Angels haue
no power but that which is lent and limited of God.
Therefore Saint Iude saith that they are reserued in chaines
vnder darknesse:Iude. ver. 6. and here for our comfort we are to consider
how that there are two chaines wherewith they are bound,
and other two wherewith they are tormented: the first
chaine that bindes them is their owne nature: the second is
Gods prouidence: the first restraines them that they can|not
doe the euill which they would;Sathan bound with three chaines. the second restraineth
them that they doe not the euill which they can: Sa|than
being a naturall creature is bounded within the com|passe
of nature, his insatiable malice would doe much more
euill than by nature he is able to performe, for aboue or con|trary
to nature can hee worke nothing: and againe many
euils is hee able to doe by naturall meanes, which the prui|dence
of God permits him not to doe. The tormenting
chaines which are vpon him, are an euill conscience, and
the wrath of God: for as he growes in euill doing so grow|eth
his conscience worse and worse, and the wrath of God
accordingly encreaseth vpon him, with which two he is con|tinually
tormented.
Nor things present, nor things to come.In our Christi|an warfare our greatest battell is the last. This is a great am|plification
of our suretie, that neyther present euils inflicted
vpon vs, nor any euill to come, can seperate vs from the loue

of God. And hereof wee are warned that all our battailes
are neyther present nor past, some of them are to come; let
vs not waxe secure because of our fore-past victories. When
Israell came out of Egipt one nation followed them to pur|sue
them, but when theypassed Iordan seauen nations came
against them: sure it is our hindmost battaile will be the
heauiest, and our last tentation greatest; the horrour of hell,
the rottennesse of the graue, the conscience of sinnes past,
the dolours of present death, all standing vp at one time to
impugne our faith, but shall not be able to seperate vs from
that loue of God wherein stands our life.
Againe wee are taught here that Christians are sure of
perseuerance,Christians are sure of perse|uerance. nothing to come can seperate vs from the
loue of God: this is proued first from the nature of GOD
who is faithfull, and will confirme vs vnto the end, perfect|ing
that which hee hath begunne in vs:Philip. 1. 6. secondly, from the
nature of the seede whereof wee are begotten againe, for it
is immortall: thirdly, from the nature of that life which by
that seed is communicated to vs, it is the life of Christ which
is not now any more subiect vnto death.
Neyther height nor depth.Sathan hath two armes whereby he wrestles, the one is pre|sumption. By these I vnderstand Sathan hath
two manner of wayes by which he wrestles against men:
some he mounts on the chariot of presumption; others hee
cast downe into the deepe of desperation: by prosperitie
hee puffes vp many to make their fall the more shamefull,
those tentations which he vsed against our blessed Sauiour
doe wee think that hee will spare them against other men?Mat. 4. 5.
hee set him vp vpon the pinnacle of the temple,How Sathan tempts to pre|sumption. of purpose
if he could to haue throwne him downe: and againe tooke
him vp to the top of an high mountaine, where making a
shew to him of worldly kingdomes, hee promised to giue
them if hee would fall downe and worship him: and albeit
with these tentations hee did not preuaile against our bles|sed
Sauiour, yet how many in this world are daily be|witched
with them, that without any refusall they fall down

and worship him. But as Simon Magus while he assayed
to flye from the top of the capitall vp into heauen, was
throwne downe to his destruction: so shall the prosperiti
of those men bee their ruine, and their high estate as a
pinnacle whereupon they shall not continue. Happy is
the man whose heart is not exalted against God by any
preferment that can come to him vpon the face of the
earth: for hee who rising in dignitie riseth also in pride
against the Lord, is raised vp as Pharaoh was, that God
may declare his power in casting him downe.
Nor depth.His other arme is desperation. The other sort of Sathans tentations tend
vnto desperation: whom hee seeth hee cannot puffe vp,
hee doth what hee can to cast downe, by feares, perturba|tions,
vvrong conceptions, but our comfort is both by the
Apostles testimonie, and our owne experience, wee may be
cast downe,2. Cor. 4. 9. but wee cannot perish.
Nor any other creature.No man is sure to continue in his estate but the Christian. Now in the ende the Apostle
doth draw his speach to the height, his confidence is so
great, that not being content with the enumeration of ad|uersaries
which hee hath made, hee defieth yet all other
whatsoeuer, if any other be: for hee speaketh this by way
of supposition, if there be yet any other creature than
those whom I haue named, I am sure be what they will,
they cannot seperate vs from the loue of Christ. Hee in
the last roome wee doe obserue the surety of a Christi|an
aboue all other men in the world; onely the Christian
is sure his estate shall neuer be changed. Worldlings may
thinke with Babell in her prosperitie,Esa. 47. 7. I shall neuer be mo|ued,Luke. 12. 19. and with the rich. Glutton promise to themselues
many yeeres to come,No worldling shall abide in the state wher|in now hee stands. but they shall be deceiued, none of
them shall continue in that slate wherein presently they
stand, the Lord shall driue them from their station as it
were with wheeles, and shall roll them like a ball as hee
threatned to Shebna.Esay. 22. 18. Pharaoh his pompe shall perish in
the redde sea: Nebuchadnezzar shall be changed from a

Monarch of men vnto a companion of Beasts: Manasses
from the Pallace shall goe to the Prison, and all the men
of the world shall goe from the house to the graue; their
beautie and royall pompe shall consume as a Moth, one|ly
the Christian shall stand for euer in that happy vnion
and fellowship with GOD; this is the state of the Chri|stian,
this is his life, this is his glory, and from it nothing
present nor to come, shall euer be able to trans|change
him. Euerlasting praise therefore
be to the Lord our God through
Iesus Christ. Amen.
FINIS.







