





SONGS
FOR THE LVTE VIOL
and Voice:
Composed by I. Danyel,
Batchelar in Musicke.
1606.
To M^r^i^s Anne Grene.
LONDON
Printed T. E. for Thomas Adams,
At the signe of the white Lyon,
in Paules Church-yard.





To M^r^s Anne Grene
the worthy Daughter to
S^r William Grene of Milton
Knight.
_THat which was onely priuately compos'd,
For your delight, Faire Ornament of Worth;
Is here, come, to bee publikely disclos'd:
And to an vniuersall view put forth.
Which hauing beene but yours and mine before,
(Or but of few besides) is made hereby
To bee the worlds: and yours and mine no more.
So that in this sort giuing it to you,
I giue it from you, and therein doe wrong,
To make that, which in priuate was your due:
Thus to the world in common to belong.
And thereby may debase the estimate,
Of what perhaps did beare some price before:
For oft we see how things of slender rate,
Being vndiuulg'd, are choisely held in store:
And rarer compositions once expos'd,
Are (as vnworthy of the world) condemn'd:
For what, but by their hauing beene disclos'd
To all, hath made all misteries contemn'd.
And therefore why had it not beene ynow,
That Milton onely heard our melodie?
Where Baucis and Philoemon onely show,
To Gods and men their hospitalitie:
And thereunto a ioyfull eare afford,
In mid'st of their well welcom'd company:
Where wee (as Birds doe to themselues record)
Might entertaine our priuate harmonie.
But fearing least that time might haue beguild
You of your owne, and me of what was mine,
I did desire to haue it knowne my Child:
And for his right, to others I resigne.
Though I might haue beene warn'd by him, who is
Both neare and deare to mee, that what we giue
Vnto these times, we giue t'vnthankfulnesse,
And so without vnconstant censures, liue.
But yet these humours will no warning take,
Wee still must blame the fortune that wee make.
And yet herein wee doe aduenture now,
But Ayre for Ayre, no danger can accrew,
They are but our refusalls wee bestow,
And wee thus cast the old t'haue roome for new:
Which I must still addresse t'your learned hand,
Who mee and all I am, shall still command.
Iohn Danyel.





I. CANTO.


_COy Daphne fled from Phoebus hot pur- suite, Carelesse of

Pas- sion, sence- lesse of Remorse: Whil'st he com- plain'd his griefes, shee rested

mute, He beg'd her stay, She still kept on her course, But what re- ward she had for this

you see, Shee rests trans- form'd, a win- ter beaten tree. She rests transform'd,

ij. Shee rests trans- form'd a winter bea- ten tree.




1. BASSO.

_COy Daphne fled:




Coy Daphne fled from Phaebus hot pursuite,
Carelesse of Passion, sencelesse of Remorse:
Whil'st hee complain'd his griefes shee rested mute
He beg'd her stay, shee still kept on her course.
But what reward shee had for this you see,
She rests transform'd a winter beaten tree.


The Answere.
Chast Daphne fled from Phaebus hot pursuit,
Knowing mens passions Idle and of course:
And though he plain'd twas fit shee should be mute
And honour would shee should keepe on her course
For which faire deede her Glory still wee see,
Shee rests still Greene, and so wish I to bee.






II BASSO.

_THou prety Bird:



II CANTO.

_THou prety Bird how do I see, thy sil-ly state and mine a- gree,

For thou a prisoner art, so is my hart, Thou sing'st to her and so doe I addresse my

Musick to her eare, that's merci- lesse. But here-in doth, here- in doth the dif- ference lie,

that thou art grac'd, so am not I: Thou singing liu'st, singing, singing, singing liu'st, and I must

sing- ing dye. But herein, c.



Thou prety Bird how doe I see,
Thy silly state and mine agree:
For thou a prisoner art,
So is my hart
Thou sing'st to her and so doe I addresse,
My Musicke to her eare that's mercilesse:
But heerein doth the difference lie,
That thou art grac'd so am not I,
Thou singing liu'st, and I must singing die.





III. BASSO.

_HEe whose desires:



III. CANTO.

_HE whose de- sires are still are still a- broad I see,
And therefore now come back come back my hart to mee,

hath neuer a- ny peace at home the while. Rest a-lone, rest a-lone
it is but for su- perfluous things we toyle. Honor wealth, honor wealth

with thy selfe be all with- in, For what with- out thou get'st, thou dost not
glo- ry fame are no such things, But that which from I- ma- gi- nati- on

win. High reaching powre that seemes to o- uer grow, doth creepe but
springs

on the earth, lies base and low.



He whose desires are still abroad I see,
Hath neuer any peace at home the while:
And therefore now come back my hart to mee,
It is but for superfluous things we toile,
Rest alone with thy selfe be all within,
For what without thou get'st thou dost not win.
Honour, wealth, glory, fame, are no such things,
But that which from Imagination springs.
High reaching power that seemes to ouer grow,
Doth creepe but on the earth, lies base and low





IIII. CANTO.

_LIke as the Lute delights, delights, or else, or

else dis- likes, as is his art that plaies vpon the same: So sounds my Muse,

ij. it founds accordings as she strikes, On my hart strings high tun'd, high

tun'd vn- to her fame. Her touch doth cause the war- ble of the sound, which

heere I yeeld in lamentable wise: ij. in lamentable wise: la- men-

ta- ble wise: A way- ling descant ij. on the



sweet- est ground, Whose due reports, ij. giues ho- nour to her eyes, Whole

due re- ports, ij. giues honour to her eyes, if a- ny plea- sing,

relish heere I vse, Iudge then the world her beauty the same,



IIII. BASSO.
_LIke as the Lute:




IIII. CANTO.

same, Else harsh my stile, vntuna-ble my Muse hoarse sounds, The voice that pray- seth

not her name, For no ground else, for no ground else could make the Musicke

such, Not other hand could giue so sweet a touch, could giue so sweet a

touch. For no, c.




IIII. BASSO.



Like as the Lute delights or else dislikes,
As is his art that playes vpon the same:
So sounds my Muse according as shee strikes
On my hart strings, high tun'd vnto her same.
Her touch doth cause the warble of the sound,
Which here I yeeld in lamentable wise:
A wayling descant on the sweetest ground,
Whose due reports giues honour to her eyes.
If any pleasing relish here I vse,
Then Iudge the world her beautie giues the same:
Else harsh my stile vntunable my Muse,
Hoarse sounds the voice that praiseth not her name.
For no ground else could make the Musicke such,
Nor other hand could giue so sweet a touch.





V. BASSO.

_DOst thou withdraw:



V. CANTO.

_DOst. dost thou withdraw thy grace, Dost,

O dost thou withdraw thy grace, Because I should not loue, and think'st thou to remoue m'a-

fections with thy face? As if that loue did hould no part, But where thy beau- tie
Ah yes 'tis more, more is de-sire, There where it wounds and

lies: And were not in my hart, Great-er then in thy faire eyes? Ah yes 'tis, c.
pines, As fire is far more fire, Where it burnes then where it shines.



Dost thou withdraw thy grace,
For that I should not loue:
And think'st thou to remoue,
M'affeictions with thy face?
As if that loue did hould no part,
But where thy beautie lies:
And were not in my hart,
Greater then in thy faire eyes?
Ah yes tis more, more is desire,
There where it wounds and pines:
As fire is farre more fire,
Where it burnes then where it shines?





VI. BASSO.

_WHY canst thou not, c.



VI. CANTO.

_WHY canst thou not as others doe, Looke on me with vnwounding eyes?

And yet looke sweet, but yet not so, Smile but not in killing wise. Arme not thy graces

to confou~d, Only looke, ij. Onely looke but doe not wound. ij.

Onely looke, ij. ij. ij. but do not wound. Only looke but doe not wound.



Why canst thou not as others doe?
Looke, on mee with vnwounding eyes:
And yet looke sweet but yet not so,
Smile but, not in killing wise.
Arme not thy graces to confound,
Onely looke but doe not wound.
Why should mine eyes see more in you,
Then they can see in all the rest:
For I can others beauties view,
And not finde my hart opprest.
O bee as others are to mee,
Or let mee, bee more to thee.





VII. CANTO.

_STay cruell, stay, Pit- tie mine anguish, And if I languish

For that which you doe beare a- way, Ah how can you be so vn- kinde, As not to grieue for

that you leaue behind, And if you'll goe ij. yet let your pitie stay, yet let your pitty

stay, and if you will goe, and if you will goe, yet let your pittie stay, yet O let your pittie stay.

But will you goe? say will you? O will you goe and shew that you neglect, that

you neg- lect me, Yet say farewel, ij. ij. farewell. ij. ij.




VII. BASSO.

_STay Cruell stay:


Stay Cruell stay,
Pittie myne anguish,
And if I languish
For that which you do beare away,
Ah, how can you be so vnkind,
As not to greeue for that you leaue behind,
And if you'l goe, yet let your pittie stay,
But will you goe and shew that you neglect mee?
Yet say farewell, and seeme but to respect mee.



Yet say fare-wel, and seeme but to re- spect, O seeme but to re- spect mee. Yet say, c.






VIII. CANTO.

_TIme cru- ell Time canst thou sub- due that Bow?
Or art thou growne in league with those faire' eyes?

That conquers all but thee and thee to stayes? as if shee were ij.
That they might aide thee to con- sume our dayes, or dost thou loue ij.

exempt from Scieth or Bow, From Loue and yeeres vn- sub- iect
her for her cru- el- ties, Being mer- ci- lesse like thee that

to de- cayes? Then doe so still although she makes no
no man wayes? And doe so still although she no- thing

steeme, Of dayes nor yeeres but lets them runne in vaine, Hould still thy swift
cares, Do as I doe loue her al-though vn- leinde, Hould still yet O




VIII. BASSO.

_TYme cruell tyme:


Tyme cruell tyme canst thou subdue that brow,
That conqueres all but thee, and thee too stayes:
As if shee were exempt from seyeth or bow,
From Loue and yeares vnsubiect to decayes.
Or art thou growne in league with those faire eyes,
That they might help thee to consume our dayes,
Or dost thou loue her for her cruelties,
Being mercilesse lyke thee that no man wayes?
Then doe so still although shee makes no steeme,
Of dayes nor yeares, but lets them run in vaine:
Hould still thy swiftwing'd hours that wondring seeme
To gase on her, euen to turne back againe.
And doe so still although she nothing cares,
Doe as I doe, loue her although vnkinde,
Hould still, yet O I feare at vnawares,
Thou wilt beguile her though thou seem'st so kinde.



wing'd houres that won- dring seeme, To gase on her euen to turne
I feare at vn- a- wares, Thou wilt be- guile her though thou

back a- gaine. And doe so, c.
seem'st so kinde.





M^r^s^. M. E. her Funeral teares for the death of her husband.
The first part.
IX. CANTO.


_GRiefe, Griefe,

Griefe, Griefe, keepe within and scorne, to shew but teares,

Since Ioy can weepe as well as thou, Disdaine to sigh for so can slender cares, Which

but from idle causes grow, Doe not looke forth vn- lesse thou didst know how

To looke with thine owne face, and as thou art, And onely let

my hart, ij. my hart, ij. That knowes the rea- son why,




XI. BASSO.

_GRiefe keepe within:


_GReefe keep within and scorne to shew but teares,
Since Ioy can weepe as well as thou:
Disdaine to sigh for so can slender cares,
Which but from Idle causes grow.
Doe not looke forth vnlesse thou didst know how
To looke with thine owne face, and as thou art,
And onely let my hart,
That knowes more reason why,
Pyne, fret, consume, swell, burst and dye.



Pine, Fret, Con- sume, Swell, Burst and

Dye. Swell, Burst and Dye.





The second part.

X. CANTO.

_DRop, ij. ij. drop not, ij. O drop not mine eyes,

nor trickle, trickle, trickle downe so fast, nor trickle downe so fast, nor

trickle, trickle downe so fast, For so you could doe oft be- fore,

In our sad fare-wels and sweet meetings past, And shall his death, ah shall

his death now haue no more? Can nig- gard for- row yeeld no o- ther

store, To shew the plentie of af- flicti- ons smart, Then onely




X. BASSO.

_Drop not mine eyes.


_Drop not myne eyes nor Trickle downe so fast,
For so you could doe oft before,
In our sad farewells and sweet meetings past,
And shall his death now haue no more?
Can niggard sorrow yeld no other store:
To shew the plentie of afflictions smart,
Then onely thou poore hart,
That knowst more reason why,
Pyne, Fret, Consume, Swell, Burst and Dye.



thou poore hart, ij. poore hart, ij. That know'st more rea- son

why, Pine, Fret, Con- sume, Swell, Burst, and

Dye. Pine, Fret, Consume, Swell, Burst and Dye. Swell, Burst and Dye.





The third part.

XI. CANTO.

_HAue all our passions:

Haue all our passions certaine proper vents,

And sorrow none that is her owne?

But she must borrow others comple- ments, To make her in- ward fee- lings knowne,

Are ioyes, de- lights and deaths compassion showne, With one like face and one lamen-

ting part: and one la- menting, ij. one la- menting part: Then onely




XI. BASSO.

_HAue all our passions:


Haue all our passions certaine proper vents,
And sorow none that is her owne?
But she must borow others complements,
To make her inward feelings knowne?
Are Ioyes delights and deaths compassion showne,
With one lyke face and one lamenting part?
Then onely thou poore hart that know'st more reason why,
Pine, Fret, Consume, Swell, Burst, and Dye.



thou poore hart, ij. poore hart, ij. that know'st more rea-

son why, Pine, Fret, Con- sume, Swell, Burst and

Dye. Pine, Fret, Con- sume, Swell, Burst and

Dye. Pine, Fret, Con- sume, Swell, Burst and Dye.





XII. CANTO.


_LEt not Clo- ris thinke be cause she hath in- vas- saild
I was made to be the pray and boo- ty of her

mee, That her beauty can giue lawes to o-thers that are free: Though others may her
eyes, In my bosome she may say her greatest kingdome lyes. I can de-cerne more

brow a- dore, Yet more must I that there-in see farre more, Then any
se- cret notes, That in the margine of her cheekes Loue quotes, Then any

others eyes haue powre to see, She is to mee, More then to a- ny others she can
else be- sides haue art to read, No lookes proceed, From those faire eyes but to me won- der

bee. O then why, Should she flye, From him to whom her sight, Doth ad so
breed.




XII. BASSO.

_LEt not Cloris think:



_LEt not Cloris think because
She hath vnvassald mee,
That her bewtie can giue lawes,
To others that are free.
I was made to be the pray,
And bootie of her eyes:
In my bosome she may say,
Her greatest kingdome lyes.


Though others may her brow adore,
Yet more must I that therein see far more,
Then any others eyes haue powre to see,
Shee is to mee
More then to any others she can bee.
I can decerne more secret notes,
That in the margine of her cheekes Loue quotes:
Then any else besides haue art to read,
No lookes proceed,
From those fayre eyes but to mee wonder breed.


O then why,
Should shee fly,
From him to whom her sight,
Doth ad so much aboue her might:
Why should not shee,
Still Ioy to raigne in mee?




much aboue her might, Why should not shee, Still ioy to raigne. in mee





The first part.
XIII. CANTO.


_CAn dolefull notes, c.

Can? can dolefull notes, dolefull notes to

measur'd accents set, Can? can dolefull

notes, dole-full notes to measur'd accents set, Ex- presse vn-mea- su'rd griefes,

Expresse vn- measur'd, vn- measur'd griefes which time for- get. Ex-

presse vn-mea- sur'd griefes which time for- get. which time, which time forget




XIII. BASSO.

_CAn dolefull notes:


_CAn dolefull Notes to measur'd accents set,
Expresse vnmeasur'd griefes that tyme forget?



Expresse vnmeasur'd griefes which time euen all time forget.





The second part.
XIIII. CANTO


_NO let Chromatique times ij.

Chro- matique tunes harsh without ground, Bee sullaine, Musique for a

tunelesse hart, Bee sullaine, c.

Bee sullaine. c. Chro- matique

tunes most like my passions sound, Chro- matique tunes most like,

most like my passions sound. most like, c. still like, c.




XIIII. BASSO.

_NO, let Chromatique Tunes:


NO, let Chromatique Tunes harsh without ground,
Be sullayne Musique for a Tunelesse hart:
Chromatique Tunes most lyke my passions sound,
As if combynd to beare their falling part.



Chro- ma- tique tunes most like my passions sound,

most like, c. still, c. Chromatique tunes most like my

passions sound, As if com- binde to beare their falling

part. As if combinde to beare their fal- ling part.





The third part.
XV. CANTO.


_VN- certaine certaine tunes, of thoughts fore-

cast, of thoughts fore- cast, Bring backe the

same, then dye and dy- ing last. then dye and dy- ing last.

Bring backe the same, then dye, then dye and dy- ing last. then dye and dy- ing,

and dy- ing last. and dying last. ij.




XV. BASSO.

_VNcertayne certayne turnes:


_VNcertaine certaine turnes, of thoughts forecast,
Bring backe the same, then dye and dying last.



ij. and dy- ing last.





XVI. CANTO.


_EYes looke no more, for what hath all the earth that's
Cloth thee my hart, with blacke darke thoughts and thinke but

worth the sight? Eares heare no more, for what can breath the voyce of true de- of
des- paire, Si- lence locke vp my words and skorne these I- dle sounds of

light. Thinke, thinke, Glo-ry, Honour, Ioyes, De- lights, Contents,
ayre. But, but Sorrow, Griefe, Af- flicti- on, and Despaire,

are but the emp- tie re- ports, Of vna- pro-pri- ed termes that breath inuents, not knowing
these are the things that are sure, And these we feele not as con- ceits in th'aire, but as the

what it im- ports. Ioyes, Delights and Pleasures in vs hold
same we en- dure. Ioyes, Delights and Pleasures makes griefe to

such a doubt- full part. As if they were but thrall, and those were all in all,
ti- ra-nize vs worse, Our mirth brings but distastes for nought delights and lastes.




XVI. BASSO.

_EYes looke no more:



EYes looke no more, for what hath all the earth that's worth the sight?
Eares heare no more, for what can breath the voyce of true Delight?
Cloath thee my hart, with darke black thoughts, and think but of dispaire,
Silence lock vp my words, and scorne these Idle sounds of Ayre.


Thinke Glory, Honour, Ioyes, Delights, Contents,
Are but the emptie reports
Of vnappropried termes that breath inuents,
Not knowing what it imports.
But Sorrow, Griefe, Affliction, and Dispaire,
These are the things that are sure,
And these wee feele not as conceyts in th' ayre,
But as the same wee endure.


Ioyes, delights, and pleasures in vs hould such a doubtfull part,
As if they were but thrall,
And those were all in all,
For Griefes, Distrusts, Remorce, I see must domineere the hart.
Ioyes, Delights, and Pleasures, makes griefe to tiranize vs worse,
Our mirth brings but distastes:
For nought delights and lastes,
Griefe then take all my hart, for where none striue there needs lesse force.




For Griefe, Distrusts, Remorse, I see must do- mi- neere the
Griefe then take all my hart, for where none striue, there needes lesse

hart.
force.






XVII. BASSO.

_IF I could shut the gate:



XVII. CANTO.

_IF I could shut the gate a- gainst my thoughts,

And keepe out sor- row from this roome with in, Or me- morie could cancell all the

Notes of my misdeedes, ij. and I vnthinke my sinne, How free, how cleere, how cleane my

soule should lie, Discharg'd of such a loathsome com- pa- nie. How free, c.




IF I could shut the gate against my thoughts,
And keepe out sorrow from this roome with-in:
Or memory could cancell all the notes,
Of my misdeeds and I vnthink my sinne,
How free, how cleare, how cleane my soule should lye,
Discharg'd of such a lothsome company.


Or were there other roomes with-out my hart,
That dyd not to my conscience ioyne so neare,
Where I might lodge the thoughts of sin a-part,
That I might not their claim'rous crying heare.
What peace, what Ioy, what ease should I possesse.
Free'd from their horrors that my soule oppresse.


But O my Sauiour, who my refuge art,
Let thy deare mercies stand twixt them and mee:
And be the wall to seperate my hart,
So that I may at length repose mee free:
That peace, and Ioy, and rest may be within,
And I remaine deuided from my sinne.






XVIII. BASSO.

_I Dye when as I doe not see:



XVIII. CANTO.

_I Dye when as I doe not see, Her that is life and all to mee, And

when I see her yet I dye, In see- ing of her cru- el- tie, So that to me like mi- se- ry

is wrought, Both when I see her, Both when I see, and when I see her not. So, c.




_I Dye when as I doe not see
Her that is lyfe and all to mee:
And when I see her yet I dye,
In seeing of her crueltie:
So that to mee like miserie is wrought,
Both when I see and when I see her not.


Or shall I speake or silent greeue,
Yet who will silencie releeue:
And if I speake I may offend,
And speaking not my heart will rend:
So that I see to mee it is all one,
Speake I or speake I not, I am vndone.






XIX. CANTO Primo.

_WHat delight can they in- ioy, whose harts are not their owne, But are

gone, but are gone abroad a- stray, and to others bosomes flowne, Sely Comforts, sely ioy, which

fall and rise, and rise as others moue, Who seldome vse, Who seldome vse to turne, to

turne our way, And therefore Cloris will not loue, For well I see, How false men

bee, And they must pine that louers proue.



_WHat delight can they enioy,
Whose harts are not their owne?
But are gon abroade astray,
And to others bosomes flowne.
Seely comforts, seely Ioy,
Which fall and ryse as others moue,
Who seldome vse to turne our way,
And therefore Cloris will not loue:
For well I see,
How false men bee,
And let them pyne that Louers proue.



XIX. CANTO Secundo.

WHat delight can they enioy, whose harts are not their owne, But are gon, but are gon abroad, a-

stray, and to others bosoms flowne. Silly comforts, silly Ioy, which fall and ryse, and ryse, as others moue,

who seldome vse, who sel- dome vse, seldome vse, to turne, to turne our way, and therefore Cloris will not

loue, for well I see, how false men bee, and they must pine that louers proue.


XIX. BASSO.

VVHat delight can they enioy, whose

harts are not, are not their owne, but are gon, but are gon a-

brod, gon abroad astray, and to others bosoms flowne.

Silly comforts, silly Ioy, which must fall  ryse as others

moue, who sel- dom vse, ij. to turne our way, 

therefore Cloris will not loue, for well I see, how false men

bee, and they must pine that louers bee.


XIX. ALTO.

_WHat delight can they enioy, whose harts are not their owne, But are gon, but are gon abroad a-

stray, And to others bosoms flowne. Silly comforts, silly Ioy, which fall  ryse,  ryse, still as others moue,

who seldome vse, ij. vse to turne, doe seldome turne our way, and therefore Cloris will not loue,

For well I see how false en bee, then pine that louers bee.





XX. TENORE.

NOw the Earth, the Skies, the Ayre.

All things fayre, the Earth, the Skies, the

Aire, all things faire, all faire.

Seemes new borne thoughts t' infuse. Whilst

the returning spring, Ioyes each thing. ij.

the spring ioyes each


XX. CANTO Primo.

_NOw the earth, c.

Now the earth, the skies, the

Aire, All things faire, the Skies, Earth and Aire, the Earth, Skies, Aire, and all things faire, Now the

Earth, the Skies, the Aire, Earth, Skies, and Aire, all things faire, Seemes new borne thoughts t' in-fuse,

Whil'st the returning spring, Ioyes each thing. Whil'st the returning spring, Ioyes each



XX. BASSO.

NOw the Earth, the Skies, the Ayre,

All things faire, the Skies and all things faire,

Seemes new borne thoughts t' infuse,

Whilst the re- tur- ning spring.

Ioyes each


XX. CANTO Secundo.

A direction for the tuning of the Base Lute.

A la mi
B fa b mi
G sol re vt
D sol re
Gam vt
Double D sol re.
Double Cla vt

_NOw the earth, c.

Now the Earth, the Skies the Aire, the Skies, the Aire, Now

the Earth, Skies, Aire and all things faire, Seemes new borne thoughts t' in- fuse,

Whil'st the returning spring Ioyes each thing, the spring that ioyes each




XX. TENORE.

thing. And blasted hopes,  blasted hopes renewes,

When onely I alone onely. I alone. Left all a-

lone to mone. Finde no times borne for me, finde no

times, finde no times borne for me, No flowrs, no me-

dow, no flowrs, no medow springs, No Bird sings.

But notes of misery-of misery. No

flowres, no Medow, no flowres, no Medow springs.

No Bird sings, ij. But notes of mise-ry.

But notes of misery, but notes, but notes of misery


XX. CANTO Primo.

thing And blasted hopes, blasted hopes re- newes. When I a- lone, when onely I a- lone, a-

lone, Left to mone, Finde no times borne, Finde no times borne for mee, No flowres, no Medow,

No Medow springs, No Bird sings, ij. But notes of mi-se-rie. ij. No

flowres, no Medow springs, ij. No Bird sings, But

notes of misery mi- se- ry. No Bird sings, But notes, but notes of mi- se- ry.




XX. BASSO.

thing.  blasted hopes renewes: Onely I alone.

I a- lone, left to mone, finde no times born,

finde no times borne for me. No flowres, no flowrs,

no Meadow springs, no Bird sings, but notes of

misery. ij. No flowres, no flowrs,

no Meadow springs, no Bird sings, but notes of

misery. ij. but notes of mise- ry.


XX. CANTO Secundo.

thing, And blasted hopes re- newes, When onely I a- lone, onely I alone, When

I alone. Left to moane, Finde no times borne for mee, No flowres, no Medow springs, ij.

No birds sings, But notes of mi-sery, of mi- se- ry. No flowres,

no Medow, no Medow springs, No bird sings, ij but notes of mi- se-ry, ij.

No Bird sings, But notes of mi- se- ry.





M^r^s Anne Grene her leaues bee greene.
XXI.
A direction for the tu|ning
of the Lute.







THE TABLE.

_COY Daphne fled: I.
Thou pretie Bird: II.
Hee whose desires: III.
Lyke as the Lute: IIII.
Stay cruell stay: V.
Dost thou withdraw: VI.
Why canst thou not: VII.
Tyme cruell tyme: VIII.
Griefe keepe within:
First part. IX.
Drop not mine Eies: Second part. X.
Haue all our passions: Third part. XI.
Let not Cloris think: XII.
Can dolefull notes:
First part. XIII.
No, let Chromatique tunes: Second part. XIIII.
Vncertaine certaine turnes: Third part. XV.
Eies looke no more: XVI.
If I could shut the gate: XVII
I dye when as I doe not see: XVIII.
What delight can they enioy: XIX.
Now the Earth, the Skies, the Ayre: XX.
M^r^s Anne Grene her leaues bee greene. XXI.

FINIS.





