




THE SVRVAY OR TOPOGRAPHICAL Description of France:
With a new Mappe, helping greatly for the Suruey|ing of euery particular Country, Cittye, For|tresse, Riuer, Mountaine, and Forrest therein:
Collected out of sundry approued Authors: very amply, tru|ly, and historically digested, for the pleasure of those who desire to be throughly acquainted in the state of the kingdome  dominion of France.
LONDON Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe, and are to bee sold at his shop at Poules chayne. 1592.




The Preface to the Reader.
THou seest before thine eies (gentle Reader) the face of the florishing Kingdome of France, whose lustre and glorie at this present is a little eclipsed and dymmed by the cyuill dissention and bloudy broiles that a long time haue afflicted it. I knowe many famous Cosmographers haue in their maps described the country in ample sort, vnto whom an ancient Historiographer gaue the first and greatest light I mean Iulius Caesar who in his learned and eloquent Commentaries of France did so excellently well that all the writers in the world, and lay all their pens and wits to|gether in that matter, cannot doe so well againe, or once come neare him, considering the time that he wrote was so long agone. Amongst other that haue written since of the country and people of France, Bele-Forests hath not deserued the lest praise for his Collections out of sundry good and approued Authours, published concerning this matter. Now thou hast also here of vs a breif Topographicall description of France and Nauarre, gathered out of many of the later writers not to bee neglected, wherein are exactlye and briefly described their Regions, Prouinces, Citties Castels, and Fortresses, the commodities of euery soyle, the na|ture of the Inhabitants, their auncient and moderne maners, lawes rights and customes, with diuers other thinges coincident to the same, and verye meete to bee knowne in such an Historie. To bee breif I shall not neede to write at large of the Country in this place, for that thou shalt bee informed thereof most amply by one that can sett it downe in better manner then I. I will speake a worde or two of Paris, the capitall City and metropolis of all France, an vniuersity whose fame is spread through|out all Europe for the famous Scholes of learning therein, and I thinke it to bee beside one of the most populous Cityes in the world. The number of whose Inhabitants is of many millyons, and to make shorter, is, as it were another world, or rather as one said of ancient Rome, an epitome of the world: with the Crowne of France is invested at this present Henry the Fourth lyneally descended from Saint Lodouicke, who is now vp in Armes with the princes of his bloud roiall for his title and right vnto the Crowne: Remarked for the most heroicall and magnanimous Kinge, fo the most victorious and invincible warriour that euer vnsheathed sword

for a Kingdome: hauing bine personally present and fought more then fourteene or fiueteene pitched fields, and had victorye on his side at them all. So that I thinke if we seeke amongst all the Empires of the Assyrians, Persians, Grecyans, Romans, Almans, Iewes, Tartarians and Mahome|tans, and ouer all the face of the whole world beside, we cannot find a king of a greater race and more noble courage then this: hauing had xxviii. kinges in his house before him and all in line masculine of his fathers side: His mother being the heire and yssue of a Queene, whose mother was sister to Francis the Great, excelled in wit, learning and haughty courage of a woman all other Christian Princesses that euer had liued before her. And if there be any that will contradyct me concerning the kings roiall parson or his ancient ofspring and descent, to compare it to some base, poore and ignoble Family, he is lesse able to speake of the royal, high, ancient  noble families of Christendome, then frogs and rats are to discourse of the greatnes, height, essence, beauty and admirable operations of the Sunne: and for his country if there be any that will empeache the goodnes and beautie thereof, to say that it is not so fruitfull nor so pleasant, nor so well furnished and replenished with all thinges that are to be desired in such a flourishing kingdome (Peace only excepted which the God of heauen send downe vpon them spedily) he is no more able to dispute of a Country then a Mole or a Mouse of the man in the Moone. For his Royall person, and noble progenie his very enimyes and al the world shalbe iudge. And for his kingdome and country William of Saluste Seigneur of Bartas, a man of that nation to whome credite may woorthily bee giuen in such a matter: whose verses in praise of his natiue soile in his second day of his second weeke, I haue translated thus out of French:
O Fruitefull France! Most happy Land, happy and happy thrice!
O perle of rich Europaean bounds. O earthly Paradice.
All haile sweete soile! O France the mother of many conquering knights,
Who planted once their glorious standards like triumphing wights,
Vppon the banckes of Euphrates where Titan Day-torch bright.
Riseth, and blouddy swordes vnsheathd where Phebus drounds his Light,
The Mother of many artist-hands whose workemanship most rare
Dimmes Natures workes, and with her fairest flowers doth compare.
The Nurse of many learned wits who fetch their skill diuine
From Rome, from Greece, from AEgipt farre, and ore the learnedst shine,
As doth the glymmering-Crimsin-dye ouer the darkest gray:
Titan ore starres, or Phaebus flowers ore marigolds in May.
Thy flouds are Ocean Seas, thy Tounes to Prouinces arise,
Whose ciuill gouerment their walls hath raisd to lofty skies.
Thy soile is fertill-temperate-sweete, no plague thine aire doth trouble,
Bastillyons fower borne in thy bounds: two Seas and mountains double,
The Crocodile fierce-weeping-teares annoyeth not thy maine,
The speckled-race of crawling Serpents hant not thy domaine,
Not in one Acre of thy land that cursed seede is seene,
Backs-venimous-winding to and fro t'infect thy medowes greene,
The Tigre-swift of-foote prayes not within thy mountaines hollow,
Nor hungry-soming ore thy Plaines inrag'd his chace doth follow.
No Lions in thy desarts lurke: no Sea-horse monster rumbling,
Swymmes to thy maine, and steales thine infantes vnder waues them tumbling
If in thy streaming- riuers-rich-swift-gliding be not rold
The golden sands mong Pibble-stones, nor ore of massiue gold:
Yf Siluer pure dropping from downe thy mountaines be not found,
And euery step Perle, Ruby, Diamond, Grenate on thy ground,
In contre-chaung thou art as rich in woade, in wolle, in wines,
In Salt pits, Sindon fine good Graine: which are sufficient mines
To make thee farre and neere renound of earthly Kingdomes Queene.
Tis only Peace, thou lackst. Alas! O God whose Eyes haue seene
Our blessinges and our miseries, thine Eyes of mercy glance
Vppon our present State and quench the flames consuming France:
Sweete father turne our stormes to calmes: Thy heauy hand retyre,
Hide quickly in thy Quiuer all the Arrowes of thine Ire.
Thou canst not Gentle reader desire to knowe any more of this country then this excellent poet hath told thee, co~cerning they great treasures, com|modities and pleasures thereof, wherein it is worthely to be preferred be|fore all other countryes vnder the scope of the heauens. Thou seest first with what worthy and honorable titles hee saluteth this rich and flouri|shing territory: then speaketh of the great numbers of warryours, famous Artists, and men of great learning that it hath brought forth and bred. Nexte setteth downe the Scituation of the Countrey: to wit: that it is bounded towards the west and the North with the huge Ocean Sea:  to the Southward with the Mediterrane: being full of diuers riuers or rather litle seas, passing and runninge euerie way cleane thorow the mayne: the names whereof are: The Rosne the Saone, Dordone, Loyre, Marne, Seyne, and Oyse: besides a great number of others smaller and yet verie famous to: It hath her cities as Paris, Tholouse, Roan, Lions, Bourdeaux, and many other wich are more populous then so many dutchies, Countries and whole prouinces. The fortresses at this day are fayrer, more in number and better fortified then euer before. As for the Ciuility of the people, I leaue that to the iudgment of the stranger that hath liued there. The ferti|lity of the Country is almost incredible: the ayre is temperat euery where. For rampires and walles it hath the two seas: and likewise the moun|taines called the Alpes towards Italie: and the Pyrenaean mountaines to|wardes Spaine, beside it is exempt from all venimous, cruell and rauish|ing

beastes, as Crocodyles, and other monstrous Serpents, which spoe the country of AEgypt and diuers other partes of Africa. If it haue not mines of Gold and Siluer, precious Stones and perles, yet hath it in cont re-exchang other mines of farre greater commoditie and neuer to be searched to the botome: to wit: lynen clothes: woade, wolles, salte, corne and wine: The wadd and salte are found in Languedock: salte is founde also in the Country of Guienne: wolles in Prouince and in Beausse, where is also wheate in abondance: wine in diuers partes, and in all prouinces except fower or fiue great prouision of two or three of these commodityes: The poete hath remarked the principall thinges whereof great trafficke is made into forraine and neighbour nations from France. This then might suffice to learne that nation to acknowledge the great gifts of God and bee thankefull for the same. And seing they haue so many benefits, to knowe what they want, and to aske it at his hands that can giue it. So also with my hart I can wish to this kingdome (that whilome was so flourishing) and I hope all good christians wish the same, a florishing, firme, ciuill, vn|aigned and christian Peace, the band of true vnity and concord to indure amongst them for euer.





A TOPOGRAPHICAL Description of the two kingdoms Fraunce and Nauarre, by their seue|rall Parliaments and Pro|uinces.
_PARIS which serueth for the Ile of France,Paris. Picardie, Champagne, Bry, Auxerre, Puysaye, Gastines, Hurepoix, Chartres, with the territories of the same, Perche, Montforte, Amaury, Ti|mere, Vandosme, Dune, Beausse, Orle|ans, Bloys, Sologne, Tours and Touraine, Maine, Aniou, Poictou and the land of Auniz, Angolesme, Lymosin, the high and lowe Marche, Berrie, Neuers, Bourbon, Auuergne, Forest, Lyons, Beauiolois, and Mascon.
2 Roan serueth for Normandie.Roan.
3 Renes serueth for Bretaigne.Renes.
4 Digeon serueth for Bargondie.Digeon.
5 Grenoble serueth for Dauphine.Grenoble.
6 Aix serueth for Prouince.Aix.
7 Tholouse serueth for Viuares,Tholouse. Velay, Geuou|dan, Languedock, Rouergue, Quercy, Foix, Comin|ges, the countie of Ite in Iordan, the countie of Gaure, Agen, Cendon, the countie of Lestraec, Armignack, Bigorre.
8 Bourdeaux which serueth for Xantonge,Bourde|aux. Peri|gort, the land between the two seas; Bourdeaux, the

land of Medoch, Buchez, Laundes, the duchie of Al|bret, Bazoles, and Gascoigne, Mets with the territo|rie thereof, which haue one President or soueraigne Iudge.
The King of Nauarre hath also two parliaments which serue for the countries which he holdeth in soueraigntie.
Pau.1 Pau which serueth for the territorie of Bearne.
S. Palais.2 S. Palais or S. Pelasge whervnto do resort al the Nauarrian part of Biskay.

An abstract out of Belforest.
THe Realme of Fraunce is diuided into eight parts in respect of so many Parlements ther|in contained.
Paris.Paris serueth for many countries.
TholouzeTholouze which serueth for Languedocke and part of Guyenne.
Bourde|aux.Bourdeaux which serueth for the rest of Guienne.
Roan.Roan which serueth for all Normandie.
Grenoble.Grenoble which serueth for all Dauphine.
Digeon.Digeon which serueth for Burgondie.
Aix.Aix which serueth for Prouince.
Renes.Renes which serueth for Britaine.
Metz.Herevnto as a ninth part may bee added Metz, which serueth for the same towne and the territorie thereof where the king hath one President which iudgeth absolutely.
Iurisdic|tion of Paris.Under the iurisdiction of Paris are comprehen|ded the Bailiwike of Laon which hath the firste place, then Rheims, Amiens, Abbeuille, Bullogne, Senlis, Sens, Auxerre, Troy, Vitrye in Partenay, Cha|stle-thierry, Chaumont in Bassigny, Meaux, Prouince, Melune, Poictiers, Angiers, Mans, Tours, Blois, Bur|ges,

Orleans, Chartres, Angolesme, Rochel, Monfort, Amaury, Lyons, Malins, S. Peter, the minster, Rion, O|rillac in Auuergne, then the Prouostship and Ui|countie of Paris, but Belforest obserueth not this or|der of Bailiwikes.


The Prouostship and Vicountie of Paris.
PAris standeth in as good an aire as any towne in the world,The scitu|ation of Paris. the territorie thereof being plea|sant, fruitfull and plentifull in Corne, Wine, Whitemeates, Haie, Fruite, Herbage, Cattell, and cleere waters, euerie way inhabited with Farmes, great Boroughs and Uillages, besides an infinite number of houses of pleasure, as Gentilly, Bissestre, Vannes, Issy, Arcueil, where there are cleare waters, fountaynes and good springes, vaulted and arched about. The lower Medoune which belongeth to the Charterhouse. The higher Medoune some|times the Cardinall of Lorreyns, who procured the building of the arteficiall and halfe naturall Caue in the same, S. Clow, Montmartre, whence they haue their plaster of Paris, which is a great furtherance to the buildings of the same.S. Dionise S. Dionise in Fraunce (where are the Toombes of the Frenche kinges) containeth eleuen parishes, it is wide, and hath within the circuit therof arable grounds, medowes wine, and willow groues, wherby considering the compas therof it is nothing inhabited. It standeth as wel and in as faire a feeld as any town in France. It is easie to be fortified and hard to bee forced, in that there is no hill or other thing to commaund it, for it standeth in a faire and large champion, al|most euerye waye compassed and enuironed with

waters and marshie grounds.
The Prouostship of Paris hath seuen vnder baili|wikes, tearmed the seuen daughters, whose seates doe beare the name of vnder bailifs, and the guardi|an of the Prouostship of Paris is the cheefe Bailie: their names are these, 1. Poissi. 2, S. Germain in Laye. 3, Taurnon in Bry. 4, Torcie in Bry. 5, Corbeyl. 6, Mont-le-herye. 7, Gonnese in France.
Poissy.Poissy standeth nere the riuer of Seine in a plesant small vale, on the one side enuironed with groues, and on the other side with arable grounds.
S. Ger|mains. Nanteere Wood of Treason.S. Germains in Laye is very well seated, and in a good aire, specially for the game.
Nanterre a village wherin S. Genouiefe was born.
Within one league of S. Germains there is a great wood almost all oke, tearmed the wood of Treason, if any twigge thereof be cast into the water, it pre|sently sinketh like a stone, and sithens the treason (whereof it taketh the name) was there contriued, it neuer prospered, for being cutte it springeth no more, a matter vtterly repugnant to the nature of Oke, at this present time there standeth little but Standers and Stompes. It is betweene Peck-gate and Cat-gate, fiue leagues from Paris. In a corner thereof somewhat within the woode on the side that lieth toward S. Germains, there standeth a great stone table, wherevpon it is sayde that Gau|nelon of Hault-escul and his confederates conspyred the destruction of Charlemaigne and his posteritie.
Corbeil.Corbeyl, a Countie lieng vpon two riuers, Seyne and Essonne, or the riuer of Estampes, it is situate in a faire feeld, but ouerlooked and commanded with two hilles.
Among certaine ruines and decaied buildinges,

between Consolans and Charenton, there is an Ec|cho which answereth the voice ten times.
Villeneuf S. George or S. Georges new towne,Villeneuf. is a great Borough, three leagues distant from Cor|beil.
Mont-le-hery,Mont-le-hery. which is not far distant from Char|tres, betweene the same and Paris lyeth the manor house of Palaiseau Longuineau, Anthonies bridge, or Pont-Antoine, Queenes borow, or Bourg la Roine and Vau de Ceruay an Abbey.
Gonesse no walled towne,Gonesse. but neuerthelesse is one of the fayrest and wealthyest Borowghs in all France, they make there most excellent bread.


The Land and territorie of Chartres.
CHartres is a Dutchy scytuate betweene the 49. and 50. degree of the North latitude,Chartres. howebeit Ptolome placeth it in the 48. Westward, it borde|reth vppon the territorye of Orleans and Beausse, Northward on Perch and Normandie, South|ward vpon Dune, and Eastward vpon France and the land of Gastine. The soyle plentifull in al kind of graine, fruit, cattell, wine and gardeines. Tho|rough this country passeth the riuer of Aure, which falling from Perch, keepeth his Channell alongest Chartres, Nogentle Roy, Dreux and uet,  thence running neere to Louiers at Pont de Larche, falleth into Seyne. The Church of Chartres was founded long before the comming of Iesus Christe, in the honour of a virgine which should bringe foorth the Sauiour of the world.Vidamy of Chartres. In Chartres there is a Vi|damye: the Bishopricke is forty leagues outright, and in Ecclesiasticall causes hath iurisdiction ouer

1600. Parishes or Steeples. It hath vnder it Bloys, Vandosme, Dune, Dreux, Mante, Montforte Great Perch Poissy. Sundry baronages of Perch, doo at euery death or alteration of Lorde relieue of the Byshopricke as Allay, Brow, Monnirall, Antho|ne, Bazoch, the Uicounty of Laygny, and Messe doo relieue of the Vidam. The inhabitants of Chartres are familiar and courteous, and greatlye giuen to buyeng and selling of corne.
Chartres.Chartres is a Bayliwicke, and hath a iudgment seat, wherevpon do depend these vnder bailiwicks. 1. Neufchastell in Timerais. 2. Great Perch. 3. Perch Gouet. 4. Estampes. 5. Dourdant. 6. Nogent le Roy. Bonneual.
The land and terrytorye of Chartres comprehen|deth also Beausse and Sologne, wherof:
Beausse.Beausse hath on the South Gastine, on the East and North, the territorye of Chartres and Vandos|me, on the West. This countrey lieng betweene Loyre and Paris is one of the plentifullest in wheate throughout Europe, and euer is an assured Store|house to the Ile of France and Paris. It lieth leuel, no one place higher than other, and the plaines so euen that no riuer can runne through it: whereby they haue there no water but out of Pooles, mari|shes, and welles, which for the most parte are drie in summer and so consequentlie water very scarce: such drought maketh this Countrey more apte to corne then any other. Therin do stand som towns  villages though not of any great name, as Toury Angeruille, Meruville, Gemuille, Artenay, Pluuiers, which is rather thought to be in Gastine.
Sologne.Sologne lieth beyond Loyre, which boundeth the Eastside thereof as Orleance doth the North, Berry

the South, and Touraine the West. The chiefe Townes therein are Gergeau, Suly, Ferte, S. Lau|rent des Eaux, Clery, and others that lie in the plain which stretcheth from Orleance to Bloys, and is one of the fayrest in France, the soyle is sandy and so consequently good for Rie.
Estampes a Dutchy,Estampes well seated in a good Uine ground, the towne is of a reasonable circuite: how|beit but slenderly inhabited and is very waste, and yet rich by reason of the trafficke of corne, there is a faire and strong castell, also a riuer which is well stored with Crayfishes, but hath no name but what it borroweth of the towne.


Dourctan and Espernon Townes.
Dune dependeth of the bailiwicke of Bloys,Dune. it ly|eth in the 48. degree of the North latitude, and is 10 leagues broad but not so long: on the East lieth Or|leance, on the West Vandosme and the territorie of Maine, on the North Galerne, Chartres and Perch, and on the South Bloys, the head Towne thereof is Chasteau Dune which standeth on a rocke vppon a very high hill and hard to come to,Chasteau-Dune. especiallye on the North side, from whence they may see as farre about as the day can conceiue. This Castle stan|deth vppon such a hanging hill, that it seemeth to hang or leane in the cloudes, and is fortified with a great towre. In this town is the iustice seat for the whole county of Dune, whereon doo depend fiue ca|stlewicks viz. 1. Montiguy Ganelon. 2. Courtalane. 3. Montilar. 4. Esdars. 5. Rebecan: With others which haue recourse by appeale like as Chasteau-dune hath to the royall Sea of Bloys, the suburbes

are 4. times greater, better built and more plenti|fullye inhabited then the towne. The dwellers of good capasity, theyr speech meetly neat, proper and short. Toward Perch the territory of Dune is ful of groues, Forrests and pastures, with pooles and store of cattell. Toward Orleance and Bloys, it is plentifull in corne and vines, the vine grounds do end at Chasteau-dune, for approching toward Nor|ma~dy there are no more except some few wild bran|ches, which they maintain only for a shew, making veriuice of the fruite of the same. In this Countye is the lake of Verde, which conteyneth two leages in length,Verde Lake. and 250. paces in breadth when it is at the fullest, and is well stored with fishe and wilde-foule.
Bloys.Bloys. This countrey is well watered with dy|uers springs and brookes, besides foure Ryuers: Loyre, who taking his head in the forrest of Cham|rout, passeth by Illiers, Alluy, Bonneuall, so belowe the Suburbs of S. Iohn de la Chaisne, at Chasteau-dune, so to Vandosme, and thence falleth into the ri|uer of Sastre at a Uillage called Escoublanc, which is a legue aboue Chasteaudune. In swaloweth the Riuer of Conny which springeth in the Forrest of Orleance neere to Arteuay, deuideth it selfe into two channels, whereof the one runneth to Baygnolet in Beausse, and the other to Varez. This smal stream notwithstanding whatsoeuer rayne, dooth neuer arise, ouerflow, or is troubled: but contrariwise it riseth, ouerfloweth, and is most troubled in the hot|test season of the yeare and in the dogge dayes, if it chance to ouerflowe and passe extraordinarily be|yond the bankes and vsuall bounds of his bed, the contreymen are sure of a haruest plague or famyne

the next yeare after. The third is called Aigre, and the fourth Hyerre, which so soone as it is sproong vp, immediatly hideth it selfe in the earth, not farre from the first head, breaketh out againe, and soone after falleth againe into the earth, where it runneth aboue a league vnder ground. This countrie ap|pertaineth to the house of Longueuille, which is des|cended of Iohn the Bastard of Orleance, and natu|rall sonne to Philip of Fraunce, who was sonne vnto king Philip of Vallois.
Millencay  Remorentine doe depend vpon the Bailiwike of Blois.Millencay and Remo+rentine. Remorentine is a smal Towne standing vpon the territorie of Blois, but comprised in Sologne. It standeth in the riuer of Sodre.
Blois standeth in the 47 degree of the North lati|tude,Bloys. and somewhat more on the East lieth Orle|ance, on the West Touraigne, on the South Sol|logne and Berry, on the North Vandosme Beausse, toward Beausse it standeth vpon Loire, part vpon a hillie rocke, and part vpon the playne. For the plen|tie of excellent wines, corne and fruit, few countries may be compared to Blois. It hath store of vnder|woods, orchards, riuers, pooles, and quick springs of faire and cleere waters, whereof doe proceede the fruitfulnesse of the soile: the feede is faire, the ayre wholesome and very temperate, the heat moderate. It excelleth Beausse and Sologne wherein it doeth participate, in that besides the aboundance of corne, it is prouided of Wine, Fruit, and Water betweene Blois and Orcheze (a village within two leagues of it) where is found earth in colour and effect resemb|ling the Turkes Terra sigillata. At Blois are condu|its of such greatnesse and height, that three horse|men may passe afront vpon them. There is also a

Bayliwike and Iustice-seat, whose iurisdiction ly|eth fortie leagues out, and containeth seuenteene townes, and six hundred great parishes.
Cha~bort.Chambort standeth within three leagues of Blois from whence it may be seene, it is a castell wherein is a staire, vpon the which a great number of people may passe too and fro at once, and yet not see each o|ther. Therein is also the Q. garden containing x. akers of land, from the which stretcheth an allie to|ward the forrest of Blois, which is halfe a league long and six fathome wide, beautified with faire rowes of elmes, ech one planted six foot from other, whereof there are about six hundred in a ranke.
Va~dosme.Vandosme and the territorie thereof are bounded on the East with Beausse, on the West with Aniow on the North with Perch, and on the South with Touraine, it is a Dutchie appertaining on the far|ther side to the king of Nauarre, and is of the land of Chartres, the towne standeth vpon Loire.
Houdan  Dreux Perch.Houdan Dreux are also of the land of Chartres.
Perch a Countie, is also of the countrie of Char|tres hauing on the East and North Normandie, on the South Chartres and Vendosme, on the West the territorie of Maine.
The notablest Townes therein contained, are Mortaigne, Bolesme, Feuilet, in high Perch in Perch.
Mortaigne, Bolesme, Feuillet, Gouet. Bazoch Gouet. Aluge, Nonumirall, Brow, also Anthon, Malues, Raux|uiaillard, Conde vpon Huynes, Nogent le Rotron.
The Territorie is watered with the streames of Huynes, Comerche, Lambee.
Part of this countrie belongeth to the Duchy of Alenson, and therefore aforetime depending vpon the parliament of Roan, but now vpon the Exche|quer

of Alenson, the rest is of the Bailiwike of Char|tres, and so consequently hath recourse to the parli|ament of Paris.


The Bayliwike and Duchie of Orleans.
THis countrie hath on the East Gastine,Descrip|tion of Orleans. on the South Sologne, on the North Beausse, and on the West Touraine, Orleans is as well seated as any Towne in Fraunce, hauing at the foot of the walles Loire, which comming out of the mountains of Auuergne passeth toward Geuouand. In this ri|uer they take Salmons quicke, Plaice, Aloses, and Lampraies, and they vse thervpon great trade of merchandise, Loire falleth into it, which is a spring or Fountaine, a small league from Orleans vpon the side of Oleuet, and runneth not past the length of one league in all, notwithstanding what|soeuer drought it neuer drieth vp, neither is it euer frozen, so that when Loir is so frozen that the milles cannot grind, they haue recourse to those of Loiret. The soile is fruitfull and well inhabited, sufficient|ly prouided of corne, as well of the selfe growth as from Beausse, their neighbour and the side of So|logne. Great store of Fish and Foule, but specially of good wines both White and Claret, for the Orleans wines doe beare the name of the being more helth|some, delicate, and nothing so corrosife as the Gas|coigne wines. Their plentie is such that they sende great store to Paris and all other parts of Fraunce, also into other forren countries. The towne stan|deth high, very wholesome, and in a fine aire, and the inhabitants doe speake as eloquently for French as doe the Castillians for Spanish, or the Tus|cans for Italian.
Unto the Bayliwike of Orleance haue recourse Bois commigne, Yeinuille which is in Beausse, Cha|steau Reuard, Yeur the castell, Neusuill at the lodges, Syan, Montaugis, Loris, Neune vpon Loire, Bois|gencye.
Baugency.Baugency vpon Loire, one of the delicatest towns of the Realme, as abounding in wine and corne, be|side the pleasure of all sorts of game, as also in re|spect of the traffike.
The For|rest of Or|leans.The Forrest of Orleance is twelue leagues long and feedeth an infinit number of cattel, besides that they there fetch their timber to build with, as also fewell for the whole countrie round about.


Melune and the land of Gastine.
Melune.MElune standeth vpon Seine, hauing on the East Bry, on the South Gastine, on the North that side of Paris that loketh to Corbeil, and on the West Beausse: it is about the 4 degree of the latitude, part thereof standeth vpon a high grounde, paunching vpon which in that place maketh an Isle as at Pa|ris, in the which the Castell standeth. The soile is pleasant and fruitful in corne, wine, wood and fruit, and the riuer in fish. The Citizens are courteous, actiue, and of good capacitie.
The Bayliwik and Iustice seat of Melune hath recourse to the seas of Moret, Nemours, Chastealou|don, Chapelle la Reyne, Villy in Gastine.
Gastine hath on the East Bry and the Riuer of Seyne,Gastine. on the West Beausse, on the South the For|rest of Orleance, and on the North the land by Char|tres, the soile is in many places sandie, and yeeldeth but little. The most famous places are Nemours,

Chasteauloudon, Nore, Ferte, Fountainbeleau, and an infinit number of Gentlemens houses.
S. Maturine l'Archant standeth in a large,S. Matu|rine l'Ar|chant. sandie, drie, and almost barren soile.
Fountainbeleau (the kings mansion) is very well seated.Fou~tain|beleau. Wood, game, brookes, pooles, riuers, wild-foule, and fish, are plentifull.
Moret a small towne vpon Loire,Moret. easie to be forti|fied, and a reasonable good soile.
Nemours standeth also vpon Loyre.Nemours. The duke of Nemours is of the house of Sauoy.


Sens.
SOme men thinke Sens to be in Burgondie,Sens. others in Champagne, and some others doe thinke it to be a prouince of it selfe. The territorie of Sens hath on the East Champagne, on the West Gastine, on the South the territorie of Auxerre, on the North Bry, from the which the riuer of Yonne doth part it, for the iurisdiction of Sens reacheth almost to Monte|reau. The towne standeth vpon a hill, and leaneth ouer the riuer of Yonne, which runneth at the foote thereof, large and wel ditched, with cleere streames continually running through the streetes thereof, which springeth out of a Lake that is without the towne, not farre from the which there is a Spring whose water naturally dooth turne into pommish stones, which be very light and haue correspo~dence with the froth. The countrie aboundeth in Corne, delicat wines, flesh, whit meats, wooll, fish, and o|ther commodities: there is also more store of Oile and Nuts than in any other part of all Fraunce, for the whole countrie is couered all ouer with Wal|nuts,

yea all the playne from Meutereau vnto Sens, wherein are sundry townes and villages, faire me|dowes and good grounds, also on the other side of Yonne toward Gastine, are many hilles, some very high, loaden with vines.
Pont sur Yonne-Pont sur Yonne a little town, whose inhabitants are nimble, ticklish, and giuen to warres.
Villeneuf le Roy.Villeneuf le Roy the onely sea royall, depending vp|on the Bayliwike of Sens.


The land of Auxerre.
Auxerre.AVxerre is scituate in a most fruitfull soile, very pleasauntly vpon the riuer of Yonne, which diuiding it from Burgondie and the territorie of Neuers, commeth to wash the lowest part of the towne, which beginning in a vale climbeth vp to the toppe of a hil, wherevpon standeth the castle, an auntient thing compassed and fortified with great walles. This towne consisteth of eight parishes, out of this soile doth proceed the most parte of the wyne that watereth Paris.
Chablis.Chablis a small towne not farre from Auxerre.


Champagne.
Cham|pagne.CHampagne and Bry are herein accounted but for one land, through the which the riuer of Marne taketh his course, and so at Charenton which is within two small leagues of Paris, dooth fall into Seyne. These countries doe on the one side of Marne comprehende these Townes following: Laigny, Meaux, Forcy, Colomiers, Prouince, Monte|reau, Bry Countie Robert, Nogent Merye, Troye, Bar

vpon Seine, Mussy l'Euesque, Douzenay, Vandoeure, Bar vpon Aube, Ferte vpon Aube, Pont vpon Seine, S Florentine, Erny the castell, Fonuille, Sedan, Re|bel, the land of Bassignye, the land towarde Vitry in Perch, which parteth Bar from Champagne, and Fraunce from Lorraine. On the other side are Rheims, Glaye, Gaudelu, Chasteau-Thierry, Dorma~t, Espernaye, Chalons, Laygny, S. Menehou.
Bry and Champagne haue on the East Lorraine and Parre,Brye. Cham|pagne. on the West Fraunce and Hurepoix, from the which Seine dooth diuide them, on the South Burgondie, and on the North Picardy.
Champagne is a countrie flat, fruitfull, and meet for tillage. Brye is woodie, but yet in a manner as fruitfull as Champagne, the firmament cleere, and the aire gentle and temperate, the riuers great, the people actiue and giuen to good husbandrie, the Nobilitie courteous, valiaunt, and manye; the townes welthy, the villages well inhabited, and to be breefe, they want nothing necessarye for mans life: corne, wine, cattell, wood, fruit, game, flight, fi|shing, as plentifull as in anye other Prouince of Fraunce. Howbeit the people of Champagne are somewhat teastie and selfwilled.
Troye The cheefe Towne of Champagne,Troye. stan|deth some 47 degrees and a few minutes from the Aequator, being scituate vpon the Ryuer of Seine. The soyle fat and fruitfull. The circuit of the wals the largest in Fraunce. It hath a Bayliwik and Iu|stice sea, wherevnto haue recourse Bar vpon Seyn, Mussy l'Euesque, Forest vpon Aube, Negent Pont vp|on Seyn, Eruy the castell, S Florentine, all Townes scituate in Champagne.
Chastillon standeth vpon Seyne.Chastillo~.
Bar.Barr vpon Aube is parcell of Bassigny.
Arssy.Arssy standeth also vpon Aube.
Bassigny.Bassigny whereof Charcont is the cheefe towne, it is a towne of great resort standing vpon a rocke, furnished with a reasonable strong castell. It hath no riuer to water it, neither any water other than in cesterns, sauing one spring which is beneath the Dogan,Dogan is a Towne|house or a Costome|house. neuerthelesse beneath runneth the riuer of Suize, which taketh the head out of the Fountayne of Ormances, and pooles of Maran, within foure or fiue leagues of Chaumont. Marne which springeth out of Marmote neare to Langres, runneth a good way from the Towne. The cheefe traffike is cloth both woollen and linnen, and the drapers and wea|uers are of greatest account among Marchaunts, and are welthie and rich. The soyle is fruitful. To the Bayliwike and Iustice sea doe answere the seat of Barr vpon Aube. It hath also Consular Iurisdic|tion.
Monti|randell.Montirandell standeth vpon Marne.
Ieinuille, of the dependence of a yoonger sonne of the house of Guyse.Ieinuille. It is a principalitie wherevpon doth depend the Boroughs of Sullye, Douleuant, Roches, Escairon, with other Castels and Uillages.
Vassy.Vassy, a royall seat of the inheritaunce of Guyse, and patrimonie of the Scottish Queene, it stan|deth in the middest of the woods vpon a small riuer named Bloys, and hath goodly fountaynes, of the which one being in the Hospitall of the Dogan, yeeldeth such plenty of water in lesse than 120 paces it driueth sundry milles. Not farre from Vassy are the mines of earth whereof they make that nota|ble Bole Armoniak, that is so greatly esteemed and transported all ouer Fraunce and other Prouinces.

Parthois,Parthois. wherof Vitry is the cheefe town, lieth vpon the riuer of Saux, which co~ming from the countrie of Bar,  springing at Chenets (a strong hold 12 leagues from Vitry) doth within halfe a league of the sayde towne of Vitry fall into Marne. The Bayliwike of Vitrie containeth betweene 35  40 leagues square, beginning at S. Disiers vpon Marne,  higher on the south,  stretcheth Northward to Nogent l'Artant.
Under the same ar co~prehended the seats of S. Me|nehon, Teismes,Passe-a|vant. Espernay, Rouueray, and Passe-avant
This towne standeth vpon a hill, hauing on the east the plain of Parth, on the west the riuer of Marne which beginneth there to carrie laden boats, wher|by they transport to Paris al kinds of marchandise, corn, pulse of al sorts, yron, hempe and other wares, whereof Parth doth abound. The country is great, and euery way inclosed with the riuers of Saux and Marne, which maketh it almost an Iland, except on the east, where these 2 riuers be 2 leagues asunder,  in that place standeth S. Disier, a faire strong towne.
Prouins a bayliwike of the land Bry,Prouince. Mo~tereau hauing vnder it Sesane, Ley le chastel, Bray vpon Seyn, Montereau a town at the meeting of Seine Yonne, the castell be|tweene two riuers, but ouercrowed by a high mou~|tain wheron the vines grow: on the east it hath be|tween the 2 riuers an extent of medowes, drawing toward Trole, on the west Gastine, on the north Bry, on the south Gastile with the co~fines of Moret. The soile fruitful in corne, wine, fruit, hay and wood, but especially pleasant for the game, cheefly on the side that lieth to Bry.
Betweene 2 riuers do lie the villages of Morolles Molu,Morolles and Molu wherof Bertra~d of Foessi knight of the order, who is known by the surname of Genuay, is Lord.

On the side of Bry are the villages of Fonges, Celle, Tauers, Vernon, Valences, whereof the eldest of the Allegrynes of Paris is Lord. They be now two bro|thers, William Allegryn Lord of Valences, and Octa|uian Lord of Bordes, a Uillage not farre from Va|lences.
Nangis.Nangis appertayneth to the Lord of Beauuais.
Blandye.Blandye, the mansion house of the Duke of Lon|gueuille.
Prouins.Prouins standeth vpon a hill, and is built on the point thereof, the riuer of Morat watering the foote of the said hil falleth neere vnto Laygny into Marne. There is small store of wyne, whereby the people are forced to furnish themselues from other places. But the soyle yeeldeth plentie of Corne, Pastures, Wood, Springs of clere waters, and especially red Roses, called at Paris Roses of Prouins, whereof in the said towne they make great store of Conserues.
ColomiersColomiers in Bry dependeth of Meaux.
Meaux.Meaux standeth on a hill in the very fat and fruit|fulnesse of Brye. At the foot Westward on the side of Fraunce it hath Marne. This towne is diuided into two parts, whereof the towne is one, and the mar|ket (a very strong place) the other, and it is a brooke that falleth from the rocke that parteth them: the holde is easie to be fortified, as hauing nothing to maister or ouerthrow it.
The Bayliwike of Meaux comprehendeth the seats of Crecy, Colomiers, Ferte Gauchet. Bryeconty|robert and Torcye doe belong to the castell of Paris.
Mo~ceaux.Monceaux a castel and a house of pleasure, which the Queene mother hath built in the Territorie of Meaux.
S. Fiacre.S. Fiacre a Religious house.
Iouerre and Fermouchier religious of women.Iouerre  Fermou|chier. Loygny. Castle-thierry. Rheims.
Loygny which hath a fayre Fountayne.
Castle-Thierry, a Bayliwike whose vnderbailifs are Chastillon vpon Marne, Ouchy le Chastell, Tres|sons milly S. Front.
Rheims an Uniuersitie and Bayliwike, compre|hending the seats of Chalons, Veruz, Espernay, Tismes, and the Bayliwike of Sauldron.
Chalons standeth vpon Marne,Chalons. bordering East|ward vpon Barr, Northward vpon Rettell,  West|ward vpon Espernay, which also standeth vppon Marne.


Picardye.
PIcardye hath on the East Flanders,Picardye. fro~ whence the riuers doe diuide it, on the South Cham|pagne, on the West the Sea and part of Nor|mandy, and on the North the prospect of Callais and coast of England. It is watered with the Riuers of Some, Oyse, Ayne, Escaut, Scurpe, and others. The countrie is great, and as well inhabited as any o|ther in Fraunce. It is one of the fruitfullest in the world, and a principal storehouse for Paris, wanting nothing but coyne.
It containeth these Bishoprikes: Soissons, Sen|lis, Beauuais, which some count in Fraunce, Noyon, Laon Amiens and Bullogne, in steed of Teruin.
The notablest places are Fere, Gandelu, Villiers Costeruz, Beaumont, Creyl, and Verbery betweene Marne and Ayne.
Betweene Ayne Oyse are Lyance, Velly, Nato, Riemont, Compegne and Chauny. Breteuile, Cler|mont in Beauuais, Mondidier, Pinquignie, Blangis,

Abbeuille and Valerye.
Between Oyse and Some: Veruin, Guise, S. Pelle, Landrecy, Fousome, Bohan, S. Quintin, Nesle, Roye.
And Some encloseth in Ham, Peronne, Corbye, Dourlens, Rue, Crotoye. Hesdin now in decay, Ren|ty Montereuil on the Sea, Staples, Bullogne.
Where the land waxeth narrow along the coast of the sea, and so forth by the countrie of Oyse which comprehendeth the Townes of Guyne, Ardres, Hames, Blarues, Callais.
Soissons.Soissons is in the Bayliwike of Laon.
The territorie of Laon is comprised betweene the riuers of Ayne and Oyse, whereof Laon is the cheefe town which standeth, it is a bayliwik wher|on do depend Soissons, Noyon, S. Quintin, Riemont, Coucy, Chauny, Guise, Peronne, Mondidier, Roye.
Lyans.Lyans or the Lady of Ioye, is not far from Laon.
Co~pigne.Compiegne is in the same quarters.
S. Quin|tin.S. Quintin the head towne of Vermandois, scituat vpon Some, enuironed with fennes and medowes is the kay of France.Ham. Chastelot. Hard by are Ham Chastelot.
Guise, a Duchie and auncient inheritance of the yoonger sonnes of Lorraine.Guyse.
Peronne.Peronne, a strong towne vpon Some: Corbye, Roye, Mondidier, Nesle.
The territorie of Beauuois whereof is cheefe:
Beauuais.Beauuais or Beauuois in a fayre seat, hauing the little fruitfull hilles on the one side, with the Me|dowes and pastures on the other, then the arable landes and vine groues. The walles thereof well flanqued and rampired, the ditches deepe  large, with sluses to let the water out or in fro~ the brooks and riuers. The towne is one of the greatest  best set out in all Fraunce, so that in beautye of building,

strength of rampiers, statelinesse of Churches, and pleasauntnesse of feed it is one of the notablest in all Fraunce, the territorie for three or foure leagues a|bout the towne is so full of Burroughs and great Uillages, that the one is not past halfe a mile from the other. The soyle yeeldeth the finest Flax that may be: especially Bale, a small Towne where the Flemings and Hollanders do resort for those kinds of Flax, whereof they make there so notable fine linnen cloth, which they disperse and sell ouer the whole world. In the same soyle they digge also a kind of earth (almost as excellent as that of Venis) to make vessels and pots. But the originall of the cheefest wealth of this towne ariseth of their wool|len workes, and Diaprie, for there they make the best Serges in all Fraunce, yea such as may com|pare with those of Florence. The Stammels also of Beauuais are the finest in France,  are transported al ouer Fraunce, Germanie, Spaine, Italie, Greece.
Clermont in the territorie of Beauuais,Clermont Gerberoy, and Beau|mont. a Countie. Gerberoy a village not far from Beauuais Beaumont
vpon Oyse, do al belong to the bishoprik of Beauuais
To the Bailiwike thereof haue recourse Com|pigne, Clermont in Beauuais, Creyl. The Prouost|of Augy, Chaumont in Welxin, Pontoise, Beaumont vpon Oise, Cressy, Ferte milon, Pierrefons, Montmo|rency, a small towne neere to Senlis.
Amiens vpon Some which doth almost compas it about,Amiens. it hath the deepest  the most fearfull ditches in France. On the east lieth the land of Artois, on the south Vermandois, on the west Beauuais,  the fron|tiers of Norma~die, on the north Dourdens. It is one of the best  fruitfullest townes in Fraunce, in respect wherof, it is exempt of garrison, for the inhabitants are so valiaunt, that they are able of themselues to

withstand any aduersarie, the Maior and Sherifs haue the custodie of the Towne, with the charge of the warding, as also nightlye to set watche and Sentinell.
AbbeuilleAbbeuille a strong hold vpon Some, in the diocesse of Amiens, it is the cheefe Towne of Pontiew, a countrie so called in respect of the great number of bridges therein contayned, which proceed of the di|uersitie of brookes that doe fall into the Sea about S. Valeries.
In this countrie are these townes, Abbeuille, Pe|quignye, Dourlens, Aury, Crecy, Rue and Crotoye, whom three brooks do water. Reny Mutterell are on the sea, Hesdin Terwin are decayed, and the Bi|shoprike of Tirwin is transported to Bullogne.
S. Omer.S. Omer, a parcell of the Low countrie, and sub|iect to the king of Spaine, it is one of the strongest that may be, both by the natural scituation and ma|nuall fortification. It standeth on the riuer of Dae, which falleth into the sea on the North side Graue|ling. On the North lyeth the countrie of Oye, on the West Bullogne, on the South Pontiew and part of Artois, and on the East Flanders.
Oye. Guien. Bullogne.Oye, Guine, Bullogne, three countries together being limited Eastward with the territorie of Flan|ders, by the riuer of Dae, southward with Picardie, and the Bayliwike of Mutterell, from the which the riuer of Canche diuideth Bullogne, and Westwarde and Northward by the great sea. The whole coun|trie comprehendeth many townes, villages, bor|roughs  castels, as Beauquesne, Caerteuil, Estaples, which standeth at the fall of Canche into the Sea, S. Riquier, S. Iosse, Pont de Bric and others.
Bullogne.Bullogne is strong and inexpugnable. It is diui|ded

into high Bullonge and base Bullogne, and is watered with the sea, which is not much more then a hundred paces from the high Towne. High Bul|logne is inclosed with strong walles, and fortifyed with very deepe ditches.
Guynes a Countie,Guynes. wherein standeth the strong Castell of Blannes, the house and hill of Inglebert, and the towne and fort of Guynes, which is diuided in two, the one part standing in the salt Fennes, the other vpon firme land, and so strongly as it seemeth inexpugnable.
Betweene Guynes and Ardres also is a verye strong Towne by the fennes of Belangen Andres, with that channell of the Sea that runneth vnto Guynes, and parteth the countrie of Oye Guines, making that countrie inuincible.
In the high countrie of Guines lieth the Hauen of Nieullet, Artincourt, Peuplinge, and others.
Callais is scituate fouresquare,Callais. and is euery way terrible, on the North lieth Rice-bank vpon a poynt of land that runneth into the Sea, on the West the causey of Nieullet bridge, on the South the salt wa|shes fleeting from Hammes, on the East the lande of Oye and the downes which stretch euen to Graue|ling.
The land of Oye, so called by reason of a small towne of that name therein.


Langres with the remainder of the territories of Champagne.
LAngres,Langres. a strong town nere the mount Vosegus vpon the frontiers of the free countie, which to|gether with part of Bassigny lyeth on the East

side therof, on the North that side of the mount Vo|segus that breedeth Marne, on the West that side of the same mount from whence Seyne doth spring, on the south Bourgondie, within which Dutchie this towne is comprehended, but the dependences haue their recourses to Sens.
VandoeurVandoeur, a strong castell in the territorie of Lan|gres, neere vnto the head of Seyne. These lands doe abound in corne, wine, groues, yron-mines, and o|ther things.
Vignory.Vignory, a Towne standing some quarter of a league from Marne, betweene two hilles, vpon the one whereof standeth the Castell.
Montes|clair.Montesclair, a castell three leagues from thence, standing on the top of a high hill in the countrie. It hath bene fortified as being the first front in Fraunce on the side of Lorraine, and at the foot of the same hil is the great borough of Montesclair, a Castell, three leagues from Rimanont.
Other places. Ioignye, a Countie. Tonnerre, a Countie.
Vezelay. Here was the famous Clark The|odore de Bezabotne.Vezelay and the Castell of Grimont are builte on the toppe of a hill, along the foote whereof runneth the riuer of Yonne.


The land of Neuers or Niuernois, a Duchie.
THis countrie is large, and watered with three nauigable riuers,Neuers. Yonne, Allier, and Loire: ha|uing on the East Burgondie, on the South Bourbon, on the West Berrie, on the North Gastine and Sologne. The cheefe towne thereof is Neuers vpon Loire. The riuer of Nyeure runneth along the East side of the walles thereof. It standeth vpon a

hill, round about inclosed with good strong walles and great towers well ditched, and beautified with a stone bridge of twentie arches ouer Loire, wate|red with diuers fountaines, wherewith they maye alwaies fill their ditches. It hath no suburbs, and contayneth tenne parishes. Halfe a league beneath it Allier falleth into Loire, Nyeure doth continually driue yron mils and forges. The countrie is full of wood  pasture grounds, so that the people doe giue the~selues much to the breeding of cattell. They are poore  liue miserably, as hauing no will to labour, except in some few places between Neuers and Cha|rite. There are toward S. Leonards some Siluer mines which are not much haunted, but the yron mines are well frequented, by reason there is wood ynough, beside they vse some stone-cole which they find neere Dezize within 2 leagues of Neuers: they haue in the forrest free stone to build with, the best in Fraunce,  that they transport to Orleans, Blois, c.
In the land of Neuers are 11 walled Towns, as Neuers, Dezize, Clamesy, Douzi, Monluis, Angilberts, Corbigue by S. Leonards, S. Sage, Luizy, Premery, c.
S Pierre le Monstier,S. Pierre le Mon|stier. is of the dependances of Ne|uers, and a bayliwike wherevnto haue recourse the land of Douzye, Xamcoignes, Cusset, the borrough of S. Steuen of Neuers. The rest aunswereth to the prouostship of Neuers, as Charite vpon Loire.
There be also other townes as Castlechinon, Lor|nye, Cosne, which belong part to the king, and part to the duke of Neuers.
S. Pierre le Monstier standeth on Allier,  ioineth vpon Bourbo~ Cosne, which lieth toward Sologne.
The land of Douzy or Douziois,Douzy is an addition to Neuers, wherby the duchie co~taineth 30 castelwiks.



Berry.
Berry.THis countrie hath Loir, Neuers, and Bourbon on the East, on the North Sologne which the riuer of great Soudre parteth from Berry, on the west Tourain which the riuer of Vndre parteth therefro, and on the south the borders of Lymosin, from which the riuer of Creuse doth diuide it.
This land containeth many townes, villages, borroughs and hamlets, forrests, hilles, brookes, fountaynes, vine grounds, arable landes and pa|stures, with great store of cattell, wherewith they traffike throughout all Fraunce.
The cheefe towns are Bourges, Sancerre a coun|tie standing vpon a hil, with the riuer of Loire at the foot therof. Cosne vpon Loire, accounted in the land of Neuers, but not within the duke of Neuers Lord|ship. Coucresant and the castellwike therevpon de|pending.
Besides the which there are Aubigny vpon Nerre, whose Lords are descended of Berant Steward Lord of Anbig, a Skot well known in the warres of Na|ples. Remorenti vpon Sousdre, is of the dependan|ces of Blois. Selles in Berry. Menesto vpon Cher. Vierzo~. Dun le Roy vpon Aurette. Chasteauneu vp|on Cher. Boussac, Aigurand, Cluys an auncie~t house. Arge~ton. Chastre vpon Vndre. Victow and Berry by the riuer of Creuze. Blane in Berry which parteth Li|mosin. Chasteau roux, Buramois, Paluau, Chastillon, vpon Vndre. Preuilly a goodlye place that parteth Limosin from Berry.
Thence returning Southward, are Chasteau|meillant, Limeres, Chaumroux, Issoudun, on the cheef

seat depending vpon Bourges.
Bourges doth somewhat leane to the side that re|gardeth the fennes,Bourges. the riuer of Auret runneth tho|rough it. It is one of the greatest townes in France, and so strong, that it is thought almost impregna|ble, by reason of the washes, which rising out of the quicke springs, can neuer be driuen nor turned a|way they haue such gulphs and depths. The great tower is round, from whence they may see three or foure leagues, the walles are three fadome thicke, the outside formed like a paynted dyamond. It is also fortified with other townes, walles, and deepe ditches, shaped like an Asses backe. The forme of the enclosure of the towne resembles a sheep coate, being in compasse 4004 fathomes,  fortified with 80 great towers. It hath seuen gates, seuen cano|nicall Churches, and seuenteene parishes. Also the house of Iames Geur now belonging to the Lords of Aubespine, the Dutch house, the Sandes, other|wise called the Arenes, in olde time an Amphithea|tre. It hath an Uniuersitie, also a bayliwike, wher|vpon doe depend the seas of Issoudun, Dun le Roy, Menu vpon Yeure, Contressant.
Under that of Bourges are Sancerre,Sancerre. a Countie which comprehendeth diuers parishes and Castel|wikes, also the Baronage of Mont-faulcon,Mont-faulcon. which also contayneth sundry parishes.
Lary a small Town armed with a strong castell,Lary. with the riuers of Cher and Arnon running along by it.
Issoudun the second roiall towne of Berry,Issoudun. strong, well walled and rampired, with a castell standing somewhat aboue it, whose walles the riuer of Cher doth wash. It is a welthy towne, and of trafficke,

contayning but two parishes, the soile yeldeth good wine and wooll.
Of this sea doe depend diuers Castelwikes, as S. Seuere a borough, Limeres, Bausac, Perouse and o|thers that are of the same Lordship.
Of the Bayliwike doe depende Chasteauroux, Gracay, Argenton, Chastre, Chasteaumeillant, Cha|stelet, Charots, and many others.
Charots.Charots, a towne vpon Arnon, betweene Bourges and Issoudun.
Chasteau|roux.Chasteauroux standeth 16 leagues from Bourges, and is scituat vpon Vndre, neere to Blois and Limo|sin. It hath a faire castell,  containeth 4 parishes.
Deols.Deols a fruitful soile in corne and wooll, where|of they make great marchandise, the iurisdiction therof reacheth aboue 20 leagues about, and there|of do depend about 120 fiefes or farms. It is now a countrie belonging to the Lord d'Aumont.
ArgentonArgenton, a towne with a strong castell, armed with ten towers. It standeth vpon Creuse, and be|longeth to the Lord of Monpensier.
Boussac.Boussac and Perouse, Townes vpon the borders of Bourbon and confines of Limosin, the latter stan|deth in a barren soyle.
Chastre.Chastre a towne and castle vpon Vndre neere to Limosin. It belongeth to the countie of Chasteau|roux and to the Lord of Aumont.
Chasteau|meillant.Chasteaumeillant lieth now wast, howbeit there is yet a strong castell.
Dun le Roy.Dun le Roy, the third roiall towne of Berry, and roiall sea.
Chasteau|neuf.Chasteauneuf vpon Cher.
Vierzon, the third roiall sea of Berry, in a fair seat by reason of the woods,Vierzon. forrests, warrens, and the

riuers of Cher and Yeure, howbeit the soile is sandie and more meet for gardens than tilth.
Ametrun vpon Yeure,Ametrun the fourth roial sea of Berry.
Aubigny,Aubigny. a towne.
Coucressant,Coucres|sant. a great borrough vpon Soudre, with a castell almost impregnable, and of the fayrest and best built in Berry, it is a roiall sea. Augilon.
S. Aignan,S. Aigna~. a Countie vnder the walles whereof doe runne Cher, Soudre and Yeure together, and do carrie reasonable boates.
Lenrous,Lenrous. a towne well walled.
Vatan a towne belonging to the Lords of Vatan.Vatan


Tourain.
THe territorie of Tourain is not very great,Tourain. on the west lieth Anieou and Poictou, from which Creuse doth diuide it, on the South Poictou, along the riuer of Creuse toward the hauen of Piles, also Berry, on the East Blois and Berry, from which Cher doth diuide it, on the North Mayne and Van|dosme, which Loir parteth from it.
Towns subiect to the iurisdiction and duchie of Tours: Chinon, Lodun, Thouars, Langers, Amboise, Loche, Chastillo~ vpon Vndre, Montrichard,  others
Tours is one of the welthiest towns in Fraunce,Tours. as well in respect of the fruitfulnesse of the Soile, which is termed the garden of Fraunce, as through their traffike, especially of silke.
Amboyse,Amboise. the kings mansion standing vpon Loir in the best aire and fayrest feed in Fraunce.
Montrichard,Montri|chard. scituate in a faire plaine on the one side, enuironed with rocks and groues, on the other side goodly medowes. The riuer of Cher is a neere

neighbour vnto it, without the towne doe appeare the houses vnder ground, and aboue them the gar|dens and vine groues.
Chaumo~t.Chaumont vpon Loir, well seated.
Cormery.Cormery, an Abbie.
Loches.Loches, a towne and castel vpon Vndre. It hath on the East Chastillon vpon Vndre, on the North Cormery, on the West Beaulieu, which is not past two bow shot from it. The Castell is such as fewe places may be compared with it, it standeth vpon a rocke with one onely way to it, and the same defen|ded with a fayre gate, armed with a great Bul|warke, strong walles, and double ditches large and deepe, so as no humane strength is able to force it, neyther is there any way to beat it without brea|king the Rocke which is about 1000 or 1200 paces long. In our Lady church in the Castell lieth fayre Agnes, Lady of Beauliew, hir Toombe is of blacke Marble with hir picture liuely drawne therevpon. On the east side of this castell be the manors, which are the Kings lodgings, and neere thereto the lod|gings of faire Agnes, which are very stately. These two together doe make but one. There is also a great dongeon which serueth for a prison to such as the king mindeth to keepe very straight, wherein are two yron cages, the one called Balue cage, be|cause Lewis the eleuenth did commit cardinall Ba|lue to the same. These cages are six foot wide, and eight foot long, hauing no more roome but for a pal|let to lie vpon, the grates are of wood verye thicke corded on with yron, and the partitions so straight, that a man cannot put his hand out of them. Lo|ches is a sea royal, depending vpon the iustice sea of Tairs. The suburbs are greater than the towne.
Paremy,Paremy. which is not far from Loches, is a castel, and standeth vpon a hill in a good aire, with a parke on the backside that is two leagues compasse, and walled round about, wherein are two faire great pooles, the towne is watered with the riuer Brig|non, the vicountie of Paremy belongeth to the house of Voyer.
Lodum,Lodum. a sea roiall betweene Tonnere Creuse.
Chinon vpon Creuse in a faire and fruitfull soile.Chinon.
Touraine hath plenty of fruit,Tourayn. which bearing the name aboue all other are transported into diuers countries, also of Corne, Wine, Wood, Game, and wholesome waters. It is greatly traffiqued, the people courteous, tractable, faire spoken, whereby among all French speeches that of Touraine is best polished.
Mans standeth vpon the riuer of Sarth.Mans.


Mayne.
THe territorie of Mayn is diuided,Mayne. for Mans and the confines therof remain in the kings hand, but the towne and duchie of Maine belongeth to Charles of Lorraine duke of Guyse.
This countrie hath on the East Perch, on the West Britaine, on the South Anieow, and on the North Normandie. It hath three riuers Maynne or Maine, whereof the towne and duchie of Maine which standeth thereon doe take their name, Loire which parteth Mayne, Touraine and Vandosme, and Sarth which riseth in the land of Chartres. In this countrie are two faire Forrests, sundry groues and faire large landes, but more fit for game and breed of Cattell than for tillage, whereby the coun|trie

consisteth both of fat and leane, fruitful and bar|ren, and many places aboundeth in wildfoule. The inhabitants are painfull, industrious, not easily de|ceiued, more craftie than their neighbours saue in words, which is repugnant to the Prouerbe, That one Mauxman is worth a Norman and a halfe.
Mans.Mans is a Bayliwike and Iustice sea, whervnto haue recourse the Castell of Loire, Vall, Beaumont, S. Susane, Chasteaugotier, Flesche, Maine, la-Iahais, Sa|ble and Ferte Bernard. All vnder one clymat, of like fruitfulnesse, and of like liberties and lawes.


Aniow.
AnieowTHis countrie is one of the fruitfullest in France, it is hillie, as being replenished with risings,  hilles, loaden with vines, beautified with forrests, groues and vales, flourishing with medowes and landes, the nurses of cattel; but aboue all the white wines do bear the name to be the best in the realme. It hath aboue fortie riuers, beside fountaynes, pooles, ponds, washes, brookes, stewes for fish, and other small lakes, besides this region is moystened vnder ground with good springs. It hath Tourain and Vandosme on the East, Britaine on the West, Poictou on the South, Mayne and La-Val vpon the North.
Angiers.Angiers standeth vpon Mayenne, which runneth through it, and is fortified with a fayre and strong castell.
Of the Bayliwike of Angiers do depend the seas of Saumure, Bauge, Beaufort, Pont de Se, and others.
Riuers in Anieow.Riuers in Anieow. On the one side of Poictow are Loire, the cheefe Viene, which comming out of

Poictow and Limosin falleth into Loire, in the Ba|ronage of Monserean Monserean aboue Saumeure, a roiall see.
Dine which springeth neere Moncontour,Dine. falleth into Losse of Poictow, Losse into Thonets, which falleth into Loire neere Samur.
Antane,Antane. whereinto doe fall the lakes and pooles of Brissac, whereof Charles of Losse is Countie.
Layion runneth to Chemille,Layion. a county depending of the marquisat of Beaupre, and so falleth into Loir aboue Cassone, which is the B. of Angiers.
Leure falleth into Loire beneath S. Florentz.Leure.
Guynet beneath Chant, Ceaux.Guynet.
On the East,Anthyon. West, and North side. Anthyon beneath Logne, receaueth Latan, which taketh the name of Latan, the Lords wherof doe beare the sur|name of Neaille, also Coesnam which passing by Bagge a towne and vnderbayliwike, and by Beaw|forte an vnderbayliwike and countie, from whence are issued the families of Cauillac and others, falleth into Anthyon, aboue Audard, which is neere the slate quarries, whereof Anieow is full, as also of white lyme  marble of all colours, and so finally Anthion falleth into Loire, benaeth Angiers aboue Pont de Se.
Loyr swalloweth Ternaur beneath Lude,Loyr. a coun|tie belonging to Guy of Daillon, Seneschall of An|ieow, which runneth by the sayd Towne, and so falleth to the Baronie of Flesche, thence to Duretall, a countie belonging to the Lord Frauncis of Speaux, marshall of Vielluille, so to the castell of Verger, be|longing to Peter of Rohan, Prince of Guimenay, al|so by Matesilon an auncient house, and finally fal|leth into Sarth, beneath Bryolay, which appertay|neth

to the marques D'Elboeuf.
Riuers on the east, West  North side of Anieow. Sarth commeth out of Norma~dy,Sarth. and runneth along the countrie of Mayne, runneth to S. Nicholas de Sable, a towne and baronage of the Lords of Guyze so to Chasteauneuf a baronage, and so beneath S. Au|bins falleth into Mayenne.
Mayenne.Mayenne springeth aboue Alenson, and so passeth through the duchie of Mayne, the which belong|eth to Charles of Lorraine, a yoonger brother of the Guyze, so to Castelgautier a sea royall, hauing re|course to Angiers and depending vpon the duchie of Beaumo~t le Voyer which is the king of Nauars, and so passeth close by the castell of Angiers, and within two leagues thereof falleth into Loir, at a place cal|led the mouth of Mayenne. It hath diuers other ri|uers, but none of any name.


Normandy.
Norma~dyNOrmandy hath on the East Picardy, and the riuer of Epte, on the west Britaine, with Cenon a riuer running from Fougiers, and passing by Pontarson, and so falling into the sea at S. Nicholas mount, doth seperat from it on the north the Ocean sea, and on the south Mayne. It is in eleuation of the 46  47 degree of the North latitude,  so one of the coldest regions in France, except the country of Oye.
Normandy comprehendeth seuen Bayliwikes, Roan, Caux, Caen, Eureux, Gisors, Constantine, and Alenson, which now is an Excheker by the fauour of Monsieur the kings late brother.
Roan.Roan standeth vpon the banks of Seyn, not farre from an arme of the sea, the flood dooth almost beat the towne walles: with 2 small riuers on the East

that water it, vz. Rober Aubette, on the North a great plain of medows with sundry high hils, rou~d about the town there are faire fruitful fields, as the field of Rohonois, so called of the village of Rohom, one of Neusbury, of old Wessin and of Caux. It is a marchant town by reason of the riuer and channell which is capable of great ships, so that the neigh|bourhood of the sea hath made it so plentifull, that at this day there is no town in Europe more haun|ted with marchants, or where the citizens are bet|ter seen in traffike, either by sea or land, either wher there are more expert Pilots, or that make greater or longer voiages than they, as indeed it is a thing almost natural to the Norman. The fairest houses are the Archbishops lodging, the Abbot of S. Ouins house, standing in the fairest, best ayred, and eastliest of the towne ful of faire gardens. The kings when they come to Roan do ordinarily lodge therin. The old castell, where in time past the parliament was holden, which now is kept in the palace. There is also a court of ayds, wherto all the elections of Nor|ma~dy, Perch, the prouostship of Chaumont, with the counties of Maigny Po~toise, haue recourse, the bai|liwike  iustice sea is vsually called the Cohue.. The stateliest buildings are the Bridge and our Lady|church, which is armed with three great Towers.
Eureux a bayliwike and Iustice sea depending of Roan,Eureux. it standeth on the riuer of Iton. On the East it hath Seyn, on the West the territorie of Lisieux, on the north the confines of Roan,  on the south Perch.
It contayneth sundry townes, as Vernon, Aigle, Passy, Furilles, Conches, Breteuil, Rogles, Brayn, and Hermonuille.
Lisieux hath on the east the land of Eureux,Lisieux. on the

North Auge, on the South Perch and Alenson, on the west the confines of Seez, the teritorie of Lizieux stretcheth to the riuer of Rille, which comming out of the forrest of Aigle, passeth vnder sundry bridges, as Autene, Montfort, Ponteaudemer, so falleth into Seyne at Honflew a coast town, Dyne doth also wa|ter it,Lizieux. and parteth it from the territorie of Seez. Li|zieux, farre ynough from the sea betweene Seez and Verneuil.
Caux.Caux a reasonable large countrie, hauing on the East the territorie of Abbeuille, on the South Beau|uais, on the North the Ocean, on the West Seyne, and part of the territorie of Roan.
The notablest townes therein are Gisors, S. Cler vpon Epte, Gournay, Aumale, a Duchie. Pontoise, ra|ther of France than of Caux. Neuf-chatell, a see roial. Hen, a countie of the duke of Nauars heires. Fescamp an Abbie. S. Valery on the Sea. S. Valery in Picar|dy, is vpon Some.
Diepe.Diepe a famous Hauen, a strong Towne, and of great resort, the inhabitants are famous on the sea, and doe make long and dangerous voiages.
Haure de grace.Haure de grace, and New hauen a warre towne, which cannot be forced but toward the olde tower, by reason of the riuer, of the washes, of the floud and ebbe, the Hauen is very safe for trauellers, and eue|ry way openeth on the plain, except one way, where there are diuers small Hilles that seeme to com|maund it, but they are all to small purpose.
In the countrie of Caux, when either Noblemen or yeomen doe die, all the inheritance falleth to the eldest, neither can any part thereof be giuen to the yoonger, excepte some pension to maintaine them during life, but if they die it returneth againe to the

eldest, so as the yoonger cannot dispose thereof in a|ny respect. This law with some small difference is obserued through the rest of all Normandie and Bri|taine.
Seez standeth vpon the riuer of Orne,Seez. which fal|leth into the Ocean beneath Caen. It is a bishoprik which hath iurisdiction ouer the most part of Alen|son and Perch. This countrie standeth in the mid|dest of Normandy, hauing on the east Lisieux, on the West Bessine, on the South Alenson, on the North Caen and Auge. Part of Alenson, a Duchie, now an Exchequer with right of soueraigntie in iustice and roialtie. Afore time this duchie had recourse vnto Roan, and part to Paris; for the Duchie of Alencon stretcheth out to Normandie.
Falaize belongeth to the Bishoprike of Seez,Falaize. and to the Bayliwike of Bayeux.
Bayeux the head towne of the land of Bessine,Bayeux. is neere to Seez, which is on the East side therof, Con|stantine on the West, Mayne on the South, and the confines of Caen on the North. The Bayliwike is greater than the Bishoprike, as hauing inrisdicti|on ouer the most part of the Diocesse of Seez.
The territorie of Bessine is plentifull in Corne and fruit,Bessine. the riuer in fish, and the champion in Cat|tell and pasture.
Bayeux is a Bayliwike and Uicountie,Bayeux. depen|ding vpon the iustice sea of Caen. In this Uicoun|tie standeth the great borough of Torigny, a county appertaining vnto Iames of Matignon, who hath three sonnes, vz. Odel, Lancelot, Charles.
Aure,Aure. a riuer that runneth not farre from Bayeux, it falleth vnder ground at a place called la Fosse au Souoy, and appeareth againe halfe a league thence

vpon the sea shore. It maketh a faire hauen called the hauen in Bessine.
ArgentonArgenton a towne vpon Orne, neere Hiesmes.
Falaize.Falaize vpon Orne, standeth equally distant in the bottom of a vally, being euery way compassed with mountains, the forme therof resembling a long and narrow ship. It hath but three streets, of the which two do run clean through it from the one end to the other, the castel standeth as the sterne of the ship. It is vpon a rocke and commandeth all the towne. It is armed with deepe ditches, enuironed with two pooles, and hath a great round tower, so high that it is thought to be the fayrest in Fraunce, also ouer a|gainst it there is a rocke almost as high as it. It hath also a dougan as strong or stronger than the castell. The towne is more inhabited with Gentle|men and Lawyers, than with Merchants, and to say truth, there is no great trastike, it containeth but two parishes. It standeth in a faire and health|some ayre, by reason of the medowes and smal hils, which alwaies are greene, as also through the infi|nite number of fountaines that water euery part of the soyle, whose brookes doe wash and cleanse the Towne. They make there the best Knyues in Fraunce.
Guybray.The borrough of Guybray is not farre thence, where the Fayre of Guybray is holden at mid-Au|gust, with great resort of people and wares.
Arinnes.Arinnes, a mountayne within a league of Falaize toward the West, therein doe breede Hawkes and Fowle for the game, as Faucons, Sacres, Tirce|lets, Sparhawkes, and sometime Eagles, and o|ther fowle as well for the game as the mouth.
Arnes.Arnes, a village neere to Falaise, within 8 or 9

leagues of the Sea, scituate in a plaine Champion, naturally very drie, without any riuer or brooke at all, and yet somtime by conduits vnderground, the Sea commeth in so plentiful, that it maketh a lake or poole, bringing in great store of Fish, and when the Water is gone agayne, the place remayneth drye.
Vire a small towne castell and vicountie,Vire. wherof the territorie about it is called Vau de Vire.
Caen vpon the riuer of Orne or Anhie,Caen. which twise a day is filled, according to the ebbe  flood of the sea. It is next to Roan, and cheefe of the lower Normandy, and accounted one of the fayrest and plentifullest in Fraunce. The riuer running vnder S. Iames bridge, whereon the Townehouse is buil|ded, vpon piles and bending arches, with 4 stages, and 4 towers, and at the foure corners diuideth it into two townes. On the other side of the Towne runneth Oudon, and that part s best builded and inhabited of the whole towne. It runneth through the middest thereof, and driueth diuers milles, then falleth into the great riuer, which imbracing the towne, fals at Estreban 3 leagues from the town in|to the sea, whereby the great boats haue passage, which causeth both the country  towne to abound in al sorts of merchandise, wines, fish, and other vit|tels. The castell standeth on high ouer the towne, vpon a rocke fortified with a dougan, in the mid|dest whereof there is a great square Tower of a woonderful height and bignesse, at the four corners flanqued with foure great Towers and Ditches, deepe and full to the brim. This Castell hath so great a court that therein you maye range six hun|dred men in Battell raye. And in respecte of

the importance of the place, it is vsually committed to the custodie of great Lords. The late Constable was Captaine thereof, whose roome the Marshall D'Anuille now enioyeth. At Caen they haue a court of Aydes, a Iustice sea, and an Uniuersitie, the traf|ficke and the fruitfulnesse of the soyle are great, and although Normandie yeeldeth no Wine, yet grow|eth there some at Caen that may serue, but at Ar|gences, which is within three leagues thereof doth grow very good, and thence doe the inhabitants of Caen vsually furnish themselues.
Aura~chesAuranches is in the Bayliwike of Constantin, sci|tuat vpon the toppe of a hill and rocke which is ve|ry steepe and hard to come to on the sea side, stan|ding on the top of the town walles, they may see a|boue foure leagues about vpon a white and sandie ground, wherevpon the Sea fleeteth euen vnto the foot of the rocke, which is a piller and proppe to the sayd Towne, which the Sea at his full flood doth wash, on the other side they may behold the flatte countrie couered with groues. From the top of the walles they may also see S. Michaels mount in the Sea. Auranches is in circuit rounde, well walled and flanqued, the ditches large and deepe, and the Suburbs greater than the Towne.
Constan|tine.The land of Constantine hath the Sea on the North, the Territorie of Seez on the South, the Bayliwike of Caen on the East, and Britaine on the West.
The townes thereof are Carentan, neere wher|vnto is the closet of Constantine, that aboundeth in pastures. Valtorgue. S. Loe.
Constan|ces.Constances, which resembleth a champion with|out walles or enclosure, without the same on the

West side is a fayre bridge with many arches, vn|der which runneth a brooke, and about it a Foun|tayne conducted in pipes of lead a long halfe league into the middest of the Towne, which otherwise should want fresh water, sauing that they haue a few welles that doe somewhat helpe them.
Villedieu,Villedieu a commandrie not far thence belong|ing to the knights of Rhodes.
Hay parsnell.Hay par|snell. Grand ville. Launde Heroult.
Gran-Ville, a Hauen towne.
Launde Heroult.
This countrie of Constantine along the sea side is beautified with an infinit number of castels, and some townes. It hath almost an Iland which is vnfruitfull, called Hague, also all these haue recourse to Constances: Monteburg, an Abbie. Hague. S. Voast, Barsleur, Chierbourg, a towne and castell. Bre|uall, Briqueber, Hanby, belong to the house of Es|conteuil.
The Isles of Constantine, are Gerzaie, Grene|zaie, these ysles belong to the dyoces of Auranches. Sere, which haue all forts to withstand rouers.
Constantine is the last Bayliwike in Normandy,Constan|tine. hauing vnder it the castelwikes of Briquebec, Noy|on, S. Sauueur. l'Audebu, Hay du Puis, Creances, Vil|ledieu.
Normandy is one of the welthiest,Norman|die. goodliest, and mightiest Prouinces in Fraunce, considering the great number of townes, burroughs, and Gentrie, with the fruitfulnesse of the soyle, and traffike vpon the sea. The Normans are the wariest and subtillest people in Fraunce, hardest to be deceiued, great tal|kers, giuen to profit, slie, cunning in plaies, shifts, cautels, and circumuentions of cosenage.
Norma~dyNormandy aboundeth in cattell, fish, corne, fruit, trees, especially in Peare and Appletrees, so as the inhabitants make their drinke of those fruits. The common people for the most part are giuen to spin|ning and weauing of cloth, vsing little other drinke than Perrie and Lider.


Brittaine.
BrittaineBRittaine by Astronomicall measure lieth out 3 de|grees and a halfe, or 4 at the most, and standeth in some 44 or 45 degrees of the latitude, so as the lon|gest way it is not aboue 120 French leagues, hauing on the east Mayne and part of Anieow, on the north the Brittaine Sea and Constantine, on the West the Occean sea, and on the South Poictow: the whole countrie is diuided into three languages, wherof e|uery one containeth three regions and diocesses, vz. three speak Britton Brittonant, Cornouaile, S. Paule, alias Leon: Freguier, alias Landriguet, Qunipercoran|tin: three for the French Brittons,  speake French, Dol, Rnes, S. Masco, alias Alet. The other three dio|ces do speake a mixed language, sometimes French sometimes Britton when they list, Nantes, Vannes, S. Briew. Thus are there 9 Bishoprikes in Brittaine, and on the east the riuers of Cosnon, Sarth, and doe part it from Normandy Mayne. Mayne and Loire from Anieow.
Dol.Dol a Bishoprike, somtimes an Archbishoprike.
S. Malo.S. Malo, alias Alet, a bishoprike not far from Dol.
Caucale.Caucale, a Hauen towne.
Co~bourg.Combourge.
Sa~briard.Sambriard where they take makrels in May.
Dinant.Dinant a faire towne, the riuer of Rause runneth

by it, and not far off falleth into the sea, which ma|keth the towne far richer and of greater traffike.
Chasteau-Briant,Chasteau-Briant. belonging vnto the Lordes of Montmorency.
Lambales,Lambales wherof the countrie is called Lamba|lois, and dependeth vpon the bishoprike of S. Bieu.
Treguier,Treguier alias Landriguet, Quinp, stan|deth vpon a point running into the sea, scituat in the waters, and oftentimes watered with the flood and ebbe of the sea, shippes doe ariue there to the great commoditie of the inhabitants.
Vannes,Vannes. wherin standeth the castell of Hermine.
S. Brieux,S. Brieux there is a great rocke which serueth for a harbour to ships against wind and wether, vpon the which standeth the castell.
Quintin a towne and castell,Quintin. neere wherevnto is a forrest ten great leagues long.
Iugon,Iugon. a towne neere whereto is the forrest of Hunandye, also the castel of Corlay belonging to the Lord of Ton.
Auongour,Auon|gour. Guimp|gand. Lamba|lois. a towne and auncient house discended of the race of the duke of Brittaine. Guimpgand.
Lambalois a land in the marches of S. Brieu, wher they make more parchment than in any countrie of Fraunce, by reason of the plenty of cattell.
Leons, or S. Paule a Bishoprike.
Cornouail,Leons. a Bishoprike.
Renes the parliament seat for all Brittaine,Cornouail Renes. stan|ding on the riuer of Vilene, not farre from Cham|bourg and Guerch.
Rohan an auncient house.Rohan.
Guymenay,Guyme|nay. descended of the marshals of Gye.
Nantes vppon Loire, there is a chamber of ac|counts.Nantes. In the territorie of Nantes are Ancnys

vpon Loyre. Clipson, Montagne, on the coast of Poi|ctow.
BrittaineBrittaine is one of the fruitfullest and goodliest countries in Fraunce in arable land, medows, lands for pasture, forrests: traffike vpon the sea, salt, yron, lead, in some places siluer mynes. There groweth also some wine, but it is but smal. The Brittains are generally tractable, but those that are neerer the sea coast are not so courteous as the rest. They are slie and subtil, though naturally they seeme dul and grosse. They loue their profit, and haunt tauernes, where they make most of their bargains.
La-Val.La-Val, an auncient house vpon the borders of Brittaine and Mayne.
In Brittaine are also Rieux, Raiz, Blossac, Pon|thieure, Vitrye, Fougeres, and Aserac.


Poictowe.
Poictow.ON the East it hath Berry and Touraine, from which Creuze and Vienne doe separate it, on the South Angolesme and Limosin, on the North Touraine and part of Brittaine, and on the West the sea from Creuse to Rouffec in Angolesme, which is the boundes of Poictow, it is 36 good leagues towards Limosin. It standeth vpon the countie of Bridiers, which is in the contribution of Poictow, and on the other side within 3 leagues of Nantes, so as in length, going ouerthwart it is a|boue 100 French leagues. This countrie contay|neth one thousand two hundred parishes, comprised vnder three Bishops.
Poictiers.Poictiers, the cheefe towne, vnder whose diocesse there are ten Abbies.
Lusson,Lusson. vnder the which there are ten Abbies.
Maillezai,Maille|zai. vnder the which there are foure.
The Isles of Ree Oleron are also in Poictow.
Poictow hath royall townes with Iustice seas, Poictiers, Niort, Fontenay, Mommorillon, Luzignan. Cyuray was lately made a seneschall sea.
The other Towns are, Touars, a neighbour to Touraine and Anieow. S. Maixent. Partenay, a Ui|countie. Chastelleraut a duchie, Nelle, Rochsur-yon, a principalitie in the house of Bourbon. Chize, Chau|nquy, Angle, Lussac, Cirnaw, Bressenire, S. Low, Blanc is of the diocesse of Bourges, but of the resort of Mo~|morillon. Gencay, with infinite Castelwikes and Burroughs, as: Chastagneray, S. Messinin, Plauian, Sables, Aulonne, Mareuille, S. Hermene, Montagu, Coue, a walled towne. Vion, an auncient house. Mortemer, Lezay, S. Sauin, Bourgneuf, Maigne, Vou|uent, Neruant, Chefbotonne, Narcillac, Chasteauneuf Dampierre, Puygurreau, Iarnac, Argenton, Aspremo~t Comiquiers, S. Michail en her not farre from the sea. Talmond, a principalitie belonging to the house of Trimouille. Mauleon, Mortaign, Tifanges, Essars, Fon-Benist.
To the iustice sea of Poictiers are subiect the seas of Lusigna~, Chateleraut, Mommorillon, Dorat which comprehendeth part of Limosin and part of Berry, the low marches, Fountenay the Countie, Nyort, Ciuray, S. Maxent.
In Acquitaine the Captaines of Roch-foucaut,Roch-fou|caut. Rochchouart, and Rochchandrye, euer since the gos|pell was first preached at Poictiers, doe stand vpon their gard, as the family of Montmorency doe at Paris, and the house of Senecey in Burgondye.
Rochchouart is a Uicountie in old Poictow.Rochcho|uart.
Sauray.Sauray, a towne and castell vpon the confines of Anieow and Poictow, standeth on a hill betweene two Riuers, whereto a number of Gentlemen bee vassals, the Lords thereof are issued of the auncient Earles of Poictiers, hee that nowe is Lord thereof is called Rene de Sanzay, Gouernour of Nantes, whose children are Rene Lord of S. Marsant, Coro|nell of the Ban, and Arrierban also, Christopher, Charles, Anne.
Clayn.Clayn, a riuer running by Poictiers.
The Husbandmen of Poictow are slie, subtil, will deceaue a man with pratling their pedlarly speech, dull witted lubbers, malicious, disloyall, and final|ly to be trusted, louers of brablings and nouelties: but such as inhabite the Townes are vtterlye of an other disposition, they are tractable, courteous, and willing to doe pleasure, liberall, open without deceit, pleasaunt, foreseeing, and such as will not easily bee deceaued, they know cosenars afarre off, they loue knowledge and learning. The Nobi|litie is warie, valyaunt, and extract from auncient race. The Soyle is good, fatte, wealthy, fruitfull in Corne, Wine, Flesh, Fish, Wood, Wooll, Flax, Fruit, and game for the Nobilitie, but especially a|bout Chasteleraut.


Rochell and the countrie of Aunys.
Rochell.ROchell beginneth at the gate of Marans, and is diuided from Poictow by the Riuers of Seure and of Nyort, and reacheth vnto S. Iohn d'Angely. On the East and North lyeth Poictowe, whereof some thinke it to bee a parcell, on the south Xan|tonge, on the West the sea and the Isles of Ree.
Rochell standeth vpon an edge and goulphe of the Sea,Rochell. which maketh a point therein, it is one of the easiest hauens of Xantonge to ariue at, and the Fortresse of the whole countrie, hauing the sea vpon the one side, and the washes and fennes vpon the other, whereby it is almost impossible to beat it, it hath such strong walles, Rampiers, Towers, defences and ditches, that there are fewe Townes in Fraunce comparable vnto it, either in strength or wealth, how great soeuer it be. It is in the 45 de|gree of the latitude, and head of the confines there|of and of Aunys, and hath recourse to the Parlia|ment of Paris. It is exempt of all Garrisons, and Citadels, sauing of one tower where the armour of the towne is kept. The Maior and Sherifs haue the custodie of the Towne, moreouer it standeth in a fruitfull soyle.


Xantonge.
XAntonge hath on the East Angolesme,Xantonge on the West the sea, on the North Rochell, on the south the territorie of Bourdeaux.
Xaintes,xaintes. the cheefe Towne of the countrie stan|deth vpon Charente, which springing at Carenac that is betweene Limoges and Angolesme runneth to Siuray, Angolesme, Cognac, Sainctes and Soubize, where it falleth into the sea about some 15 leagues from the head thereof.
Blay,Blay. which hath a Castell seuerall from the Towne.
Marenes,Marenes. where they make their ault with the heat of the sunne.
Marans.Marans is a great borrough, fortified with a stro~g castell, through the middest thereof there runneth a great arme of the sea that maketh a hauen, where|by with the helpe of Seure and of Nyort they maye send their marchandize out of Poictow into al parts of Europe. The Castell cannot beare the Cannon, but is accessible in Summer, by reason the least warmth laieth the Marshes drie.
Pontz.Pontz standeth within foure leagues of Saintes, and is built like an arch, for standing vpon a small hill it doth couer the head and sides thereof, vpon the highest part standeth a strong Castell, and in a vallie at the foote thereof runneth Seugue through 3 seuerall channels, the one along the walles, the se|cond through the middest of the medowes, and the third parteth the vplands from the medowes, and all these armes doe gather agayne together, then they come at the low towne where they make sun|drie bridges, on the one side of the mountain it hath the groues and woods, on the other the champion where it is double walled with ditches, full to the toppes, except on the riuer side. It contayneth three parishes, it hath iurisdiction ouer 32 Parishes, and hath 250 iefes of Noblemen and Gentlemen that hold thereof.
S. Iohn d'Angely.S. Iohn d'Angely is one of the greatest and best built townes in Xantonge, and is reasonably well walled and ditched, it standeth in a vallie with an Abbie that serueth it in lieu of a rocke and fortresse: the riuer of Bottonne which springeth at Chef-bot|tonne in the hilles of Angolesme, dooth washe the walles thereof, on the side of Poictow the country is hilly and of difficult accesse.
Barbezi|eux.Barbezieux is within 9 leagues of Sainctes, vpon

the confines of Angolesme, and is within 5 leagues of the Towne of Angolesme, of Congnac, and of Pontz. The countrie is fruitfull, far from riuers it is but a wilde thing and contayneth but three parishes, it hath a strong castell.
There are also Bourg, Soubize, with other towns and villages. This countrie is vnder the Parlia|ment of Bourdeaux.
Angoumois is the territorie of Angolesme.Angou|mois.
It hath on the East Limosin along the channell of Charenton, on the West Santonge, which is the whole length therof, and amounteth to 24 leagues, on the South Perigort and parte of Xantonge, on the North Poictow, with a cantle of Santonge, which is the breadth, and contayneth sixteene leagues.
The townes are Angolesme,Ango|lesme. the Capitall Se|neschal sea and iustice sea depending of the parlia|ment of Paris. Chasteauneuf, Cognac, seas roiall, ha|uing recourse to Angolesme, Auoelerre, Rochfou|cault, an auncient house. Morton vpon Baudille, be|longing to a yonger sonne of Rochfoucaut. Blanzac, the partition of the Lord of Marmonstier. Valeois Nareuille, belong to the house of Nareuille. Montbe|ron, Boutteuill, to the house of Montmorencye.
Angolesme standeth vpon a very long promon|tory between the riuers of Eugeny Chare~te,Ango|lesme. which doe there meet. The flat of this hill is no more than is requisit for the compasse of the town wals, euery way enuironed with a naturall rocke. The houses stand out of order, the streets rugged, the wals of se|uerall workmanship, but double on the side of the vally eastward, the ditches also double because that side seemeth the weaker, though now the strongest

of the towne, it hath no gates. The castell and ca|stellet haue their issues apart by themselues. The soyle yeeldeth store of Corne and good Wine, also Hempe, as hauing plentie of water, it is meete for gardens and hath store of woode, and among the rest there lieth the forrest of Brancone, which contai|neth 14500 acres of land. Neere to Angolesme is the head of Townur, within halfe a league thereof it falleth into Charente. It is so deepe a goulph, that there can no bottome be founde thereof, heretofore couered with swannes, and paued with the best salmon trowts in Fraunce. It is supposed to be Bau|diat a swift brooke, with so quicke a spring that it neuer drieth vp, the same comming out of Lymosin  passing by Noutron loseth himselfe vnder ground at Marton, which is within three leagues of his head. The inhabitants of this countrie are quicke witted, standnig vpon their reputation, stout, great boasters, taking small delight in traffike, liuing for the most part vpon their rents, and counterfeiting gentrie, courteous, c. The pesaunt dull witted, rude and clownish, giuen to toyle, testie, meete for warres, yet of very good courage and bould.


Perigort.
Perigort.PErigort hath some 40 degrees of latitude, and 20 or 20 and a halfe of longitude with Limosin, on the East Angolesme, part of Santonge on the West, on the North Angoumois, wherinto it is in|tangled, on the south Dordonne, which diuideth it from Agen, and the land betweene two seas. It is hilly, stony, sharpe and rough, for the most parte full of woods, some of Oke, but the most of Chestnuts,

which they vse to fat their swine, also to sell into all parts of Fraunce and Spaine. Chestnuts being cut doe soone grow agayne, and beareth the fayrer and better fruit after it is cut at the foote, otherwise it were impossible to mayntaine so many yron and steele Forges as there are. It hath grayne ynough to serue the Countrie, and good Wines, though in some places but small: the ayre subtill, healthfull, and temperate, so as sildome there is any plague or contagious disease, whereby the countrie is woon|derfully inhabited. The men sound, nimble, lustie, strong, and long liued by reason of their naturall so|brietie, for they feede little, and vse great exercise: they are affable, courteous, warie, meet for warres, especially the Nobilitie, wherof there is store. The women more fayre than nice, and good huswiues. This land is watered with sundrie riuers, hauing on the one side Dordonne, which running out of Au|uergne, runneth through Quercy, Agen, and Peri|gort, and so falleth into an arme of the sea beneath Libourne, not far from the castel of Fronsac L'isle gi|ueth the name to a small towne in the countrie, and so runneth to Perigueux, Vezere, Holuezere. Dionne runneth to Brancone, Bndial, to Noutron, and sun|drie other brookes that stande the countrie in great steed for their yron forges, shouell makers, brasiers, also for their corne and paper-milles. It hath also diuers fountaynes, whereof some are medicinable and hote. Neere to the burrough of Marsac there is one which hath his ebbe and floode, as the arme of the sea at Bourdeaux, and yet it is two long leagues from thence. Also neere to Liude a small towne vpon Dordonne, there riseth one out of a square Tower which with his spring dooth continually driue two

milles. Neere to Miremont there is a caue named Cluseau, that runneth 5 or 6 leagues vnder ground, and hath faire roomes paued after the Antique fa|shion, some altars  paintings, diuers fountaines  brookes, especially one, which being 120 foot brode, is both swift and deep. Perigort hath as many sim|ples as either Italy or Greece, also Capilaray of all sorts. Concerning minerals about Noutron, there are great siluered crustes, also stone like vnto same, which the Latines doe call lapis Azuli, vpon a rocke foure leagues from Perigueux there is redde earth, of the same colour, vertue and effectes, as Bolus Ar|moniacus, and from that myne they doe fetch into sundry parts.
The townes are Perigueux, Sarlar, a bishoprike, Bergerat, both seas royall, hauing recourse to Peri|gueux. Lyude, Miremont, Mussidan, Lisse, Riberac, an auncient house and Uicountie. Aubeter is of An|golesme, but in the diocesse of Perigueux. Noutron a towne and castell, an impregnable fortresse. Bran|conne, a smal towne vpon Drone, in a fat and fruit|full soile, with one of the fayrest Abbies in Guyen: therein Limel standeth on a rocke, the Lords ther|of are come of the house of Touraine.
PerigeuxPerigueux standeth almost in the middest of the countrie in a plaine, euery way inuironed with hils  mountains, which neuerthelesse cannot co~maund it,  they ar couered with vines, yelding reasonable good wine: within 50 fathom of the citie is algrotte towarde Vizone, which is 100 foot high without apparance either of dore or window,  the entrie in|to it is vnder grounde, and neere therevnto are the ruines of an Amphitheatre, wherin do yet remaine the cages wherein the wild beasts were shut vp for

the combats and punishmente of condemned per|sons. Perigueux is separat into two parts, whereof the citie is walled, and containeth not past 8 acres of land at the most within his circuit, and is a Bi|shoprike. The towne standeth 150 paces from the citie, contayneth some 14 acres of land. It is very close, well inhabited, and in a small grounde com|prehendeth much building. It is a iustice sea of the parliament of Guyenne, they vse much traffike and mechanicall sciences.


Limosin or the territorie of Limoges.
LImosin standeth in the 45 and a halfe degree of the North latitude hauing on the East Berry and Auuergne,Limosin. on the west Angolesme and Poi|ctow, on the North Poictow and Berry, on the south Perigort. It hath 2 bishoprikes, and is diuided into high and low Limosin,  yet is but one gouernment and seneschall sea, depending on the parliament of Paris.
The brooke of Bredasque with high Vezere, and the march land doth part high Limosin fro~ the low, and the longest way it is 40 French leagues long: this high countrie is watered with Vienne, which falleth out of the mountains of Ville. Vannes run|neth to Limoges, so through Angolesme Poictow to Chastelleraut, and thence into Loyre High Vezere springeth out of the pooles of Forsac, neere to Masse|res, and so runneth into Perigort. This countrie be|ing so waterish, hath plentie of cattell.
Limoges is the capitall towne thereof,Limoges. standing part in a vallie, vz on the side of Vienne, and part on the top of a small hill. It is more long than it is

large, well walled and ditched. At the toppe of the Towne it hath a fountaine wherewith they water their houses and cleanse the streets. It is a vicoun|tie belonging to the king of Nauarre. It hath consu|lar Iustice by reason of traffike, which is so great as it seemeth impossible, considering how farre the sea is off, as also all passages, and beside hath ne|uer a riuer nauigable. The very meanest will bee a marchaunt: the men are actiue, the women paine|full, fayre, and charitable, not greatly delighting in decking vp themselues.
High Li|mosin.High Limosin is almost barren, howbeit it hath some corne, namely Rie, Barlie, Tares, Chestnuts, and plenty of Radishes. The wyne about Limoges is greene and nothing pleasaunt, bread, flesh, fruit, wildfoule and venison are reasonable cheape, and it is good liuing at Limoges, or there about, because the inhabitants are sober and content with a little, and drinke little wine, except it be in the townes: they detest licourishnesse, and are healthfull, lustie, strong, and good husbands. In some villages you shall haue one familie wherein an old man shall see his children to the fourth generation, and without dispensation they may marrie together and dwell togither without parting of goods, yea there is some one familie of aboue a hundred persons, all be|ing kinsfolks, which liue together and haue al their goods common as it were in a colledge.
The rest of the Townes in high Limosin are: S. Irier, Perch a sea royall vppon the confines of Angolesme and Limosin. S. Iunien vpon Vienne. S. Leonard a towne and abbie. Saloignac, Souterraine, Beneuent, Pierrebuffier, a great burrough comman|ded by sundrie hilles, which being full of Uines

stretch to the gates of Limoges. Chaslus, wher there are great Faires kepte for great horsse and cattell. Grammont an Abbie and cheefe of that order.
Auncient houses, Pierrebuffier, Chasteauneuf, Rochchouart. Cars, a countie fro~ whence is sprung that of Vaugnyon. Maignac beareth the surname of Neusuille, they be diuers brothers, of whome the el|dest is Lord of Maignac.
Low Limosin is almost as large as the high,Low Li|mosin. it contayneth the countie of Ventadour: Tne, Can|bort, Uicounties which containe much lands, and many other small townes.
It is watered with Dordonne, which running along the confines of Perigort parteth it from Au|uergne. Vezere, which falling to Ruffgnac and V|zarch falleth into Perigort. Coreze, which falling from the hilles of Monidier, runneth to Tulle and Bryne le galiard, and thence falleth into Vezere.
It hath but three towns worth the speaking of, vz. Tulle, Perch Bryne, all three roiall townes.
Tulle,Tulle. a Bailiwike and Bishoprike, it passeth the rest of the Townes of this low countrie in wealth and traffike. The inhabitants are paynfull, subtill, very craftie, and loue brablings. It standeth be|tweene two mountaynes in a rough ground, for the whole countrie is hillic and crooked, neuerthelesse fruitfull in vines and walnuts, out of the oile wher|of they reape great profit.
Vzarch is fayre,Vzarch. pleasaunt, and in a good aire, it standeth vpon Vezere (a swift streame, and not to be waded ouer during the raynes. The scituation is such as it seemeth impregnable, being rounde a|bout enuironed with waters, hauing onely 2  waies to come to it. The soyle is fruitfull in Corne, Wine,

and chestnuts, and the riuers in Fish. The towns|men loue weapons, are warlike, and care not for traffike.
Bryues.Bryues standeth in a faire champion, with wood, wine, arable and medow sufficient, were it not the Bishoprike, it woulde bee no great matter, for the inhabitaunts are not much giuen to trauell.
Other Townes, Treignac, Douzenac, Alassac, Beaulieu, Neissac, Vslet. S. Angell and others, al stan|ding in a faire and fruitfull soyle.
Auncient houses, Ventadour, Combort, Turenne, Pompadour, Neaumont, Ruffignac, the houses of S. Iacob, and others: much Nobilitie, wealthy and valiaunt.
The Limosin is graue wary, ripe, wise, subtill, and craftie, not too hasty in his doings, diligent and painful, redie ynough to do pleasure, niggardly and slouenly at home. The gentrie are most hardy and valiaunt, and the citizens are more ciuil than the clownes.


Auuergne.
AuuergneAVuergne standeth in the 44 degree and a halfe of the North latitude, hauing on the East Forest and Lyons, on the South Velay and Geuoudan, on the North Bourbon and la March, on the West high Limosin, there is also high Auuergne and base Auuergne, which is the same that standeth in the champion and playne named Limagne, by reason of the riuer Lamone or Lymone, which fal|leth from the mountaines into Limagne, and so ta|keth his course towarde S. Flour, Nochers, S. A|maw, and S. Saturnine, from whence it falleth into

Allier, it is the fruit fullest place of Auuergne, and in deed hath alwaies bin accounted the cheefe, besides that, Clermont which is the capitall of the countrie standeth therein, neere whereunto there are vaults under the ground whereby a man may walke well a league under ground.
Clermont standeth at the end of the plaine coun|trie, which endeth at the foote of the mountaine of Dome, upon a hil euery way  with  full finall hilles, from whence sundry brookes and fountains doe fal, the streets, houses and buildings are of little cost, and seeme as they had bene made in hast. Before  the  standeth one of the fayrest fountaines in Fraunce, which is brought by pipes under the ground  a place called on. The towne is nw  good  strong wais  divers towers without the  standeth the Abbie of  Allier, through the  runneth a streame named Fne whereupon standeth the bridge of L which is of  of the water of a fountaine which  stone: this fountaine  ri|uer, wherto as wherethrough it passeth . The bridge is 10 fathom long, 6 fathom thicke and 8 fathom wide.  Clermont there is a fountaine whose water tasteth as , but   to drinke. There is also 
Combrailes, Montagri, Aigues perses, Clermo~t, Mon|pensier, it is the second of the countrie, and is weal|thy and rich, standing in the fat of the countrie.
Montser|rant.Montserrant, the cheefe of Lymagne. It is one of the fayrest townes in Auuergne, and inriched with the court of generalles.
There are also other townes, as Billon, Issoire, Briond, Tusonne, Langeac, S. Germain, Lambron, Ai|gues-perses, Eusureule, S. Porsain, besides many other townes, burroughs, villages and castels, belong|ing to diuers great Lords, as Montagu, Montmo|rin, Montgazon, Antregues, Cuseron, Rundan, Mont|pensier, Rauil, Fontauiles.
LimagneLimagne is 20 leagues long from old Bryond vn|to Ganat or S. Porsain, and eight leagues brode from the mount of Puy de Doyne vnto Tier a wealthye towne. All the soile is fruitfull in corne, wine, wood, medowes, fountaines, riuers, whot bathes, saffron, siluer mines, and all sortes of merchandise. The spring of Allier is 4 leagues beneath Bryond, it run|neth by Vsson, where is a goodly mine of golde and azure, thence to Pont de Chaldam, a small Towne where it beginneth to carrie boates so to S. Pisain the least towne of Lymagne.
High Au|uergne.High Auuergne consisteth in mountayns, hauing on the East Velay, on the West Quercy, on the south Rouergue, on the North Lymagne, S. Flour is the head Towne thereof standing vpon a high Rocke, which seemeth to be hewen plumb downe with the chisell, it is a wealthy towne and bishops sea.
Orillac.Orillac the second of high Auuergne, a bayliwike and iustice sea, wherevpon doe depende the seas of S Flour, Carlat, Morat, and others, which haue no o|ther traffike tha~ such cattell as they are able to feed,

although in diuers soyles of the townes aforesayd there be plenty of grayne of all sorts, because al Au|uergne is of it selfe fruitfull, except on the side where the vines cannot prosper by reason of the height of the hilles, which are alwaies couered with snowe, and yet are alwaies very profitable, in respecte of their pastures and cheese.
Other notable places of Auuergne:Pontgi|baut. Rore. Pongibaut, a small Towne 4 leagues from Clermont. Rore, a village neere to Pontgibaut, both appertaining to the Lord of Fayet. There is a siluer mine which by the kings leaue the sayd Lord hath caused to be ser|ched with profite.
Dome-hill,Dome-hill. a league from Clermont, it is pleasant and one of the highest in Fraunce, fruitfull in pa|stures and simples.
Cosme-hill,Cosme-hil which is laden with trees and pa|stures, neere wherevnto in a place called Cherre, is a fountaine which in the greatest heat of summer is all frozen and full of yse, and in the winter and col|dest time dooth thaw, yeelding smoake as out of a fornace.
The golden hille is a good league high,Golden hille. and hath plentie of pasture and springs which make the head of Dordonne. It hath also bathes both hote, luke-warme and cold, whereby yearely diuers dis|eased persons doe by washing themselues find ease.
There is also Besse,Besse. a Towne standing neere to the hill of gold or D'or, within a quarter of a league whereof there is a great lake, almost on the top of a hill, of which lake there can no bottome be founde, neither canne it be perceiued that any other water hath recourse thervnto, and if any doe cast any stone thereinto, let him assure himselfe of thunder, light|ning,

haile, and raine.
Creux de Soultis.Not far from this lake there is a goulph called Creux de Soultis wherinto casting a stone you shall heare a most wonderful noise and roring, which also in su~mer it maketh though nothing be cast therein. Neere to the towne of Vchy is a fountaine of hote water, which causeth that neere therevnto be soue|raign bathes for such as wil bath themselues ther|in in Aprill, May and September. At Chaudes-Aigues, a strong place about 8 or 9 leagues from S. Flour are many bathes wherein men do find great ease.


Bourbon and the Territorie thereof called Bourbonois.
Bourbon.BOurbon hath on the North Niuernois or the land of Neuers. It is a sea royall, and Iustice-sea for the seneschalcie of Bourbonois.
rre le stier.S. Pierre le Moustier is also comprehended therin. It is a towne and iustice seat wherto haue recourse Douziois, or the land of Douzy; Xaincois, or the land of Xantonge; Cussell, and others that are parte in Varennes, and part in Auuergne.
Bourbon.Bourbon, a towne standing between Allier Cher.
Loire.Loir passeth through this countrie.


Forest.
Forest.FOrest taketh the name of the woods  groues therein growing, and hath some good townes.
The soyle is fruitfull, and the inhabitants ve|ry good husbands, subtill, and giuen to take great paynes.



Treues, Metz, and the countrie of Messine.
TReues is wealthy by reason of the commerce which Mosselle (whereof it standeth) doth pro|cure.Treues. The Archbishop is one of the electors.
Metz hath Treues on the North,Metz. Thoulon on the south, and Verdune on the west. It is a faire and strong towne by reason of Mostelle and Seilles, that doe run through it, and hath nothing to command it but the Citadell. There they plead not by any written law, but custome only taketh place, so that for the most part the iudges are men of occupation, and none but the only president for the lawes doth in soueraigntie iudge and determine the appeales, which were wont to go to the imperiall chamber of Spires. The soyle is fruitful and plentiful in corne wine, flesh, fish, hay, sault, woode, and mineralles, whereby they stande not greatly in neede of their neighbours. The people are somewhat dull  rude, smelling of the Dutchmens maner of life, many of them speake both French and Dutch: they are va|liaunt, strong, painfull, simple, and not very greedie of learning.
Verdune a welthy towne and second in Messine,Verdune. it standeth on a hill along the riuer of Meuse.
Thoul vpon Moselle,Thoul. standeth beneth Ponta Mus|son, in a fat and fruitfull soyle.


Bourgondy.
BOurgo~dy hath on the north Cha~pagne  the land of Auxerre,Bourgy on the west Niuernois, on the south Bia|uiolis and Lion, on the east Saone, which diuideth at

from the Franch countie and Bresse.
DiionDijon the head towne, scituate almost vppon the frontiers in a faire champion, coasted with a moun|taine which yeeldeth the best vines in Fraunce, that are planted vpon the sides thereof. This towne is 66 leagues from Paris, and 33 from Lyons. On the south the riuer of Ousch doth water it, on the north the brooke Suzon. It is strong by nature, but made by handiworke in respect of such great bulwarkes and fortification. It hath a castell that standeth for a citadell.
To the parliament of Dijon doe resort the Bay|liwiks of Dijon, Autun, Chalon, Aysie, the mou~tains that are simply of the body of the estates: the lands laid to the~ are Mascon, Charrolois, Auxerre, Auxone a Uicountie, these haue particular estates: Noyers, and Bar vpon Seyn haue no estates but of the kings elect, and officers who make the departiments.
The Bailie of Dijon hath vnder him foure seas, whose appeales are immediatly broughte to the parliament. At Digeon also there is a chamber of accounts. Beaune, Nuiz, Aussonne, S. Iohn de Laune.
Talant.Neere to Dijon is Talant, a maruellous strong towne vpon a hill, and Fountaine a village where S. Barnard was borne. Dijon is but smally traffiked and standing at the least six leagues from any naui|gable riuer, besides that the soyle yeeldeth no more vittels but for the sustinaunce of the inhabitants, neyther is it wealthy, and few strangers doe haunt it, onely the inhabitants thereabouts haue recourse thither for their busines and administration of law, they are also more perfit and haue lesse corruption then such as dwell in towns of great resort of stran|gers. They loue well, and haunt one another, are

easie to be acquainted with, hard of capacitie, and so obstinate, that it is harde to turne them from any thing that once they haue printed in their mindes: the women gallant and brauely adorned, the com|mons giuen to labor, especially to the tilth of vines, they are valiaunt, bold, and such as wil not be dealt with, but to others cost.
Beaune standeth in a playne Champion neere to the mountayne in a fat and fruitfull soyle,Beaune. cheefly for wines which are esteemed the best in Fraunce. It hath a lake at hand wherwith the town may arme hir selfe making the enimies lets. It is strong and closed with good walles, well ditched and rampi|red with a strong castell, the aire temperate and healthsome, waters plenty, wherof they haue two springs, the one entereth into the Towne, where it runneth like a riuer, the other falleth into the dit|ches and inuironeth the circuit of the wals, both of them doe driue milles. The hospitall resembleth rather a kings pallace than a hospital for the poore, and therein all kinds of diseased are harboured and cured, except of leprosie  French pox. The cheefe inhabitants are Lawiers, the merchants and poo|rer sort are giuen to tilth of their vines, also to ma|king of drapery and cloath of flax and hempe, wher|of they haue plenty.
Cisteaux an Abbie standing in a great and darke wood.Cisteaux. The Abbot is as it were metropolitane o|uer 1800 monasteries of men, and as many of wo|men.
Authunois or the land of Authune.Authu|nois.
Autune,Autun the head towne thereof standeth at the foot of the mount called Conis, and is watered with the riuer Aron, it is wide, scattering, and without

bridges sauing in the Castle, and in the Fort called Marchant beneath the Castle.
Under this Baylewicke are contained three o|ther, viz. Montenis, Bourbenancy, Semur in Brianois.


Auxerois and the land of Auxerre.
Auxerois.AVxerois is hilly, but fruitfull, hauing no hill but is loden with Uines  arable groundes.
It yeeldeth the best wine in Burgondy: It hath plenty of Woodes and Groues, also of Cattle and Wooll, whereof they make marchandize. It hath on the east, the territorie of Dijon: on the south, Autune, on the west, Niuernois, and on the north Auxerre, and the mountayne: It contayneth 20. leagues in length, and almost as many in bredth, and hath diuers townes, as Semur, Aualon, Aisay le duc, Noyers, Sauliew, Flauigny, Moubar, Viteaux, Rauieres, Mont S. Iohn villages, as Moustier sur Ion, with other Castles and Uillages: Missery, Thoiy l'Eues, Montigni, vpon Ormensac, Saumiz le duc, Bourbilly, Espoisses, Baigny and others.
AuxeroisAuxerois is a bailewick, wherof Semur is chiefe: but it hath bene deuided into other seas, as Aualon, Aysay le Duc.
Semur.Semur is capital of Auxerois, and standing in the middest of the Country is enuironed with hilles e|uery way, sauing toward the East it hath in the compasse thereof three enclosures, but so ioyned to|gether that a man would not take them all to be but one town. The first inclosure is called the Bo|rough, and is the greatest and most inhabited, and that of the nether front: The second is the dougan which serueth as a circle to the whole towne. It is a strong thing standing betweene the Castle and

the Borough, armed with Cartines, and hath on the outside great, thicke, and maruellous high tow|ers, which on the inside are filled with earth vp to the loopholes: It standeth on a rocke whereto there is no accesse, and round about it enuironed with the riuer of Ormenson: It is 120. paces long, and 50. pa|ces broad. The third is the Castle founded vpon a rocke, which although it be verie high, hath neuer|thelesse two welles, wherof the deepest is not aboue 30. foote deepe. The people are gentle, quiet, cour|teous, charitable, one louing another, and liuing in good concord together, and do delight in strangers: they haue plentie of Uines, Uiolets, and Giroflow|ers, the dellicatest and sweetest in France.
Flauigny a town neere to the mount of Auxerois,Flauigny at the foote whereof standeth Alise, a village where sometime was Alexia.


Chalons, or, Chalonois.
CHalons the capital towne standeth vpon Saone.Chalons. The compasse of the Walles resembleth ascut|chion: It is fortefied with a Citadell.
Senecey the first Barronage of Burgondy is not farre from it,Senecey. and is in the possession of the Lords of Bausremont. The Castle is one of the strongest in Burgondy, standing on a great plaine vpon the way from Diion to Lions: the soyle is plentifull in fruit, wine, poulse, wood and pooles. It standeth not a|boue a league from Saone.
Bausremont a barrony in Lorayne.
Tournes between Chalons and Mascon,Bausre|mont. Tournes. a small Towne, more long than wide. It standeth in a fruitfull soyle, and good easterly ayre, well flanqued

with Saone: it is of the dioces of Chalons, but of the bayliwike of Mascon.


Mascon or Masconois.
Masco|nois.MAsconois hath on the East Saone and Bresse, on the west Forest, on the north Charolois, a coun|trie in the king of Spaines hands, but of the iurisdic|tion of Fraunce, on the South is Blauiolois.
Mascon.Mascon, a countrie standing along Saone, and al|most of the same proportion. Concerning Saone, it falleth out of the mou~t Vosegus, diuideth the duchy of Bourgondy from the franche countie,  with a soft course runneth southward, and falleth into Rhosne beneath Lions.


Lions, Forest, and Biauiolois, which haue recourse to Paris.
Lionois.LIonois, or the Territory of Lions, hath on the north Bresse, on the East Sauoy, on the South Dauphine and Languedocke, and on the West Forest and Auuergne.
Lions.Lions is one of the greatest, welthiest, fairest, and stateliest towns in Fraunce, standing vpon the con|fluence of Saone Rhosne, a riuer descending from the Alpes, and running through the lake of Lau|sanne, and without mixture falleth downe to Lions, where it receaueth Saone. These two great riuers make the seat of Lions pleasaunt, and the countrie welthy through the great plentye of merchandise conuaied vpon the same. Two mountains do forti|fie it, and mans hande hath made it impregnable:

there resort merchants out of all Europe, whereby the exchange is greatly exercised there: it is a iustice sea whereon doe depend Lionois, Masconois, Forest, Beauiolois.
Domees,Domees. a hilly soile neere to Lions, it is a soue|raigntie appertaining to the Lord of Monpensier.


Forest.
FOrest hath on the East Biauiolois,Forest. on the West Auuergne, on the north Bourbonois, on the south Velay. It comprehendeth 40 walled townes, and 37 burroughs:Montbrisson. the cheefe Townes, Montbrisson, the capitall and sea of the bayliwike, answerable to the iustice sea of Lions.
Ieures vpon Loire.Ieures.
S Steuen of Turan,S. Steuen. where they make the armour and sire peeces that are vsed through the realme, by reason of the commoditie of the water, which ma|keth good trempe, and the mines of naturall and earth cole the belt in Fraunce.
S. Galmier.S. Gal|mier.
S. Germain le vall, standing in a good and fruitful soyle for wines.S. Germain le vall.
S Bouer, the castell wher they make the most and best clothworkers sheeres in Europe, whereof they haue great vent.S. Bouet.
Rouane,Rouane. one of the best towns in the countrie, and standing vppon the passage of Lyons and Loir. There is no bridge ouer hereabout, but that of S. Rombert, which is the first bridge ouer Loire, from the spring thereof.
The country hath no more corne or wine but for their own prouision, but plenty of cattel and forrests of firre, the people simple, suttle, wary, vsing great

wordes and louing gaine.
The principall houses are Versse, an olde Castle standing so high as it may be seene all ouer the country: Cosan which is of the house of Leuy.


Dauphine.
Dau|phine.DAuphine hath on the North Lionois,  on the one side lieth the low Country of Dauphine: whereof Vienne an Archbishopricke is capitall: on the west Rhosne, which parteth it from Lionois, Viuaretz and Velay: on the East Sauoy, on the South Pro|uince, and this part is called high Dauphine, wher|of Embrun is capitall. This country lieth in length from the 43. degree of the latitude vnto about the 45. and from Durance vnto Rhosne, wherwith it is watered, as also with Drosine, Isere and others.
High Dau|phine.High Dauphine hath Embrun, an Archbishop|ricke: and these townes, Valence, Gap, Dye, S. Paul, Bishoprickes.
The low Countrey hath Grenoble, the capitall and parliament of the countrey. Vienne an Archbi|shoprick, Romans, Crest, S. Antony of Vienne, S. Val|lier, Coste, Moustier, Chasteau Dauphine, Briancon standing in the hilles whereof all the country doth take the name. Montelimart famous for the tra|fique there. Tiny vpon Rosne pertaining to the Lord of Tournon.
The people are valiant, and constant in their dealinges, careful to keepe their owne, dull witted, smelling somewhat of hilly rudenesse: and although among the clownes there appeare a certaine wilde barbarousnesse: yet are the gentry and Burgesses of townes, courteous, sociable, quicke witted, free

in speech, sildome dissemblers, high minded, capa|ble of reason, and such as will easily be moued. The soyle in some places is very fruitful in corne  wine, in other places barren sauing for chesnuts and ma|rons whereof they haue store, as also of cattell and vittels, both good, and reasonable cheape, wher|of they may also spare for their neighbours.
Grenoble standeth on the frontiers of Sauoy and riuer of Isere,Grenoble. and is capital and parliament of Dau|phine. It is in a fat and fruitfull soyle, and by little and little adioining to the foote of the hilles, stret|cheth eastward, whereof the soyle is also rounde a|bout the town  is so fat that the countrie passeth in fruitfulnesse and aboundance of things necessarie for mans life. Isere a riuer springing out of the tops of the Alpes on the east side thereof, and violentlye passing along the countrie of Torrentuise, and Mo|rienne, watereth and washeth Dauphine, and so fal|leth into Rhosne between Tiny and Valence, on the north part it hath a faire bridge of Isere, and on the south side runneth Drac a fierce brooke, which not farre from Grenoble falleth into Isere. On the same side is the flaming fountayne which boileth conti|nually, and burneth whatsoeuer commeth neere it. On the side of S. Laurence suburbs the countrie be|ginneth to be hilly, and thence doe appeare the high hilles couered with vines, and yeelds the best wine in all Gaule Narbonense: on the tops of those hilles is the great charterhouse, cheefe of al that order, al|so on the one side is the excellent vinegrounde of Challemont. At Grenoble they haue also a chamber of accounts.
Romans standeth vpon Isere,Romans. and is one of the fai|rest and welthiest townes in the countrie.
Viennois.Viennois a county hauing on the East side Sauoy on the West Rhosne, on the North Lionois, on the south Valentinois. Vienne is head thereof.
Valenti|nois.Valentinois hath on the North Viennois, on the south Auignon, on the East high Dauphine, on the west Rosne and Viuarets, the soile is fruitfull.
Valence.Valence, the head towne thereof standeth along Rhosne, hauing on the east the fountains of Charon which are so vaulted that a man may goe vpright vnder them, of the one of the~ there can neither head nor spring be found. The town is wealthy  of tra|fike, within a league therof Isere falleth into Rhosne at a place called Consolans. It is walled with two strong walles, and flanqued with sundry towers e|qually distant each from other. It hath a iustice sea an vniuersitie, and a storehouse of salt.
Embron.Embron standeth in the mountaines of Dauphine, vpon the confines and passage of Italy,  so bounded that in a halfe a day a man may from it enter into the countie of Nice, in a smal time into Piemont, and in lesse than 2 howers into Prouince. It standeth on a rocke in the middest of a pleasaunt vallie, so as from the town one may see al the field round about, and the medow wherethrough Durance dooth run. It is euery way enuironed with mountaines, that from the top to the feet do abound in corn, wine and fruit,  in diuers places the aire is so milde  tempe|rat, that they gather there as good  delicate man|na as any in the world. These hilles doe also yeeld Agarike, Turpentine  other simples. The towne containeth 7 parishes. There is a Forte on the rocke which is formed like a terrasse or platforme, being thirtie fathom high, and so steepe as it were hewen, and cannot be mined, scaled, surprised or for|ced

by assault, the rest is wel walled  flanqued. It hath fiue gates, the waters of the fountaines haue their springs in the towne it selfe. It is a bayliwike and iustice sea of the dependance of Grenoble. The inhabitaunts of Embron are courteous, obedient, peaceable, no quarrellers, nor deceitfull, giuen to la|bour the earth, and carefull of their husbandrie.
The auncient houses of Dauphine: Bressieux, Boutieres, S. Vallier, Nauigeron, Gordes, Clauezon, and others. The knight Bayard also was thereof, and issued of the house of Terrail.


Prouince.
PRouince is diuided from Italy by the Riuer of Var and standeth in the 40 degree of the North latitude,Prouince. and so subiecte to much imtemperate aire, for the heat is there greater than in any other part of Fraunce. In plentie of corn the Ile of Fraunce cannot surpasse the fields of Arles, which lie after the manner of a toung of earth, and a champion en|closed with 2 arms  chanels of the riuer of Rhosne, containing 7 Prouince leagues, as long as twelue of France: the plain of S. Chaumur, Miramon, Senai, and Melemort to Ourdan Ardage, and so toward the riuer of Durance, is comparable to Beausse: and that which lieth from Ourgen vnto Aix and Mar|seilles, and so to Yerres, Frein Antibe, vnto the riuer of Var, which diuideth Prouince from the Duke of Sauoys land, throughout the whole extent therof is replenished with store of fruit  sweet trees as Or|renge, citron, oliue, pomgranate  quince. The soyle couered with rosemary, mirtles, iunipers, and other

sweet shrubs. They haue also Palme trees which beare very good fruit, and in manner as great as those of Affrike, neere to Yerre they haue planted suger canes, whereof they hope for profite, for the soyle is very good. Also Rosine, Rue and wood are plentifull in many places, oyle of Oliues the best in Europe, they doe moreouer gather Manna there. In Prouince the high countrie and hauens doe re|semble Normandy, as at Escales, Seyne, Cohuars, Castelnaw, and other grounds that beare no vines, but are replenished with apple, peare, chestnut and walnut, and other such trees as reioice in cold soile, for one side of Prouince by reason of the mountains wherevpon the same lieth all the yeare long is very cold, but plentifull in cattel. They also make cheese but of sheepe and goates milke only. The lande of Ryes and the country that stretcheth out vnto Mou|stier, Draguignon, Lirques, Terealquier, Oigne, Val|la~solle, haue resembla~ce to the soile of Brye France, for the seasons are more backward, as standing in a more cold and temperat an ayre than the other parts of Prouince, whereby their haruest is longer out by 15 daies or 3 weekes than in other places, neither are their wines so strong and forcible as those that grow about Arles, Salo~, Aix, or Marseilles: besides that their vintage agree with the season in Fraunce. Those few forrests and groues that they haue, doe for the most part consist of okes and Pine|trees, as well male which yeeldeth Rosine, as fe|male that bringeth foorth the pyneapples and kyr|nels which are good to be eaten with their Almo~s. Also in some places namelye in the mountaines of Lestent, which are betweene Treyn and Antibe they haue Corke trees. They haue likewise goodly salt

pits, as at Berre, Yerres, also at the poole of Valence out of the which at that time of the yeare that the salt is baked and hardened, it is not possible for ten thousand men to draw it cleane out. In ayre Pro|uince also resembleth Italy: and such fruits as doe grow in Italy, prosper in Prouince. The people va|liaunt, strong, bold and quicke witted.
Nice is the first towne of Prouince,Nice. on the East standing vpon a gulph of the sea, where Var falleth into the Ligustian sea, which is called the riuer of Gam, this towne belongeth to the duke of Sauoy, and is a bishoprike suffragant to the Bishop of Em|brune.
Antibe,Antibe. scituate very strong on the sea shore, it hath Gene a bishoprike, whose sea is now transla|ted vnto Tarascon ouer against Antibe is the Ile of S. Honorat otherwise called Leuin.
Frein a bishoprike and hauen one of the strongest places in all the countrie.Frein.
Eres or Yerres with the isles adiacent,Eres or Yerres. which bear the same name doe lie alongst the coast betweene Freyn and Tolon: along those Isles they gather Corall.
Tolon a bishoprike.Tolon. S. Victor. Marseilles S. Victor.
Marseilles is almost ouer three sides washed with the sea, and the fourth which is firme land is harde to be assaulted because the vallie lieth high along, and of difficult accesse. The inhabitants are great seafarers, and doe traffike into al places, into Afrike yea euen into the hart of Ethiopia. It is in a manner the storehouse of all such wealth as is transported out of the East into the West. The kinges gallies doe vsually harbour in that hauen.
Betweene Aix and Marseilles lieth Baulme a soli|tarie

place and an Oratorie where Magdalen doing her penaunce died: this Mount is craggie, being 3000 paces high, and 10000 long. It is as it were e|uen hewen, and is inaccessible, resembling a wall, at the foot wherof is Magdalens caue raised as high as a man maye cast a stone. The opening of it lieth like the mouth of a fornace: in the end of this caue is a spring whose issue cannot be perceiued.
S. Maxi|mine.S. Maximine a Towne six leagues from Aix.
Aix the capitall Towne, standing almost in the middest of Prouince is a Parliament and Uniuer|sitie.Aix.
Cisteron.Cisteron a Bishoprike standing vpon Durance, not farre from Daulphine.
Cauallon.Cauallon a Bishoprike standing vpon the entrie into the church lands and countie of Vanduse. It is watered with three riuers, Rhosne, Durance, and Sorgue.
Pont S. Esprit.Pont S. Esprit standeth vpon Rhosne.
Aurange a Bishoprike, a principalitie fallen to the house of Nassaw,Aurange. where are yet extant the ruines of the most woonderful Theatre in the world, with other antiquities.
Auignon the Popes Toombe.Auignon containeth seuen notable things, and of euery of the same, seuen: vz. seuen palaces, seuen pa|rishes, seuen hospitals, seuen nunneries, seuen colle|ges, seuen couents, seuen gates. The kings landes doe lie almost round about it, for at Demipont is the entrie into Languedocke, and within halfe a league of it passing ouer Durance, they enter into Prouince. The Towne is stored with vittels, cloth, fine co|lours, and good paper,Durance a riuer. al growing and made in the same soile: one branch of Durance serue their diars, who make the best die in graine or crimosine that is

in Fraunce, they haue great plentie of small grayns which they vse for a very fine vermillion, and doe therewith die their silkes. Auignon is an Archbi|shoprike, and hath there a continuall Legat repre|senting the Popes person. It is also an Uniuersitie which is fortified with the spring and Fountaine of Vanduse, which inclosing it dooth fall into the dit|ches thereof.
Vanduse,Vanduse. a place not far distaunt from Auignon, whether Petrarch vsually withdrew himselfe. It lieth in a pleasaunt vallie enuironed with rockes, from whence the spring afore mentioned doth arise, which growing into a riuer through the course of other springs thereabout, is called Sorgue.
Croux a very straunge countrie.Croux.
Carpentras,Carpe~tras Vaison, Bishoprikes.
Mirtegue Salon of Croux,Martegue c. S. Chama, towns. The 3 Mries, a coast Towne betweene Arles and Mar|seilles.
Tarascon standeth vpon the fall of Durance into Rhosne.Tarascon
Arles an archbishoprike nigh to Rhosne standeth in the fennes where they now breed as goodly cat|tell as may be.Arles. Therin are to be seene the ruines of an Amphitheatre.
Being past Arles ye come to Camargue a fruitfull soyle whereon standeth S. Giles the head Towne of the countrie, also Aiguemortes so termed of the still and sleeping waters. This towne standeth vpon the swallowing of Virdoule into the sea, fro~ whence neuerthelesse the channell of Rhosne keepeth his course westward.


Languedocke with other the countrieo depending vpon the Parliament of Tholouze.
ViuaretzVIuaretz neere to Rhosne whereof Viuiers is the cheefe.
Velay.Velay, whereof Py is capitall, in this countrie lieth Tournon. Iust Lewis of Tournon Countye of Roussillon is Lord thereof.
Geuoudan which on the East and North borde|reth vpon Viuaretz and Velay,Geuoudan on the South vpon Rouergue, and on the West vpon the Territorie of Albye. Mande is the cheefe towne thereof.
Langue|docke.Languedocke vpon the East hath the Pirenean mountains, on the west Garonne, on the south Pro|uince, and on the North Geuoudan, and Auuergne. It comprehendeth two archbishoprikes.
Narbone.Narbone wherevnder are the bishoprikes of Car|casson, Bezieres, Agde, Lodesue, Nismes, Maguelonne Vzes, Eaule, Aleth, and S. Pont of Tonniers.
TholouzeTholouze which containeth vnder it Montauban Rieux, Mirepoix, Vaur, Lambars, S. Papoul, and Pau|miers.
Narbone standeth as it were in a quagmier at the fall of the riuer of Ande into the French Sea. This riuer springeth in the Mountaines of Foix, thence passing through Languedocke falleth into the Sea neere to Narbone where it maketh a great fennie marish, vpon the which this Towne is sci|tuate.
CarcassonCarcasson standeth vpon Ande.
Aleth.Aleth standeth at the foot of Pireneans.
Agd.Agd is scituat not far from the fall of Ande into the sea vpon a goulph thereof.
Beziers.Beziers is vpon the riuer of Obe, which falleth into the sea betweene Montpelier and Agde.
Montpe|lier.Montpelier standeth not far from the Sea in a good aire vpon a hill, in a faire and fruitfull Soile.

The riuer of Lez runneth within a bow shot of the walles. The towne is faire and welthie, the inha|bitants courteous. It containeth an Uniuersitie wherein Phisicke is as learnedlye reade as in any place of the world. It hath also a court of Ayds.
Beaucaire a seneschall sea,Beaucaire the towne standeth vp|on Gardon, the Territorie thereof doe stretch on the one side to Auignon, on the other to Viuarets.
It hath iurisdiction ouer sundrie townes as Al|laiz a Vicountie, Vzes a Bishoprike and Duchie in the house of Cursol. Lodesne, a Bishoprike standing vpon Orbe.
Betweene Beaucaire, Vzes and Lodesue, standeth the bridge of Gardes, which being of a maruellous workmanship, hath serued as a conduct to Nismes.
Nismes standeth in a fayre and plentifull soile,Nismes. beautified with sundrie antiquities as Arennes aud others.
Sommiers standeth vpon Virdoule.So~miers. Castres, c. Clermont Carcasson
Castres, Villemans, Pezenas, Agde vpon the riuer of Erhant, Cabestan, S. Nazare.
Clermont and Lodesne.
Carcasson a strong towne and the cheefe sea of the seneschall sea of Tholouze, except Tholouze it selfe. Leauing Carcasson wee come vnto the plaine of Languedocke, which is accounted one of the fruit|fullest in Fraunce, comprehendeth sundry Towns, as Auragnes, the territorie of Tholouze, part of the countrie of Foix (for the land of Alby and the rest of Foix is all hillye) S. Pons of Tonniers, S. Papoul, Vaur, bishopriks. Castelnaw of Ay, the cheefe towne of Auragnes, standing in the flat champion, is fruit|full in corne, pulse, and wood, wherein also the most part of Languedocke aboundeth.
Quercy.Quercy and Rouergue are accounted in Acqui|tain, and yet haue their recourse vnto the Parlia|ment of Tholouze. The riuer of Tarne parteth Ro|uergue, wherof Rodez is the cheefe towne, from the rest of Languedocke.
Rodez.Rodez a Seneschall sea belonging to Tholouse, wherevpon doe depend the seas of Alby, Castres of the Albigeois, Gaillac.
The countrie being hilly, is but barren, the peo|ple painful and quickwitted, howbeit contrariwise the soyle of Alby aboundeth in corne, wine, saffron, and iet, and is bounded with the riuers of Lot and Tarne.
Quercy.Quercy a Seneschall sea is one of the fairest and fruitfullest parts of Aquitaine, hauing on the East Auuergne, on the West and North Perigort, on the south the very Languedocke and territorie of Tho|louze. Corne, cattell and wood are plentifull, as al|so naturall coles, the riuers abounding in fishe, the soyle yeeldeth a sweete aire, as consisting both of vales and hilles. In this countrie are two bishop|rikes: Mountaubon, a Towne standing vpon a hill leaning to the bridge that goeth ouer Tarne, and fenced with an old castell, hauing at the head of the towne a Fountaine sufficient to water the whole. The Towne standeth in a fruitfull soyle vpon the great high way from Tholouse to Limoges, and Pa|ris.
Cahors the other bishoprike, is the cheefe towne of Quercy, and standeth vpon the riuer of Lot which falleth from the hilles on the side of S. Flour. It stan|deth on a hill, hauing toward Mountaubon a deepe vallie, and toward Sauillac the riuer. The whole soyle is stonie, and the vines grow vpon two steepe

hilles, that it seemeth impossible for the labourers to climbe them: the Towne is faire, large  weal|thie, framed like an Egge, the streetes beautifull, hard to be besieged, it is the seneschall sea, notwith|standing Montaubon hath the Iustice sea, and is an Uniuersitie. The Bishop is countie of Cahors, and so consequently Lord both temporall and spirituall, celebrating Masse he hath his swoord, gauntlets, and helmet on the aulter, with his legges armed.
Castle Sarasin standeth in this countrie on Tarne,Castle Sa|razin. it is no greate Towne, but strong, and standeth lowe.
Montech,Montech. a Towne.
Moissac,Moissac one of the foure principalles of Quercy, pleasauntly seated, hauing on the North and West the hilles loaden with vines, on the East Tarne and a faire champion replenished with vines, gardens, and all maner of fruits, and on the South euen a|long the walles runneth Tarne, which falling from the hilles of Auuergne passeth by Geuoudan, and somewhat aboue Alby, thence with a swifte course through a pype in the rocke it maketh such a noyse as may be heard two leagues off, then inlarging it selfe it waxeth nauigable and falleth into Garonne, may be discerned by the space of two leagues. This is the greatest trafficked towne in Quercy, as dea|ling with corne, wine, wood, saffron, oyle, wool, salt, and fish. It was but lately erected to a Seneschall-sea.
Lausart,Lausart. a Towne scituate vpon a rocke not farre from Moissac.
Tholouze standeth vnder a hill along the banks of Garonne,Tholouze part in Languedocke, and part in Acqui|taine, Garonne falleth out of Mount S. Beat in Co|minges,

nigh to S. Bertrands and passing by Caseres, Narsac, Meuret  others, it runneth almost through the middest of Tholouze, which next to Paris is one of the greatest townes in Fraunce, and hath an Uni|uersitie, Parliament, Iustice sea, and seneschalsea. The soile fat, wealthy, fruitfull, and abounding in all things necessarie for mans life: the people ciuile and courteous, deuout, and seuere in punishing of|fendors.


Part of Guyenne which is vnder the iuris|diction of Tholouse.
Foix and ComingesFOix and Cominges.
The iurisdiction of Tholouse reacheth into Guyenne from Lorat vnto Biscay, the diuision being limited by the riuer of Gane. It stretcheth from the one sea to another. The mountaines of this coun|trie are described according to the inhabitaunts of the saine, on the side of Languedocke are the moun|taines of Sant which part Roussillon from Narbon, next are those of Foix, and Westward are the moun|tains of Cominges, Aure, Bigorre, Aspe, S. Sera~ce, and Biskay, these mountains are welthie, and their val|lies fruitfull: the toppes beautified with woods, and the sides with greene pastures, besides that no soyle yeeldeth better yron mines than Foix, it also yeeldeth rosin, turpentine, pitch, frakinsense, corke, marble, iasper, and salt, also whitmeats, and an in|finit number of wilde beasts, with many quicke springs. The diols of nine of clocke  noone, which are two hilles, so termed because the funne is neuer off the one at nine of the clocke, neither of the other at noone,  are two of the highest hilles of the Pire|neans,

the one is in Bierne, the other amongst the mountaines of Auronne. The mountaines of Laue|don doe breed the best horsses in France, yea such as exceed the Spanish both in strength and quicknes, but the number is not greate, because the hill is small, and hath also woolues, beares, bores, harts, hindes, goats and cammels, also plenty of simples: from the same doe spring sundry riuers, as Ande, Aure, Garonne, Sayne, Baiz, Gerz, Dour, Garand, Graues, and other which fall into the sea.
The countie of Foix lieth on the mountains side, and is the neerest region to Tholouse.
It hath a Bishops sea which is at Pamiers, but the towne of Foix is the iustice sea and cheefe of the countrie, wherevnto it giueth name, as also to a noble familie: on the East lieth Languedock, on the West Cominges, on the North the countrie called Riueres. The Riuerins do inhabit about the moun|taines of Foix, along the course of Garonne, on the South the Pireneans. Most part of this country is hilly, especially on the side that lieth toward Taras|con, where the hilles are plentifull in yron mynes and naturall coles.
Carmain a countie.Carmain The Lordship of Mirepoix, are of the dependances of Foix At this day there be the children of the late Countie of Carmain brother to the Lord Poule of Foix one of the priuie counsaile, but the Lords of Mirepoix are come of the familie of Leuy.
Caseres vpon Garonne,Caseres. and Rieux a Bishoprike not farre from the same riuer, are betweene Tho|louse and Cominges.
Cominges a countie nigh vnto Foix,Cominges which lyeth





on the East thereof, hauing on the North, part of Languedocke and the counties of Lisle and Gaure, on the South the Pireneans, and on the West E|strac, and Armignac, it is diuided into the higher and the lower, the higher is all hillye, comprehending the Townes of S Bertrand, Conserans, S. Beat, S. Fre|gon, Moregeau, Saliers, and others.
The lower contayneth Lambers a bishoprike, Sa|mathan, Mourer, which are the cheefe royall seates, and haue recourse vnto the Seneschall sea of Tho|louze, and thence vnto the Parliament thereof.
S. Bartra~dS. Bartrand is the capitall of Cominges, and stan|deth on the toppe of a hill, and seueral from the rest. The territorie about it is fruitfull. In the vallies and on the mountaines are plentie of Groues and pastures for cattell, to the breeding wherof the hus|bandmen doe more apply themselues than to anye other thing.
Coserans.Conserans standeth vpon the Riuer of Pamiers.
S. Tregeo~S. Tregeon scituate vpon the side of a verye high hill, so strong, that the accesse vnto it is very diffi|cult. This hill is full of Vines, and the vallies are replenished with fat and fruitfull medowes and a|rable groundes. From hence runneth a vally along the riuer of Saine, euen to the fall thereof into Ga|ronne, beneath Grenade, from whence you may be|hold Coheiles, Pamier, Rieux, Espaon, also the ysle of Dodon, a Towne standing verye high with Sone, at the foote thereof, and is one of the royall castel|wikes of Cominges vnder the iurisdiction of the Castell of Samathan, the auntient mansion of the Earles.
Dez.Dez a commaundrie in the aforesayd vallie from

the toppe wherof ye may discerne Saueterre, a town belonging to the Lords of Aubigeou of the house of Amboise.
In this countrie are the families of Moncor|ueil, Lauuesan, Aulin, Rocquet, Polansic, Saias, Sarac, and others.
Lambers vpon Saine a small Towne,Lambers. yet well walled and ditched, the vines on the one side, and a faire champion of corne and medowes on the other. It standeth foure leagues from Samathan.
Samathan standeth parte vpon a hill,Samatha~. and parte in the bottome of the vallie of Saine, which run|ning through the middest thereof, parteth the town called the Borough from that part that is tearmed the Market. The higher parte is houered with the side of a castell, and is enuironed with maruel|lous deepe ditches.
The noble houses of this countrie: Montamar, Aligne, Bezerille, Polustron, Sauiquas, Lahaz, Noal|han, Cazoux, whereof is la Vallet, Esquiuso, Moth of Sauinez, Montague, Moubla~c, Basside, Andohiel, Fon|terailles and others.
Montpezat neere whereto is the house of the L. of Bellegarde is neere to Samathan.Mont|pezat.
Mouret being within 5 leagues of Samathan stan|deth vpon Garonne in a fruitfull champion,Mouret.  hath a hill which ouerlooketh it.
The whole territorie of Cominges is plentifull in corne, wine, oyle of nuts, fruit, millet, wood, or o|ther things, and is well inhabited, the men valiant, and warlike, nothing regarding learning, patient, in labour, sore in diet, discreet in talke, not lauish in apparell, and haters of pleasure. The women great huswiues, chast and neuer idle.
Beneath the Castell of Lahaz there is a Brooke which parteth Cominges from the countie of Gaure betweene which two is inclosed the small countye Ile in Iordain, a towne standing vpon Saine, apper|taining to the house of Nauarre, she extendeth hir li|mits farre into the Forrest of Baconne, on the side whereof standeth the towne of Lauignac.
Gaure.Gaure a great countie with fayre townes therein as Gimount, Beaumont, Grenade, which standeth vpon Garonne, not farre from the fall of Saine ther|into.
Beaumo~t.Beaumont the cheefe towne of the Countie is in the playne, diuided so with waters, that some think it to be part of Lomagne, but in troth it dependeth vpon the bayliwike of Gaure.
Gimont.Gimont lieth on the side of a steepe hill, harde to come vnto: along the walles therof runneth the ri|uer Gimoe. It containeth three parishes, and is a great towne, and wealthy in corne, but cheeflye in wine.
Agen.Agen the capitall towne of the territorie of Agen called Agenois, which lieth out at length betweene Lot and Garonne, hauing on the East Quercy, on the west Gascoigne, on the South Garonne, on the North Perigort, that land containeth faire townes, as Port S. Marye, Villeneuf in Agen, Hautefay, Clerac Tonins, Marmand and others.
Agen.Agen, a bishoprike standeth in a faire, fat,  fruit|full soyle: it is accounted one of the welthiest in Guienne, and is watered with three riuers Lot, Dordon and Garonne. The towne standeth in a plaine champion, and is the Iustice sea and Sene|schal sea of the countrie. It is greatly traffiqued with merchants from Tholouse, Bourdeaux, Quercy

and Rouergue by meanes of the sayd riuers, for it is very plentifull.
Condone the head of the territorie of Condone,Condone. is a great towne, but not so welthy as Agen, for it is no throughfare, neither hath any nauigable Ri|uer comming to it. It standeth in a fruitful soile, al|most euery way enuironed with small hilles, full of vines, and hath the riuer of Baize, which springing in the Pireneans parteth Armignac from Bigorre and watereth the territorie of Condone. It is a iustice|sea and hath vnder it Valence, Clairac on Garonne, Romio betweene Condone and Lectore, Nerac, a welthy towne, Montreall and others. Also Noble houses, the Uicounties of Fitzmarcon, Gondri, For|ces, Moulac.
Estrac a countie appertaining to the house of Co~|dale,Estrac. lieth vpon the confines of Samath, Auchx, and Cominges, it comprehendeth diuers Townes and Uillages, as Mirande the capitall thereof. Pauy a small league from Auchx, Castlenaw of Barbareux, a strong hold and inaccessible. Santelix, Cimorre, Saro|mon and others.
The noblest houses thereof are, Uicountie of Lu|pereux, Lord of Maccube, lord of Pauesac, the houses of Termes, and others.
The inhabitants (especially of the Uillages) are dull witted, rustical, nothing warie, al stammerers, their toongs fat, grosse, and heauy, and therfore not able to pronounce the Latine, and so consequentlye more vnapt to learning than any country in France.
Auchx one of the cheefe towns of Armignac,Auchx. stan|deth vpon Gers, it standeth on a very rocke inacces|sible, but on the one side: It is built scattering, ex|cept on the heigth thereof, where it is sufficientlye

enhabited and replenished with people.
Armig|nac.Armignac is a large countrie contayning many townes whereof Lectour is capitall, and a Bishop|ricke and Seneschall sea standing on the toppe of a hil, which each way except on the passage to Tho|louze, is inaccessible. The castell is on a rocke safe from mining or batterie. This is one of the strong|est townes in Fraunce, hauing a triple wall armed with a strong bulwarke, terrasses and platformes, on that side which is accessible, hauing in it a foun|tayne sufficient to minister drinke to the people and water to their horsses, for the towne standeth farre from any riuer. It hath also foure-skore welles or more, whose springes cannot bee cutte off no more than the springs of the sayd Fountaine. The inha|bitants are ciuill and courteous, few artificers, as liuing for the most parte vpon their reuenues, tho|rough the fruitfulnesse of the soyle in Corne, Wine, and other things.
Castera.Castera, a Towne belonging vnto the Lords of Founteuilles in Cominges is not farre from the same. It hath Vic, Nogueron, Euse, Casauban, and others.
Lectour, c.Lectour, Auchx and Vic doe all three stande in a fruitfull soyle, but approching toward the lande of Bourdeaux. The countrie of Armignac yeeldeth no|thing but chestnuts and such other Trees and fur|ther all pastures, but finally it is a meere wilder|nesse. The inhabitants are grosse witted, simple, good husbands, such as can make commoditie of a|ny thing, and giuen to traffike especially in cattell: they haue also honie and wax.
Bigorre.Bigorre bordereth Eastward vpon Armignac, Westward vpon Bierne, Northward vpon Albret,

and Southward vpon the Pireneans, in the which the most part thereof doth lie euen from the mounte of Aure vnto the hilles of Saule and Aspe, which are in Bierne.
Tarbes the cheefe Towne thereof standeth in a fruitfull soyle vpon the Riuer Adour and is parted into four or fiue bodies wherof each hath his chan|nell,Tarbes. bridge, gate, and wall. It is the seneschall sea of Bigorre, wherin are contained these other towns, Try, Runectain, Mouborget, Bagueres, wherein are the whot bathes.
Wood is reasonable throughout the whole coun|trie, which is very cold by reason of the mountains wherein standeth the Towne of Lourd, which is the last of Bigorre, as also of the iurisdiction of the parliament of Tholouze.
These famous houses are also therin contained, Aste the originall of the Cramounts who now are in cheefe authoritie in Biskay. Bennac, Louirs, Barbas|san, Aussune, and others.
The people high minded, borne to warres, sud|den in their attempts, deepe dissemblers, churlish, rusticall, not bearing with iniuries, for trifles readie to kill and slay, loyall, no robbers, nor malitious, but simple, how beit in townes societie maketh the people more ciuile. The Nobilitie are valiant cour|teous and sociable.
In Bigorre as well among the Gentrie as Pe|sants, the eldest brother beareth awaye the whole inheritaunce, sauing some small allowance to the rest, but in Bierne it is as in Caux. They haue also in Bigorre few or no Gentlemen that haue au|thoritie of high Iustice, but all haue lawe from the king. They cannot take notise of any matter a|boue

60 soulz value, neither may they whip but im|prison, but so that within 24 houres they yeeld the body of the offendor into the kings presence.
In Bigorre and in Bearne and almost throughout all Gascoigne, there is a race of people called Gabots or Gathets,Gabots or Gahets. of whom all men generally do shun and auoide the acquaintaunce, esteeming them as lea|pers, they may not dwell within any towne, but se|uerall in some corner of the suburbs,  in the Chur|ches haue their seats seuerally inclosed. They are all either Carpentars or Coopers, and of no other occupation. Goodly men, painfull, very mechani|call, they are strong in smell, and comming neere to them their flesh sauoureth very much. They are not very greedie of deuotion, and haue their buriall a|part from all other Christians, almost without any solemnity: wheresoeuer they inhabit they are pore and liue vpon day labour, ready to serue euery man for his monie. If any of them grow rich, it is sildom seene that his children inherit his substance, except such mooueables as euery man shunneth as the pe|stilence. There is almost no towne nor village in Gascoigne especially in Bigorre or Bierne, but hath some one familie of them. They are sayd to be of the off spring of Gehesi, whereto the Leaprosie of Naa|man the Syrian shall cleaue vnto the last day.


The Resort of Bourdeaux.
Guyenne.GVyenne at this present containeth no more but the countries depending vpon the Parliament of Bourdeaux, vz. the land of Bourdeaux, the territo|rie of Bazas, the lands of high Gascoigne, parte of Biskay and Medocke, which lie beyond Garonne, but

on the hither side are those countries that are tear|med the land betweene two seas, depending vpon Bazas, Fronsades, Perigort, Limosin and Xaintogne, alreadie described.
The land between two seas is so called because the sea floweth on each side thereof by two armes,The land betweene two seas. which in their course doe receaue two great riuers: the one Garonne at Bourdeaux, the other Dordon at Libourne, whereby the sayde two armes doe make the countrie almost an Iland, the point whereof ly|eth at a place called Carboniers, where beginneth the great streame of the flood and ebbe which run|neth so furiously along the channell of Dordon that it ouerwhelmeth the great shippes if it take them on the one side. The inhabitants of the country doe tearme it Marcareth, and it sildome openeth but in the whottest of summer in the equinoctiall. The towns standing in this sayd land betweene 2 seas, belong part to Agen, part to Bazas,  part to Bour|deaux.
To Bazas doe belong Reone vpon Garonne, a strong and wealthy towne, Montsegar vpon Drot, two leagues from Reolle, S. Bazille, S Ferme, Castel|mouron, Geronde, Saueterre, and others.
In Bourdeaux: S. Maiere, Benanges a Countie, Libourne vpon Dordon, a goodlye Towne at the gulph and fall of Dordon into the sea, Fronsades ly|eng beyonde Libourne, now a Marquisate and fa|mous in respect of the castel of Fronsac, which is one of the strongest in Guyenne, and standeth on the side of a hill, with the prospect along into the sea.
Bourdeaux standeth vpon the bankes of Garonne which in sundrie places washeth the walles there|of,Bourde|aux. yea and at the full of the Moone when the tide is

in, it commeth vp before the palace. The hauen re|sembleth a horned moone, which maketh it the fay|rest and strongest in Fraunce, and great shippes may enter into the same. The sea shore is on the North side, for on the East and South side of Bourdeaux lie the Laundes, and on the West the Fennes, the marches and land of Medocke. Round about it is very well fortified, beside the naturall strength of the scituation which is with great Walles, Bul|warkes, rampiers and ditches. It hath a Sene|schal sea, Parliament, Admiraltie, and Uniuersity. The soyle plentifull in good wines, as the wynes of Graue, Larmont, Bastide and others. Also farther off at a place called Melion are such white wines as in plentifulnesse and goodnesse may compare with Maluoisy. The bread of Potensac and Alenson, that are not far from Bourdeaux, is accounted the best in Guyen. Bourdeaux wanteth no store of fish or flesh, but the aire of the sea maketh the countrie vnhelth|full, and much subiect to sicknesse and pestilence.
Espare, c.Along the coast beneath Bourdeaux standeth the towne of Espare, then Cap S. Marye, also aboute the fennes lieth the land of Medock, very low and much subiect to inundation.
Blanquefort.Blanquefort a castell belonging to the Lorde of Duras, standeth in this fenny and slymy land, whose slyme proceedeth of the gulphes that the Riuer of Garonne maketh therein.
Buchz.The land of Buchz is a principalitie belonging to the house of Cantalle, the Lord whereof beareth the title of Cantalle, lieth also in the aforesaid fenny and slimy soyle. This countrie is full of Rosine, whereof the poorest sort of the inhabitants, as also of Armignac, Bierne, and Bigorre, do make their can|dels,

whereby their house doth wax blacke, for the smoake of these candels doe yeelde a woonderfull blacke colour, and maketh the very people looke with the sent of a tawny and duskie complexion, be|sides that naturally the people of Medocke and the Laundes are not all of the goodliest personages.
The Laundes wherein lieth a long way all san|die and full of grauell,Launds. which in summer is very te|dious, for these sands doe skald and skorch, besides that, the cou~trie is so drie, that there is scarse a drop of water to be had, which notwithstanding there be some villages standing out of the way: the inhabi|tants therof are very industrious, and for the most part of small stature, simply apparelled, spare in diet and yet somwhat welthy by reason of commerce of corke, rosine, pitch  cattell, wherof they haue store.
Albret a dutchie whereof all the countrie is na|med,Albret. doth lie in this countrie.
Chalosse,Chalosse. a towne famous in respect of the good|nesse of the white wines which ther grow, is neere.
Bazas whose territorie and land comprehendeth Mont de Marson,Bazas. Castle-Geloux, Ayre and Bazaz it selfe. Bishoprikes also, the Mas of Ayre and others whose soyle resembleth the Launds.
Bazas standeth in the middest of the sandes, and yet toward the North hath a reasonable good soile, plentifull in corne, wine, fruit, and cattell, which is their cheefe wealth. The bishoprike and seneschal|sea therof haue their iurisdiction extended into both sides of Garonne.
S. Seuere,S. Seuere. the cheefe cape or point of Gascoigne, for in these quarters was the antient habitation of the Gascoigns. The true Gascoigns are the inhabita~ts of Bayonne the Basques and the people of Bierne.
GascoigneGascoigne comprehendeth sundry towns as Axe a Bishopricke and Seneschalsea, whereto haue re|course Laundes, Bayon, and high Gascoigne.
Axe.Axe a strong towne hauing therin whot bathes which heale diuers diseases: therein standeth a ca|stell which serueth as a citadell. Without the town there is a pit of salt water, whereout they drawe ple~ty of salt, but it is corosiue, as being tainted with some vaine of Alum.
Adur.Adur, a riuer which runneth by Axe within one quarter of a league of the sayd riuer there is a caue wherein doe stand three toombes, which in the full of the moone are ful of water, but in the wane haue not one drop. The soile is fruitfull, and hath therin sundrie bathes, also mines of yron and other met|tall, and pitch.
Bayonne.Bayonne standeth in the edge of the West sea, e|uen at the fall of Adur and Gane into the same. It is one of the strongest in Fraunce, and cheefe of so much of Biskay as pertaineth to the French king e|uen to the riuer called I-hon, which is beyo~d S. Iohn de Luz, and diuideth Fraunce from Spaine. It is a bishoprick and a gouernment of great importance. It is not lawful for any man to come weaponed in|to it, except the king and the princes of his blood, al other whosoeuer must leaue their Swordes at the gate of the lower towne.


Bierne.
Bierne.BIerne lieth at the foote of the Pirenean Moun|taines, bordering Southwarde vpon Bigorre, Northward vpon the Bayonnoise parte of Bis|kay, fro~ the which the riuer of Sonson dooth diuide

it Eastward vppon the Launds and Chalasse along the riuer of Adur, and Westward vpon the Nauar|rian Biskay, of the which S. Palais or S. Pelasge, is the cheefe, and is the second parliament for those lands that the king of Nauarre holdeth in soueraigntie on this side of the mountaines.
Bierne is diuided into two parts,Bierne. wherof the one contayneth the mountaines, and therein is the Bi|shopricke of Oleron. The other the vallies wherein doe lie the townes of Escar l'Euesque, and Pau the cheefest towne of the whole countrie.
There be also other good townes as well tra|ded, as Otes, Morlais, Nay, Pontas, Coderch, Nauer|reins, which standing at the foot of the mountaines is a bulwarke to the rest, and is very strong as well by nature as by art.
Oleron standeth on the toppe of a mountaine be|tweene Courde and Nay euen in the verye sharpest of the hilles.Oleron.
Pau,Pau. the Princes seat is the parliament Towne for the whole countrie. Therein is a stately palace.
Serrances, which standeth on the top of a Moun|taine, and is the first of all Gaule.
The vallies of Sault and Aspe,Sault and Aspe. are the best inha|bited in all the countrie, and the people valiaunt, bold and stout.
The territorie of Iuranoon where do grow good wines.Iuranoon.
The Bathes of Aigues-chaudes and Cauderats, are the best and most excellent in Europe.
In the countrie is plentie of Millet, though not for want of Corne or wine, the land is also fruitfull in pasture, so as there is store of cattell, milk, butter, cheese, flaxe, hempe and wooll, whereof they make

great trade. It also exceedeth the rest of all Fraunce in goats. The people nimble, familiar, courteous, subtill, craftie, faire spoken, valiant in the fielde, lo|uers of libertie, and such as generally will bee all Gentlemen, high stomacked, accounting well of themselues, and contemners of all others.
The noblest houses are Grammont, and Lusse, which beare now all the sway in Biskay.
There are also in Bierne Andoyns, who is now high steward of the countrie, Mitenes, Iarders, Mouens, S. Columbe, Esgarrabague, Co|derch, Nauailles, Castelnaw, Naseres, Laz, Suz, and others.

FINIS.



A breefe recapitulation of the parlia|ments of Fraunce, with the countries which haue their recourse to the same.

Vnder the Parliament of Paris are comprehended the Countries ensuing:
_THe Prouostship and Uicounty of Pa|ris,Paris. whereto doe appertaine S. Dio|nise, S. Clou, Poissy, S. Germaine in Lay, Tornan in Brye, Torcy in Brye, Corbeil, Montlehery, Gonnesse, S. Georges, Newtowne or Villeneuf, S. George, Palaiseau, Longumeau, c.
Meleun, a bayliwike wherof doe depend the land of Gastines, whereof Milly is the cheefe towne, then Nemurs, Castell, Landen, Moret, Ferte, S. Mathurin of Archant, Fountaynbeleau.


Picardy which comprehendeth:Picardy.
Monfort l'Amaury a Bayliwike.
Laon a bailiwike vnder it are Soissons and Noy|on. The territorie of Verma~dois, wherof S. Quintin is cheefe, Riemont, Coucy, Chauny, Guyse, Peronne Mondidier, Chastelet, Corby, Nese.
Senlis a bailiwike in the gouernment of the Isle of Fraunce, whereto haue recourse Beauuais, Clermo~t which also is vnder the gouernment of France, Cha~|pagne, Creyl, Augy, Chaumont, Pontoyse, Beaumont, Crespy, Ferte, Milon, Pierre, Fons,  Montmorency: Amiens, the cheefe towne of Picardy is a bayliwike.
Abbeuille a bayliwike, and the cheefe Towne of Pontieu vnder the iurisdiction wherof are Poruig|ny, Dourlens, Aury, Crecy, Rue, Crotoy, Renty, Mon|truil, otherwise called Muttrell.
Bullogne, a Bayliwike comprehending Estaples, S. Rogmer, Guynes, Ardres, Hames, Blarnes, Clais, Oye.
In Picardy there are also Ferte, Gandelu, Villiers-Costeretz, Verbery, Velly, Male, Veruin, Capelle, Lon|dreoy, Tonsomme, Bohain, Breteuille, Blangy, and Valerie.


Champagne, which comprehendeth:
Cham|pagne.Troy the cheefe of the countrie, and a Bayliwike whereto haue recourse Bar vpon Seine, Ferte vpon Aube, Meussy l'Euesque, or Bishops Meussy, Nogent, Pont vpon Seine, Castle Erny, S. Florentin, Chastillon vpon Seine.
Chaumont the cheefe Towne of Bassigny and a Bayliwike, whereto haue recourse Bar vpon Aube, Montirandall, Ianuille, and Vassy.
Vitry, the cheefe towne of Parthois, and a Bayli|wike, hauing vnder it. S. Disier, Nogent, l'Arcant, S. Menehou, Feisme, Espernay, Roueray, Passeauant.
Rheims, a Bayliwike comprehending Chalons, Espernay, Tismes, Vertuz, and Saudron.
Sens, a Bayliwike containing Villeneuf le Roy, Pont sur Yonne, Langres, Vandeaur, Vignorye, Mo~t|esclair, Rimaucourt, Andelon.


Brye comprehendeth:
Brye.Meaux the capitall Towne and a Bayliwike, hauing vnder it Crecy, Colomiers in Bry, Ferte Gau|chet. Moneaux, S. Tiare, Iouerre, Laigny, Brye, Coun|ty Robert, Torcy doe depend of Chastelet in Paris.
Prouince, a Bayliwike whereto haue recourse

Sazaime, Loy, the castell Bray vpon Seine, Monterain, Vallery, Nanges.
Castelthierrie, a bayliwike comprehending Cha|stillon vpon Marne, Tareffons, Castle Ouchy, Milly, S. Front.
In Champagne and Berry there are also Mery, Tonuille, Rebel, Glaye, Dormans, Ioigny, Tonnerre, and Vezelay.


The Territorie of Auxerre.Auxerre.
Auxerre a Bailiwike head of the same, wherein are contayned Chablais, Tontenay, c.


The land of Chartres.Chartres.
Chartres a bailiwike wheron doe depend Nogent le Roy, Neufchastel in Timerais, Va~dosme, Estampes, Dreux, Houdan, Dordan, Espernon, great Perch, that which contayneth Bazach, Gouet, Aluy, Momiral, Brou, Autonne, Rouxmaillard, Conde vpon Huynes, and Nogentle Roteron.
Beauce which comprehendeth the towns of Tou|ry, Angeruill, Merennelle, Genuille, Artenay, Yeinuille is of the Bayliwike of Orleance.
Sologne, which hath vnder it Gergeau, Suly, Ferte, S. Laurence des Eaux, Clery, Millansay, and Remo|rentine, whereof some are depending vpon the Bay|liwike of Orleance, and some of the Bayliwike of Blois.
Orleance a Bayliwike, whereto haue recourse Boiscommune, Castlereinard, Yeinuille in Beausse, Castle Yeure, Neufuille at the lodges, Gian, Montar|gis, Lorris, Meune vpon Loire, Baugency, Gergeau, Clery, c.
Blois, a Bayliwike whereto haue recourse Mil|lancy, Remorentin, Chambort, c.



Touraine.Touraine.
Tours a Bayliwike, contayning Chinon, Lodun, Thouars, Longests, Amboise, Loches, Chastillon vp|on Indre, Montrichard, Chaumont, Beaulieu, Pauny.


Mayne.Mayne.
Mauns a Bayliwike, to it haue recourse la Val, the castell of Loir, Beaumont, S. Safarie, Castlegautier Flesch, Maine, Luhaiz, Sable and la Ferte Bernard.


Aniou.Aniow.
Angiers a Bayliwike wherein are contained Sau|mur, Bouge, Beaufort, Pont de se, Montoreau, Bis|sac, Chantoceaux, Lude, Durall.


Poictow.Poictow.
Poictiers a Bayliwike comprehending Lusson, Mailezai, the Isles of Re and Oleron, Niort, Fonte|nay, Monmorillon, Lusignan, Ciuray, Thauars, S. Max|ent, Partenay, Chastelleraut, Melle, Rochsuryon, Chize, Chauigny, Angle, Lussac, Orinac, Bresseure, S. Lou, Blanc, Charcoux, Gensay, Chastaigners, S. Me|lun, Paluiau, Sables, or the sands, Aulonne, Mareuille, S. Hermine, Montagu, Coue, Viuorne, Mortemer, Le|zay, S. Sauin, Burgaife, Maigne, Voue~t, Mernaut, Chef|bouton, Marrillac, Chasteauneuf, Dompierre, Bayge|reau, Iarnac, Argenton, Aspremont, S. Michael en le her, Maulion, Mortaigne, Tistanges, Esars, Ton Bom|mint, Talmonde, Sausay.


Ango|lesme.Angolesme.
Rochell a Bayliwike for the Territory of Aunis.
Angolesme a bayliwike contayning the townes of Chasteauneuf, Cognac, Aubeterre, Maon, Ville|bois, Mareuille, Mombacon, Bouteuille.


Berry.Berry.
Bourges a Bayliwike comprehending Sancerre,

Cosne, Coucressant, Aubigny vpon Nerre, Slles, Me|neste Vierzon, Doule Roy Chasteauneuf, Boussac, Augurane, Cuys, Argenton, Chastre, Blanc at Berry, Chasteauroux, Bzances, Paluan, Chastillon, Penby, Chasteaumeilla~t, Linieres, Charroix, Essoudun, Menu vpon Yeure, Lury, Cracay, Augelon, S. Aignan, Leu|roux, Vatan.


Bourbon, Auueagne and Neuers, and the territorie of Dozye.
Molins a Bayliwike.
S. Pierrele Moustier a bayliwike for part of Bour|bon and Auuergne, as Bourbon Xancois S. Poursain Casset, also for Keuers Dozy Desize Clamery Augil|lert S. Leonard S. Sange Laizi Premery Charite Ca|stle Chinon Lornie Cosne in Berry.


Lyons, Biauuiolois, and Forrest.Lyons. c.
Lyons a bayliwike, containing Monbrisson, the Capitall of Forrest, Teures S Steuen of Turan S. Sali|mer S. Germain le val, the castell of S. Bnet, Rouane, Vise, Cosen.


Mascon.
Mascon a Bayliwike hauing vnder it Tournes,Mascon. c howbeit this countrie is vnder the gouernment of Bourgondie.


Auuergne, wherein are:Auuergne
Ryon a Bayliwike of Limagne, hauing vnder it Clermont Monterrant Combrailles Montagu Ai|guereses Montpensier Billon oire Brionde Langeac S. Germain Lambrun Eusbreule S. Porsain Cusset Montmorin Montgason Antragues Cuseron Ron|don Fontamilles Pontgibaut. c.
Orillac a Bayliwike of high Auuergne, compre|hending S. Flour Carlat Murat Chaudes Aigues or the whot waters.



Limosin.Limosin which hath:
In high Limosin, Limoges and Iuet, Perch, S. Iu|nion, S. Leonard, Saloignac, Souterrane, Beneuent, Pierrebuffier, Segur, Chasluz, Cars, Maignac.
In low Limosin are Vantadour, Turrenne, Com|bort, Tulle, Vzerch, Bryne, Treignac, Douzenac, Alas|sac, Beaulieu, Meissac, Vslet, Pompodour, Ruffignac.


Roan.Vnder the Parliament of Roan is all Normandy, which containeth:
Roan, a Bayliwike.
Eureux a bayliwike co~prehending Vernon, Aigle, Passy, Breteuille, Rugles, Brayne, Hermeinaille, c. Lisieux, Honflew, Ponteaudemer.
Caux, a bayliwik comprehending Gisors, S. Clere vpon Epte. Pontoise is rather of Fraunce, Gournay, Aumale, Neufchastel, Heu, Dieppe, S. Valery vppon the sea, Tescampe, Houre, Harflew, Caudebec.
Alenson a bayliwike.
Caen a bayliwike.
Bayeux, a bailiwike containing Sees, Falais, Gui|bray, Torigny, Argenton, Hiesmes, Vire.
Constances, the capitall of Constantine, whereto haue recourse Aurenches, Carenton, Valognes, S. Lo|hay, Poiuel, Granuille a hauen, Launde Herould, Mo~|tebourg, Hogue, S. Voast, Barfleur, Cherebourg, Bre|uall, Briquebec, Amby, Hogue, which is almost an Iland, Gerzaie, Grenezaie, Sere, Ilands.


Renes.Vnder the Parliament of Renes is Britaine, which comprehendeth:
Renes, Dol, S. Malo otherwise called Alet, Caucal, Combourg, Sambriort, Dinant, Castle Briand, Lam|bales, Treguier, alias Landrignat, or Quimpercoren|tine, Vannes, S. Brieux, Quintin, Iungon, Auangour, Guimpgand, Leon alias S. Paule Cornouaill, Rohan,

Guimenay, Chambourg, Guerch, Nantes, Aucems, Clisson, Montagu, Raiz, Blossac, Pont eure, Vitry, Fouggiers.


Vnder the Parliament of Dijon is Bourgondy,Dijon. which comprehendeth.
Dijon a Bayliwike vnder the which are Beaune, Nintz, Ausonne, S. Iohn de Laune, and Tallent.
Autune a bayliwike comprehending Monteins, Bourbonency and Semur in Brionois.
The bayliwik of the land of Aux contayneth Se|mur in Aux, Aualon, Arnay le duc, Noyers, Sau lieu, Flauigny, Mombarre, Viteaux, Raniers, Mont S. Iohn le Moustier, Espoisses.
Chalon a bayliwike.
The bayliwike of the mountains.
Charolois a bayliwike whereof Charolois is the capitall towne.


Vnder the Parliament of Grenoble is Daulphine,Grenoble. which is diuided into two parts:
High Dauphine comprehendeth the Townes of Ambrune, Valence, Gap, Dye, S. Paule, c.
Low Dauphine containeth Grenoble, Vienne, Ro|mans, Gest, Bianzon, Mo~telimart, Triennes, S. Anto|ny of Viennois, S. Valier, Coste, Moustier, castle Dau|phine.


Vnder the Parliament of Aix is Prouince,Aix. which comprehendeth these townes:
Aix, Marseilles, Antibe, S. Honore an isle in the sea, Freins, Erez, Tolon, S. Victor, S. Maximin, Casteron, Pont S. Esprit, Craux, Tarascon, Martegue, Salon of Craux, S. Chama, the 3 Maries, Arles, S. Giles; Agui|mortes, Senas, Malemort, Ourdon, Andage, Escalles, Seiues, Colmars, Castelaume, Riez, Moustier, Dra|guignon, Lirques, Folcaquier, Vallensolle, Oigne.
Auignon Cauallon Nice Aurenge and Carpe~tras are not the kings.


Vnder the Parliament of Tholouze is Languedocke with other Countries,Tholouze as:
Viuarets, wherof Viuiers is cheefe.
Velay, wherein standeth Puy and Tournon.
Geuoudan, whereof Mande is capitall.
Languedocke, which comprehendeth Tholouse Narbone Carcasson Beziers Agde Lodesne Castelnaw Ary the cheefe towne of Lauragnes.
Rouergue containing Rhodes Alby and Castres, Albygeois.
Roueray contayning Cahors Montaubon Castle|serrasin Montech Moissac and Lausarte.
Guyenne hath recourse also to Tholouse.
Foix a Countie, comprehending the Townes of Paumiers Sauerdun Masers Carmain Mirepoix and Rieux.
Cominges, containing S. Bertrand Conserans S. Fregeon S. Beat Montregeau Saliers Coheilles Pau|mier Esperon. Also in the lowe countrie of Co|minges, Lombers Samathan Ile Dodon Muret Ru|imes Dez Saueterre and Montpesat.
Isle in Iordain, a countie containing the towne of Lauignac.
Gaure, a countie contayning the Townes of Gi|mont Beaumont and Grenade.
The land of Agen comprehending Agen Port S. Mari Villeneuf in Agenois Hautesay Clerac Touers and Mermande.
Condone comprehendeth Condone Nerac Valence Lairac Romion and Montreal.
Estrac a Countie, containing Mirand Pauy Caste|hian of Barbereus Santelix Cimorre Saramon.
Armignac containing Lectour Auchx Castera Vic|ynogueron Casanbon Ense.
Bigorre, comprehending Tarbes Trie Rauistains Maubourget Baigners Lorde.


Vnder the Parliament of Bourdeaux is Guyenne,Bourdeaux. which comprehendeth:
Xaintonge contayning Xaintes Blaye Marennes Marans Pons S Iohn d'Angely, Barbezieux Boury and Soubize.
Perigort contayning Perigeux Sarlate Bergerat Linde Miremont Mussidam Lise Riberac Mantrone Branthone and Luneis.


Reolle.Reolle.
The land betweene two seas, containing S. Ba|sill Montsegur S. Terme Castlemoron Gerind Same|terre S. Macire, the Countie of Benanges, Liborne Fronsac.
The territorie of Bourdeaux contayning Bour|deaux Graue Esparre, the land of Medoc Blanquefort, the principalitie of Busch, the countrie of Laundes, the duchie of Albret, Chalosse, c.
Bazadois comprehending Bazas Montdeniarson Castlegeloux Aire, the Mas of Aire.
Gascoigne containing S. Seuere Axe Bayonne S. Iohn de Luz.


The king of Nauarre hath two Parliaments.
Pau for the territory of Bierne which comprehen|deth Pau Oleron Escarre Ortes Morlais Nay Pontac Cadeich Nauerrems and Serrances.
S. Palus or S. Pelasge, whereto haue recourse the whole Nauarrian Biskay.

FINIS.




