




Mysterium Pietatis OR THE Mysterie of Godlinesse WHEREIN THE MYSTERIES CONTAINED IN THE

Incarnation
Circumcision
Wise-Men
Passion
Resurrection
Ascension.

OF The SON of GOD, and comeing of the HOLY-GHOST, are unfolded and applied.
AT EDINBVRGH. By Will. Arand. M. A. oe of the Mi|nisters of that City, lae of Vniversity Coll. OXON.
I. Tim. III.XVI.
And without contrversie great is the Mysterie of Godliness.
London, Printed for Robert Boultr, at the Turks-head, in Corn-hill near to the Royall Exchange, ANNO DO. 1671.




To the right Reverend Father in God, George, by the Mercie of God, Lord Bishop of Edinburgh.
My LORD,
_THE Almighty in His Law, ordered none to appear be|fore him, empty handed, yet he himself being to Flesh invisible, the present was an offering to His Priest; God who is also called, Good accounting it churlish to addresse in thankfulnesse to Him, without something that figured bounty to His Servant; neither would he have his People alwayes takeing, but some|times also giveing: unto which Law, as a Conformist, I in this your Clinical condition, comeing to receive your Blessing, presume to present this my Mysterium, in regard of your Acquaintance with Godlinesse, not accord|ing to the new stile, which intimats separa|tion; but to Scrpture-Dialect, Respecti

Holinesse and peace. You have had experi|ence of the CROSS, and that at home, we by your Lordships order in our Pulpits, pray for your PASCH; your self waits for ASCENSI|ON in your bed, the power of the RESUR|RECTION haveing said, be not affraid.
My LORD, when the Rivers of Babylon begu to swell, I mean, when those tyds of con|fusion, that destroyed all order in these plea|sant Lands, of late years, did first rage, you were one of the Hundreth and Twenty, that resolved TO SIT by and weep retiring from your own, to other Countries, to any Kingdom rather then IN those waters, to become in|strumental of your Countries Sorrow, Death, or Discredit: How did my dear and worthy Father, your Brother and Companion in that Tribulation, and in the Kingdome and patience of Jesus Christ, exult at his Death, that he had in a bloody Time, been free of the blood of all men, whether executed on the scaffold, or slain in battel? and that in a time when one cryed up Character of a perfect E|vangelist was to be an Incendiary to which, how vehemently was he solicited in both Kingdomes.
IN those dayes of unleavened bread, the Angel who Redeemed you from the same e|vill made you find Favour in the sight  Strangers; Providence among them alott alottin

you a Charge, peculiarly respecting Church-Festivities, and that Theme pursu'd, untill In|iquity, and Invasion, gave Check to Royalty and Order: but these again, being Captiv'd by Truth and Decency, a door was open'd, and that Holy subject a fresh prosecuted; Vntill God and the King, whom you alwayes joyned, called you to weare an Honourable Mytre in that City, wherin you had so signaly, Innocent|ly, and patiently, endured the Crosse.
VPON which score, unto whom fitter could this manuel be delivered, for Patronage then to you my dear Lord? The Author cofiding to be participant of the effects of those vertues where|of Experience hath evidenced to him, you are copiously endowed conveyed into your breast, as it were by Christanity and Blood finding one William Archbishop of St. Andrews, Anno Dom. 1279. Chronicled for a lover of peace, and your Names-sake, and our Martyr Mr. George Wisheart, to be fam'de for Humility and Charity: Vpon which rocks I build my presentment, Conceiving that your Aged, Young, and yet Accomplished Abilities, shall not disdain my Improportionat Dedication, but that you shall depart in peace, even with me, pardoning my failings, praying for direct|tion to my good Intentions, and for Ad|ditament

to my weak endowments: In grati|tude whereof, that your Nunc Dimittis, with Simeon, may be in Peace, and that Peace to come in Job's opportunity as a shock of Corn cometh in his Season, shall be the Prayer of,
My LORD, Your Lordships most Obedient Son, and Servant. WILL. ANNAND.
From my Study
May 15. 1671.



To the Courteous Reader.
Ingenuous Friend.
_IT is not unknown, that Solo|mon of old said, of make|ing many Books there is no end; yet by the expression, it's probable he only under|stood his own continued pains therein, having ac|cmplished Abilities therefore: But grant him to check the plurality of other Writters, I dare engage and promise never to write more, that since his time, if there had not been multitudes of Authors, we should not have had one book for a hundreth, which yet we profitably turn over; Freedom therefore of Writting not being called in, I have for my Mysteria the Apology of a late publisher in the year 1659. (a time, wherein the Presse, like a skittish Jad, had broke all bridles, Curbs, and Girhts of Li|censes, and Restraints) who entitled his Book, Let me speak too: and believe it, in some things he was worth hearing; for in all to be perfect, is the sole priviledge of Almighty GOD.
LET me declare, that I knew of no false Copies abroad of these Sermons, that I never feared to be injured thereby, though there had; that Importunities from others never induced me to a composure, or that Arguments were offer'd urging a necessity of Publication, being convinced that the perpetual burying of these sheets, should never have caused any sensible alteration in the affairs under agitation, about the present expedition, or Dunkirk Randevouz of the most Christian King: But profitable I humbly conceiv'd they might be, to such as will read, then practise; and having an education that said Stand off to tattle, with a Natural Genius abominating To meddle, I have some spare houres forming conveniences, for profit|ting my Generation, the immediate Parent, of this, and other Subjects, which Time and Opportunity, may bring to light.
IT is plain white-seam work, without the Point, or Lace, of Marginal citations, because Toylsome and Expensive; yet one thing troub|led me, which was the throng of Authors upon this Subject, being forced (as sometimes Travellers are) to forsake the path, (but ne|ver I hope the rode,) untill the Croud passed, by which, as may be perceived by the Scruti|nous, I had, or took, time, to look about the Country, and what others did lesse heed, i

here respected with greater care and Vice Versa.
IF thou hast ever Printed thy self, want of Charity is not to be surmised: if otherwise perhaps thy Relations, thy Kinsman, thy Fa|ther hath, and I presume some Paragraph or other, hath Redundancy, Deficiency; Some Section containeth somewhat too laxe, too dark, and upon this score, crosse I pray thee my Failings: Beseeching also, that when in the Title thou reads the Mysterie of the INCAR|NATION or ASCENSION, unfolded and applied, thou wouldst understand the phrase with this Restrictive note IN PART.
Farewell.



An advertisment by way of Caution unto all Readers.
_AMONG other blemishes wherewith the face of this Age is disfigured and whereof she ought to be ac|cused as being degenerat from that Pristine Beauty, Justice  Equity, of which our more upright Ancestors bequeathed ample legacies, one is, that whatever savors of that Ancient Doctrine established in the Church, (who for her age, and Religious hoarinesse ought to be accounted venerable) Invidiously is by some, foolishly is by many, houted upon, as Superstitious, Idolatrous and Anomo|lous to verity and Truth; atteesting, yet without ground, that whatever in Divinis cannot be found in express text, as Forni|cation, should not be named among Saints: Obtruding this upon some Disciples, it cannot be supposed, but this smal treatise, because an ofspring of Antiquity, shall be deemed scan|dalous,

and as a misshappen birth, in the Mid|wifery of their forestalled fancy, be smother'd as soon as parted from the womb of the Press, and not buried, but cast forth through the dung|gate of Obloquie or into the Kidrone of disdain.
NOT considering that if the question should be put concerning, some approved practises, and strongly pleaded for Resolves, the legiti|mating of many Acts should be found to emerge from Scripture, Logically, that is, Rationally understood, conform to that rule a Minore ad Majus. The Iewes appointing feasts as that of Dedication, one great Jew, instituting a feast as that of Purim, the Zealous separating dayes from civil use, to commemorat mercy, the devout Magistrate designing such and such hours, o dayes, for publick preaching; Colledges, Halls, Hospitalls, Schools, solemnizing dayes in me|mory of their pious Founders  Religious Bene|factors, exempteth the Church from Censure, in enacting festivitys for her Lords birth, passi|on, or Resurrection.
SINCE the world could not con|tain the books, had all things been writen which were done, or said concerning it by Christ, the world I inferr, is to rest satisfied when any thing is done, not contrary to the things in that one Book taught and delivered by

him or at least not to condemn it, which so much the less s to be done, that the Judges of these exercises seldome, if ever (were they exactly scann'd) are found seriously to reflect upon any one day in the year, the matter wherefore these dayes were set apart, which they condemne be|cause fixed principaly upon one day.
ANABAPTISTS infringe that liberty our Lord hath procured for us in denying in|fant-baptism, as if they were without the Co|venant, in which more  higher priveledges are tacitly granted to the Jew then Christian, he wanting, the other enjoying the comforts of admitting his Son into that promise made of old unto the people, the Almighty styling himself Lord God of your Fathers: whereas the Bap|tized by them, stands in a particular, or person|all Relation, to the Same Lord from which there doth not flow so eminent Consolation in case of Death in Infancy.
AND such who will not allow the Church in separating times of worship, for dazeling, that is, singular acts of Grace, ought to reflect how the vesture of the Christian, under Gospel-dis|pensation, is our-tail'd, being made more short, more bare, more thinn, that is, the Churches freedom, more impared by the Death of he Saviour, then amplified and enlarged; we bfore

seeing the Phylactery of the Iew, so exten|sively broad, large  honourably gracefull, un|der Typicall oblations, Synagogue and Tem|ple-service, the removeall of which, discharg|ing to the now Believer, that piece of true de|votion, wherein the Faithfull of old appeared before God, with joy, haveing Roome, that is, liberty to make, to keep Holy-day.
ITS granted, that neither Jew nor Gentile, men or Angel, an, dare, or make offer, to make a day holy now but to observe a day Holily, or to separate a Civil day, that is one of the six for a Holy use, a Saint-like encompassing the throne of God for Celebrating praise or powring forth prayer, as by many it is held good, and perfor|med in the week; so ought it not to be judged sup|perstitious, if done by others in the Return of the year.
IVDICIOUS Calvin expoundeth those places of St Paul Orthodoxly genuine, Let no man judge you in meat or drinke, or in respect of a holy day, 2 Cal. 16. Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years, Gal. 4.10. One man esteemeth one day above another. Rom. 14.5.
For, quis nisi Furioso? who (saith he) but Mad-men will here understand any observation condemned, save what ritualy shadowed Christ to come,  neque Ecclesias

damnavero, neither shall I censure (marke the words) those Churches who have in|stituted other solemn dayes for the Con|gregations Conveening together, they Keep|ing from superstition, of which they shall be free when appointed purely for good order, and Discipline, not as shadows of the Law, c. Institut. lib. 2. c. 8. S. 33.
Whence its deducible that feasts so observed are not to be accounted either Jewish, or Popish, they being purely to Commemorat Christ already come, and appointed for that end, before either Pope, or Romish Antichrist that is to say, be|fore the usurpation of the Bishop of Rome, above all called gods.
FOR when the Records of the Church shall be exactly viewed, and when again more diligently inspected, and a search made after that, then for greater security, if once more there be a tumbling over the monuments of An|cient times, the Time, the Place, the Persons, by whom the dayes here marked, were di|stinguished, and first instituted, shall ne|ver be found, never be heard of, so that it was a puzling and thorny question, and for ought we find, an Unanswered one, proposed by our Late Soveraign, April . 1647. of blessed memory in these words, I desire to

be resolved, why the new Reformers discharge the keeping of Easter, the Celebration wher|of being of the same Authority, which chang|ed the Iewish Sabbath into the Lords-day, Saturday being no where discharged, where|for it must be the Churches Authority, that changed the one, and instituted the other: therefore my opinion is, that those who will not keep this Feast, may as well return to the observation of Saturday, and refuse the week|ly Sunday, when any body can shew me, that herein I am in an error, I shall not be a sham|ed to confesse and amend it, till when, you (Meaning the Comissioners, and Ministers treating in the Isle of Wight) Know my mind.
C. R.
THERE is no foot-steps of Antiquity in|deed declaring the rise either of the one or other and those Arguments from proportion, touch|ing the vndenyed one, wants not their influence in approving the other controverted; the old Church by her own power abolishing the Iewish Sabbath though expresse law, and Divine sanction for its observance, is scattered through|out, Moses  the Prophets, the present Church abrogating by not using Apostolical constituti|ons though enjoyned by the holy Ghost in proper terms, as not abstaining from blood, not anointing

the sick, not tarrying one for another, before the Sacrament of the Supper in St. Pauls sense, not having Deaconesses to attend the poor Clinick sick and bed-rid: Against which such as are not distracted, foameth not, nor at the Churches de|suetude thereof, being convinced at the Reason|ablnesse of her omission, and her Authority so to doe, which in the case under debate, is also to be acquiesed in, and conceeded unto.
THE Controversy so early started betwixt the Eastern Western Churches about the Ce|lebretion of Easter, Anno. Dom. 240. as whether on the 14 day of the Moon with the Iew, or on the Lords-day as with us, gives Testimony for the Seniority of this Festivall, and by anology, of all the other, chiefly considering, that the observance of either is recorded, to arise from a custome long before delivered; Assiatick Congregations, Synods and Councels keeping it precisely with the Passeover, those of Europ refusing in that punctilio of time to Celebrate their spiritual Pasch, Christ being come, observed the annual dominicall, as we now, both of them, more wise then to put darts in the hands of unbelievers, by affoording Israel Armour to fight against our weekly Sunday, or any Heretick to strugle against the decrees of the Church, because no expresse warrant for their publication, having this in general that what

conduceth to our Lords glory and mans sal|vation, may by our Princes, Churches and Elders be appointed, provided the Church be not burthened thereby, nor salvation held as subsisting thereupon, or pressed, as matters of Faith, the present fault of the Church of Rome, by the Reformed Church abroad eyed, in separ|ating from her Corrupted Doctrine, yet re|taining the celebration of Dayes, which she as a Sister had derived unto her, with the Gospel from the times of the Apostles, and custome of all other Churches of God: At which word, let one stumble, for though a naked custome, or n only custome, as such, signifieth little; yet when it cometh cloathed with Truth, Rever|ence, Sanctity and Antiquity; Its hoary-head s to have all due veneration, which St. Paul voucheth in recurring to it, in that case of womans being covered in the Church, there|rom surceasing to dispute, 1 Cor. 11.26.
BUT how is it to be observed, when be|ds Tradition, it cometh with Imperiall Edicts? he division above mentioned being reconcil'd y the first, and famous Councel of Nice, deter|mining the Celebration of Easter for ever to  upon the Lords-day Euseb. in vit. Con|ant. lib. 3. ratified by imperiall proclamations mitted from that Holy and Royall Emperour,

Constantine, sugaring such Laws, with King|ly solicitation in Epistles, perswading some Eminent Churches to obedience, and conformity that the Resurrection and Passion might be ali Celebrated in the Churches, being one scatered abroad. Socrat. Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. uing that the Jewish observance might  a repetition of that famous Feast by a two- celebrating in one year, which as a thing abonable here solved never to endure whereby them it is to be adverted, that the year 1664 made  clamours, Easter being lost one whole week that of 1655 caused a whole months Errour,  as fell almost this present year. 1671 as to  time of celebration, which is the Sunday  the first full Moon, next after the Vernall , by which account through the processi of the Equinoctium Vernum, it will often  and worse, untill at length it be quit lost,  unknown (as is told us by skilfull Mathemacians) it were generous if the new Stile  made old Style, and the Julian changed, to  Carolin account by Emendation of our Tab But to go on
THE Emperours Letters were seco by others from the Councel to the Church Alexandria, Lybia, Pentapolis, including joyfull newes of the Vnion of the Chri

Churches in the West, South, North, and some parts of the East, concurring to this Act, and adhering to this statute about Easter, those of Italy, Affrick, Egypt Spaine, France, Asia, Pontus, Cilicia and Britaine; which last did punctually observe the Pasch according to the Asian Churches: from which it is more then pro|bable, our Ancestors received not the Gospel from Rome, nor any of Romes Emissaries, and we find Joseph of Arimathea first to plant the Gospel here, sent out of France by Philip, the E|vangelist, whom Policrates, Bishop of Ephesus attested to have taught those Esterns that way of Institution, Euseb. Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. But afterward Britaine yeelded to the Law, submitting to the determination of the Emper|ours and Councels, Niceph. Hist. lib. 8. c. 25.
YET before this Nicen Councel, the sol|emnity of this, as also of all other dayes, is notour: for under the reign of Valerian. A. D. 257. Alexandria being almost desolate by Tumults, Pestilence and Plague; the unbelieving In|habitants bevailing their disaster, did the Christians with great joyfulnesse solemnize the Feast of Easter in fields Prisons, and where not with gladness of heart, Niceph. lib. 6.20. Yea the more Tyrants design'd the Gospels over|throw, the more zealous were its Followers for

its Lord and Masters splendour, particularly in their exact heeding Church Festivalls, among which that of the Nativity was respected, Ce|lebrated in December as now, in the Church being so taught, and received it from times of old, Aug. in Psal. 132. The Archiues of Rome that is, the Registers of the Citty, being Au|thentick witnesses of his birth, that happning in the dayes of the Universal Taxation by Au|gustus Cesar, Tert. ad Mar. lib. 4. c. 7. Th Church generally of old, knowing no other day observed no other, Chrys. de Nat. St. Ioh. Serm The more solemnity being given alwayes to it,  regard that without it, the feast of the Epiphany Pasch c. had never been, these as rivers flow|ing from the Fountaine, of the verity of the birth, whereupon it was called the Metropolis, that is, the head, the Foundation of all Festiv|ities, Ib. de Beat. Philog. orat. And what is sai of one Feast, maybe said of this, and all other, tha by the Church were they instituted, and an|nualy observed, Aug. Epist. ad Jan. 119. . 14. Even before statutes were made, or before there were any Christian Emperour, to honou them with a Law.
LAMENTABLE was that slaughter made upon a Christian Assembly in the dayes o Dioclesian at Nicomedia, where on the Nativi|ty

day the Church-doors being shut, by the Ty|rants, and life offered to all who would burne Incense to Jupiter, from within the people testi|fying, they were Christians, believing in one God, and in Christ, for whom with the Father and Spirit they were ready to suffer, a fire was Kindled, which in few minuts redacted to ashes twenty thousand persons, Niceph. Hist. lib. 7. c. 6. To which degree of Cruelty, they are not many leagues distant, who will Censure the service of these Martyrs as will-worship, be|cause Convocat on that day, practising what long before had been taught, by holy Ig|natius the second Bishop of Antioch after Peter and said, to be that little Child IESUS, set in the midst to teach his Disciples Humili|ty, Matth. 18. He floriushed, Ann. Dom. 71. And being sentenced to be devour'd by Lyons adviceth against disrespecting Festivities saluteth Polycarpus who is Known to have been Disciple to St. John the beloved Apostle Epist. ad Philip. the Reason of these precepts, being for advancement of believers towards God, or, (which is a more apt expression) for returning to him, this one said haranging upon the Natalitials of our Saviour Greg. Naz. Orat. 38. Whence the Golden-mouthed Fa|ther, prefaceth a Sermon in upbraiding such,

whose zeal and fervour, excited only to Com|municat upon such dayes, (which yet might be often) and not upon others, pathetically shewing how each day might be made a Festival Chrys. in Fide Ane. Hom. 5. Which them by Origen. who was Famous Anno Dom. 226. was closely followed in his writting in defence of the Gospel against the cavils of subtile Philo|sophers, affirming, that to Keep a feast, was but to attend dutifully, offering up Prayer and praise, as unbloody sacrifices unto God, and he who believed the death of Christ, and lived by his word, did Celebrate the Pasch, such who went to an upper Chamber to pray with one accord, Keeped the Pentecost c. Con|tra Cels. lib. 8.
WHAT more? for Paper would faile, if exact rehearsal of the practise of the most fam'd, most Ancient, most edifying, most Religiou Sermons, Orations, Persons, Churches, and Nations touching these things were in Indi|viduo Specified without boasting what hat been said as light, may Conjure those Spectrum Phantasmes, Phasmes, and Apparitions of pre|tended supperstition, though walking in  heavenly garb, by a holy vogue, to disappeare as Impostors airey vanitys, possessing nothing of the substance of solid piety, not having th

true body of Refined Reason, Laws, Edicts, and Authority regulating Christianity in this ex|ercise, by uniting Churches for observing in the Circumstance of time, that, for the doing whereof they had Authority from Apostles, or A|postolick men; I say, Circumstance of time, there being a while disagreement among the Churches when, but never about, whether, these dayes should be observed, the difference in our own Churches about Easter after Austine the monks enstalment, being removed by Theodo|rus Bishop of Canterbury a Citizen of no mean City, born in Tarsus in Cilicia St Pauls Coun|trey who appointed the feast of Easter to Com|mence according to our present Computation, Anno Dom. 662. Ful. Eccles. Hist. Cent 7.
WHEREBY Vnity was beheld in the Churches of Palestine, that Conforming with the Churches of Antioch, of the greater and lesser Asia, of Egypt, Thessalonica, Athens and Corinth, the Churches of the Isle St. Thoms, of Iberia, the Mengrellians bordering on the black Sea, those of Phrigia, Galathia, Bythinia, Lydia, Caria, Paphlagonia, Magnesia, Lycia, Alepo, Damascus, Tripoly, Cyprus, Can|dia, Zant. those of Media, Persia, India, those of the Abyssins, Babylon, Syria, and those of the once great Kingdom of China: For a learn|ed

Author shewing how all these Churches, though under the Dominion of the Turk, Rome, or Pagans agree with us, in the great matters agitat, against our Romish adversaries, as in the Supremacy Purgatory, halfe Communion Transubstantation, c. Discovers also their disagreement from us in severall points to In|stance onely in the case in hand, some beginne their Lent ten dayes before ours, some fast nine dayes before the Ascension, in regard of Christs absence from the Apostles, which to them they reckon a time of sorrow, Paget Christian og|raph 146. and 150. Which exception from our observance, evidenceth their agreement with us in the matter under proof, according to that Known rule exceptio firmat in non exceptis.
SHOULD we say in all this they inclin'd to Popery, waspishly they would sting, and fret|tingly would they be angry, having against that so great an aversness, that the Patriarch or Archbishope of Constantinople when Elected by his Clergy, and confirmed by the Barut or Patent of the Grand-Segnior in the Govern|ment of the Churches of Greece, Macedon, Epirus, Thrace, Mosina, Maldavia, Corsu, in the Egean Se, c. having under him seventy four Archbishops, I say this great Patriarch yearly upon the Sunday called Dominica Invocavit,

solemnly excommunicats the Pope and all his Clergy, for Schismaticks, its true of late his seat hath been oft at Musco, where to this day if a Ro|man priest by chance should officiat upon any of their tables, or Altars, as polluted, or accursed, they break it into pieces, Paget ut sup.  c 29.
A Learned Critick and Antiquary, view|ing the severall Churches of the world, finds that part of the Greek Church in Armenia, Celebrating the Nativity, not as wee, but upon the sixth of January Breewoods inquir. 124. as if that had been his birth day, which in|deed is an old opinion, being received by some, but neither so universaly nor so rationaly believed, Chrys. Hom. de Nat. led thereunto through a mistake of the word Epiphania signifying ma|nifestation, they concluded the time of his birth, and baptisme to be one, for which cause it may be yet the Ethiopicks sprinkle themselves in the Epiphany in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, yet not as essential unto Faith, but as Historicall, a remembrance of our Savi|ours baptisme Barrets travells p. 146.
YET the received opinion by the Current Testimony of all Antiquity from the first, and primitive times, was the feast of Christmas, that is, with the old Saxon Christs feast, com|puted, and appointed to be observed, as it is

now, being Inclyta solemnitas, a Famous Festivity over all the world Cyp. de Nat. Ser. giving it as genuine Characters of true professi|on to observe the Lords-day and Festivals. Tert. de. Idol. c. 15.
TO make yet a doubting Thomas believe the existence of no Popry in this codicle, let him thrust his hand into the side and looke upon the Prints of these things, in the body of the Church Reformed, he shall, or may be ascertained of its Innocency, in this matter, or be forced to ex|alt himself, above all in our Israel, accounting none to be so wise, so pure, so knowing, so holy, as he in all our Congregations, when put to|gether.
BEHOLD, Eminent Emissaries of those Churches, chosen as messengers from Holland, Gilderland, Zealand, Vtrech, Frizland, Transylvania, Groning, from the Palatinate, Landgrave of Hesse, Helvetia, Genevah, from the Republick of Brem, and that of Embden, and from the Kingdom of great Britaine met to|gether at Dort. to Censure, Remove, and Re|buke, opposers of their peace, and Corrupters of the Doctrine of the Reformed Church, for preventing of Error, Heresy and Division; And see them all seated debating for this end, yet unanimously agreeing in full Synod to In|termitt

for a while, untill the feast of the Na|tivity of our Lord and Saviour which then ap|proached, was performed and over, The foraigne Divines, being desired not to remove from Towne for more convienency of meeting, the solemnity being done: This motion freely obeyed and by none disputed, may put some stop to the grumbling Zelot not to say the Censorious Hy|pocrite, whose Religion perhaps should alto|gether not only be questioned, but his prophan|nesse attested, had he not the salvo of twitting others in the teeth, as Formalists to, buoy up his Credit with the headless Vulgar: And when the Magistrats of Bommel writ requesting that Henricus Leo their Minister, might be allowed to repare to his congregation, to preach Administer c. with his own people, upon the feast of the Nativity, The Synod smelling a Rat refused the motion, Leo having been cited be|fore them for Censure, yet Censured not, the request, nor hissed at the purpose, adjacent Ministers being easely obtained. Synod Dor|dre. sess. 36. and 45. How would some of our Precisians have ranted? dissented?  to let the world know them to be no small fools, it is pro|bable they had protested against such Actings,
VEIW these Churches in their severall precincts, it shall be found Dayes of this fort are

not condem'd as unholy or superstitious, but ho|nourably mentioned, those of Suitzerland De|cently observing the Incarnation, the Circum|cision c. The like is done by the Churches of Germany, Hungaria, Transilvania, those of the great Dukedome of Lituania, the greater and lesser Polonia, the Fratres Bohemi, those of Moravia, Holland, France: in Genevah, its true they are not observed, yet it's as true, that she condemns not these that do, approv|ing and commending, thereof, as her subscrip|tion to the Helvetick Confession, apparently evinceth, Durells veiw. p. 25.26.
THE practices of the Reformed Kingdomes of Denmark Norway, and Sweden is Known, which appended to what hath been declared may strick an aw, Creat a terror in the bosome of that Malapert, whose rigid conceptions are wraping to a tendency of disrelishment, disre|spect or Censure.
THE Fairest Daughters of the Church Re|formed, being our own three Kingdomes, are not to want their due respect, the particular judge|ment of each one being equivalent to many ex|traneous, or beyond Sea provinces, as the Ju|dicious among those will declare, we begin with Ireland as farthest off, whose Clergy in a nu|merous Convocation in Dublin Anno Dom.

1615. agreeth in their Confession, that every particular Church hath Authority to institute, Change, put away Ceremonies, and other Ec|clesiasticall rites, c. Constituting others making more to seemlinesse, or edification. Art. of Irel. 77. Vpon which firme basis stands fixed her obedience in pleading for, and stand|ing to the observance of these dayes. England in her Confession drawn up Anno Dom. 1562. speaketh the samething (both agreeing to the Reformed Churches abroad) saying, Every particular or nationall Church hath Authority to ordaine, change and abolish Ceremonys and rites of the Church, so that all things be done to edifying, adding, that whosoever through his privat judgement, willfully and purposely doth openly break the Traditions, and Ceremonies of the Church, not repugnant to the word, ordained by Authority, ought to be rebuked as he that offendeth against the Com|mon ordor of the Church, thus fare the Article. Now though neither of these be so expresse as are the Confessions of the Helvetian Churches allowing the Celebration of the Lords Nativity, Circumcision c. nor as that of Ausburgh (the standart of the Reformed Churches abroad) retaining the traditions of about holy dayes, the Lords day, the Nativity,

the Passeover, c. Yet upon these pillars stood that Arch of her Law and Church constitution Anno Dom. 1630. (viz.) All manner of persons shall from henceforth Celebrate, and Keep the Lords day, and other holy dayes, ac|cording to Gods holy will and pleasure, that is, in hearing the word, c. And where is that Church, (Rome excepted) in the whole world, Regularly constitute, did ever presume to Cen|sure England in this particular? nay, where is that Church, (except as above excepted) but blesseth her as a Daughter and prays for her as a Mother?
SCOTLAND is behind none of the Re|formed Churches in defence of the matter questi|oned: for she in her Reformation (which truly in this was according to the best Refor|med Churches) by the Lords of the Congregati|on after mature deliberation, for raising bulwarks against Popery, concluded, that in all parishes the lessons of the Old  new Testament should be read on Sundayes, and other FESTI|VAL DAYES. Spots. Hist. lib. 3. Ann. Dom. 1558. the sence of the word FESTI|VAL, determineth the Authors exemption from obloquy, upon the account of this works were any of these noble Patriots alive, to peruse his discour|cess; but least any suspend belief of the thing, out

of prejudice to that most Reverend Historian, I hope Mr. Knox will have some influence upon the weak in faith, who records the same thing to be done by the same persons, whom he calls Lords and Barons professing Christ Jesus, Re|formed preachers rejoyceing, and much en|couraged thereby, the Popish Clergy being on the other hand much Incensed. Knox Hist. lib. 1. Was not our old League with England in (our new dayes) and Vniformity thereto in the mouths of many? which was begun by sub|scription, and consenting to the rites and service of that Church, by which the French was here overthrown, the Pope, the most Christian and Catholick King, being angry thereat, Buchan. Scot. Hist. lib. 19. All which put together, with the legall procedure of Future times, de|monstrateth those bug-bare ordinances, Votes, and Resolves contrary to those proceedings, which hath troubled our Lands, were not Nati|onall decrees, but Falacious opinions. And be|held by the Churches abroad (as could be prov|ed by numerous instances) not so much the Doctrine of our Reformed Churches, as the Dod|der of our Churches Reformed (i. e.) weeds growing about them excrescences of the Earth occasioned by showers and Tempests of popular commotion, and in seren sky cast over the wall

and Empalement of our Congregations.
BVT yet if any man be contentious, and still hold this youngling as Popishly affected, its Father, the Author, from these vndenyable re|cords, smiles at the expression, pittys their mistake, justifying himself, against such selan|darous taunts in St. Pauls words we have no such custome, (that is, so to speak) neither the Churches of God: But for peace sake do wish the dissenter to cognosce before he condemn, For as the Erecting of the Altar of Ed. Ios. 22.10. Occasion'd a surmise of Rubens A|postacy, and Idolatry, was upon search, found otherwise: so a right stateing of the Question, and a seasonable distinction (as with them) may make us blesse, pray for, and part from each other, to the laying aside con|tention and debate, which the sense of the Re|formed Church, about these things, when he|arkned unto shall happily procure.





MYSTERIUM PIETATIS OR THE MYSTERIE OF THE INCARNATION OF THE SON of GOD Unfolded, and applied.

Christmas-Sunday, Tolbooth Church, 1670.
YVLE-Sunday, Tolbooth Church, 1670.


JEREMIAH. XXXI.XXII.
How long wilt thou go about, O thou back-slid|ing Daughter? For the Lord hath crea|ted a new thing in the Earth: A woman shal compass a man.

_VICE and Folly are so congenit with the Essence and soul of man since his fall, that Aristippus counted a good or temperate man, to be the most admirable thing in the World;

and the Orator, beholding the proclivity of most, unto that which by the torch-light of Nature was to be condemned, chused rather then be led by them, to become a Victime or Sacrifice unto Reason, and perish with good men: wherefore GOD superadding to those un-audiable censures, motives and documents suggested vigorously by the Spirit into the hearts of people, as perswasives unto ver|tue; hath in the Church from all generations sent his Servants the Prophets (who though dead yet speak) to purchase proselys un|to piety, by powerfully convinceing the world of sin, and terrifying men from un|righteous courses by the Terrour of the Lord, even by those judgements he is purposed to execute upon all that are ungodly, by which the strongest holds sin hath erected, hath become like Iericho's walls flat, so powerful hath been the breath of their mouths, from which Energy came that confidence of Lac|tantius, who with open mouth transacts wit his Readers that if they give him a Covetou man, an Ambitious man, a Libidinous man, by a few Scripture Texts (actuated by the Sprit) he shal instantly present them with a liberal an Humble and a Chast man. And if any Rampier of Belials erection, had brav'd it  opposition to those precepts of pious de|portment,

making avarice and lust, with impudence, and power, Rapine, Effusion of blood, Oppression, and Injustice, so far to enlarge the Philacteries of their Jurisdicti|on, that like Augustus Cesar they tax all the World, compelling even man-kind to pay Contribution; Goodness joins with Omni|potence, and by wonders, and Miracles, GOD gives check to unbelief, making it as Pharaoh's Chariots, first move softly, and next overthrows it in the Sea of Admiration, making Faith first transcendently to triumph, next resolve upon obedience, and godly holi|ness argued into them, by convinceing pro|digies, the intellectual faculties of the Soul not being so deprav'd, but will prompt the organs of the Speech to say: This is the fing|er of GOD. Which holy violence if yet more obstructed through the frequency of visions, the customableness thereof not inforceing but nauseating the Heart as cloyed, with signs and wonders, the Almighty compassionating the phrensy, displays once more the Ensigns of his power and for creating in men new hearts, and disuniting them from their be|loved lusts, causeth Truth to be embraced by representing for its verity unwonted Spec|tacles as here he did the Jews (a generati|on fatted and surfeited with miracles put|ting

Divinity it self to devise a new device for reclaiming them from stale and Frantick combateings against Heaven, and for confirming them, against their old wonted Apostacy and back-slideing, Creats a new thing in the Earth, makeing a woman to compass a man.
PROVIDENCE is but a continued Creation, a series of the things at first created; which Creation, is not only the production of things out of pure nothing, by an irresistable fiat, but also out of matter by it selfe (through any vertue inherent) not disposed to be the origen, or parent, of such or such a Substance: as Adams rib was not in nature in its utmost activity capable to produce of its self; or give the constituent parts of such a Harmo|nious body as Eva had, receiving the power for that, by its inlargement, extension, and apt composition in symetry of parts, alone from the great IEHOVAH, who stil continueth the beings at first created by th same alsufficiency they were formed, an wherein they are commanded to subsist, whic being observed, and indeed expected, in the turns and returns of the year, (forsooth) by natural reason and experience, createth  wicked men a neglect of,  prejudice against their maker, which putteth God by way of revenge

upon some, and in manner of advice to others, and for Caveats unto all, to form stange effects from not imaginable causes, that the Dreadfulness or Loveliness thereof may thunder, or allure men into a reformation, which to perfect, our Prophet orders his Hearers to consider this new thing, viz. A womans compassing a Man.
THAT a woman should be created out of man, is an old thing; that man should be produced out of a Woman, is an ordinary thing; that a Woman should embrace a man, is no strange thing, but search records and a woman's encompassing a man is a new thing in the Earth,  so new, that it is the preroga|tive of the Lord of Glory alone, and an act whereof he boasts; yea, invits to wonder at its creating, by which is hinted, that as it was never done, so neither is it after to be expected, purposeing still to have it a new thing and under that notion to be rever'd.
THE words by some are understood as predicting a change in the Iewish Church, now groaning under onerous oppression, be|ing enfeebled by broyls and tyranny, labour|ing to be delivered, and here promised strength against, and power to overcome the Masculin sword of the conquering Baby|lonians, but this being no such new thing

since Egypt was before destroy'd, they may be interpreted to be the Gospel of our Lord Ie|sus Christ according to Ieremiah, Speaking of her, whose womb without the Knowledge of a man, encircled a MAN, That MAN, That singular MAN with an Emphasis, as the word Gaber originally imports, hold out mighty strength, a MAN in his strength, a man not old, not a boy, but in perfect ability and full strength, and was, and is, and which is yet to come, yet still a MAN, so that the wo|man is Mary, a Daughter of the house of David, and the Man is Iesus, Son of the most high GOD, whose Conception and Nativity in the flesh, was indeed a strange thing and prophesied of, as a sign, and as a won|der futurely to be accomplished, this sign the Lord giving, that a Virgin should bear a Son Isa. 7. joyning Heaven and Earth for his animation, God  man for his Constitution; A new thing yet an old thing, because fore|told, it is an old thing, yet a new thing because but now Created, that Israel who had been married in Truth, Righteousness and Iudge|ment, might leave her dissolute Harlot-like Conversation, and return to the first Hus|band of her Youth, who upon her penitence purposeing graciously to accept her as a chast Virgin, that Truth might spring out of the Earth, confirmeth his word by this asto|nishing

miracle, of a Womans encompassing a Man, which ratifies Gods tendernesse to all posterity unto all mans issue who will Spiri|tually dive into the depth of this Abyss, and secure the Treasure therein unto himself by application, Kissing the man with the Kisses of his mouth, that is, doing Homage to the Son least he be Angry.
THIS being the feast of our Lords In|carnation, called Theophania, because the Lord appeared, and sometimes the Nativity, because the Lord was BORN, it shal be as apples of Gold upon pictures of silver to descant upon the thing it self, viz. A womans com|passing a man, next upon the strangeness of that thing, or as it is a new thing in the Earth.
A Woman, that is, in sex, and yet a Virgin, that is, in condition receiving, the first com|pellation from her wombs fruit-fulnesse in which she conceiveth and nourisheth man, as if she were not properly a Woman, whose womb had not bred a man, neither shal man be happy but by this Woman, this womb Mans bearing, this Virgin's encompassing, she saveing all by this Childs bearing though a Virgin an expression from the bodies vigo|rous and beautiful motion, with vivacity, more particularly called Mary which is by Interpretation exalted, and to the highest

acclivities of acquir'd Honour, was she ma|nuducted, when seperate by eternal Decree to be Mother to the Son of God, and rais'd above the level of ordinary capacities, in be|lieving the Angels Revelation, for which all Generations shall call her blessed both for Faith and Example, her Faith and Chastity, at first view inclining her Beholders, her Admirers and Followers to that high way of the upright (i. e.) vertue, Modesty with self denial, which is above, not dareing to tread in those so did and impure paths of Wantonness, Con|ceitednesse, or uncleannesse, leading to Hel beneath, She was indeed found with Child but it was by the Holie Ghost, this woman removing the Curse due to man for Insobrie|ty, became by Samplar, another Eva not for being beguil'd, but for believing, the Mother of all living or of all, that would live by beau|tifying their lives, with Angelick continence becoming Mothers to the Son of God, con|ceiving by the Holie Ghost, who again help|eth them to keep their vessels in Sanctificati|on and Honour, The thoughts as the shade of the Iuniper tree frighting and debarring the Serpents of Corrupt resolves from entrance, and avoiding the deplorable issue of enflamed lost, in the remotest imaginations tending thereunto, subjugating every thought to the

Captivity of Reason, which by and by brings it under subjection unto Christ, and perpe|tually deterreth unclean Spirits, from nest|ling in the Soul or heart, by remembring the wo due to them, who neglect so great Sal|vation, about this time as it were, BORN by this Woman, this Virgin, unto whom the Angel was sent as unto a Virgin in body, and mind, being every whit holy, not for one day but dayly which all ought to be, and shal at last be acquir'd, maugre all seeming difficul|ties, by girding the Sword of Honour upon our thigh, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, by which we not only conquer and Triumph, but with our Virgin woman, Mag|nifie the Lord for doing great things not on|ly for us, but in us.
ADAM is said not to be deceived, but the woman, she being beguiled by the Ser|pent, brought forth Death, Adam consent|ing to her, Mary alone believes, Ioseph con|senting, and aiding her in things requisit, life is brought forth by them to destroy that Death conceived by the other two; Eva, Adam's wife became the mother of Death, Adam yeelding, Mary, Iosephs espoused, for which she is called woman brought forth life, Ioseph attending therefore she  called a Mother, she conceived that life by Faith

therefore a Virgin, yet brought forth in sense wherefore she is also called woman. How men are born all men know, but not that way, but on this wise was the birth of Iesus, Mat. 2. that it might be strangely differenc'd from other products of the womb; For when his Mother Mary was espoused to Ioseph she was found with Child, having already conceived, that Ioseph should not mistake him, for his Son, yet she was espoused, so Josephs wife, that the world should not charge her with whordome or her Son with Bastardy, so zealous is God that the ugly stain of incontinency, be avoyd|ed, pretiously esteemed among the very Hea|then; for a Laconian Lady, being demanded of the Dowry she brought her Husband? An|swered I brought chastity to his bed; Mary was found a Virgin, Mary was made a Wo|man, for her Honors defence for her lifes se|curity (Adulterers being stoned) and that more honourably she might travel as in Iew|rie or sojourn as in Egypt with a man, and some will have her made a woman, that is es|poused, that from the devil might be concealed Christs birth and conception, for though from the prophesies before runing, by the translati|on of the kingdom to the romans, by the weeks in Daniel by the Angels Message he might have a conjectural knowledge of the Messiah

near to be revealed, but a certainty thereof might not be obtained for the foresaid reasons.
WAS not Evah when first took out of man a pure Virgin yet is she not called woman? Christ is BORN on this wise, that like the High Priest he miht not be defiled by his Fa|ther, or his Mother: for by his Father in Heaven, in him is no darknesse, and from his Mother on Earth, he receives no guil|tinesse being in her Virgin estate, as the for|mer, though a Woman, when a Virgin, was tempted to distrust, this Virgin in a womans estate, not contradicting Truth, but over|come by Faith and Admiration, becometh, (pardon the allusion) the Mother of Eter|nal Salvation to all that obey, The Serpent encompas'd the woman, the Angel encom|pas'd the Virgin; and the Virgin woman without man, encompas'd man, Man thereby reaping the benefit of that he never sowed nay of that he never believed was in the Earth. For notwithstanding of that which is Fabled of Periclio, the Mother of Plato, that she brought forth, not devirginated, yet the wise admiring at that peace in the days of Augustus Caesar enquiring at their gods, its duration, had no other Response then that peace should endure, untill a Virgin brought forth a Child, which so gladned the Spirit of

the people, that a Temple was builded, called Peace, and engrav'd on its front, The eter|nal Temple, but this their conceit miscarried, for the same night Christ was BORN in Bethlehem that temple was ruined by an earth|quake in Rome, upon whose ruines in after ages was erected a Church called, S. Marys, I know there are who ighting against this Temple of peace, triumphs as did Titus over Ierusalem,  at length leav it as the temple of that City, without one stone upon another, in raseing the very being of it from Records, alleadgeing with those circumstances it was never buded save in Authors brains; But this being a day of joy, and gladnesse, of peace and Union, we shal not enter the lists for combate, accounting it easier to believe, or misbelieve, the story, then travel to infringe the objectors Authority, by digging up the foundations of that (if so) twice ruined structure.
THE first we read to have been named Mary was Miriam (Sister of Moses a Pro|phetess) the same with it, but she keep'd a|mong the Virgins, and because of an Ethio|pian woman murmured, against the Good|man her Brother, But our Mary, because found with Child, is numbred among women, rejoiceing that Shiloh, unto whom the ga|thering

of all people, was to be born of her betrothed, providence cloathing Reputation by alloting her a supposed Husband, discover|ing thereby her Genealogy, for greater Fame, both towards her self and Son, he being re|puted the Son of Ioseph which was the Son, that is (to omit dark and endlesse recko|nings) the son in Law to Heli; Marys Kin|red being Numbred, Luke 3. the cus|tome of the Jews not allowing Families to be computed by women, yet this is clear from both that being of the house of David and reckoned by S. Matthew from Abra|ham, Salvation by Jesus came to his Sons; but S. Luke reckoning from Adam, intimats Redemption by him also to be intended by the incarnation to the Gentiles, found in the Royal line, and appears in the person of the the King of the Jews, Iesus the Saviour of the whole Earth. Whose Mothers Kinred is reckoned under Iosephs name, as being one with Mary, she being his wife. Luke 3. and Heli's Daughter, which Iseph a Carpenter, became a Foster Father, a reputed or supposed Father to the worlds Master-builder, and great Architecture of heaven and Earth, his espou|sed having conceived in her womb about the age as is said of fifteen, being fitted early for her Saviours intertainment by Sanctity and

pudicity, contrary to that Famous Helene upon whose eyes its recorded none could look securely, there being thence emitted rays, destructive to purity, enflameing the breast unto concopiscence, but from this woman say they there was such emanations of beaming Continence, as not only denyed such reflecti|ons, but extinguished their being as the sun|beams do an ordinary fire: I shal swear to none of these, yet know that though Nebuchadne|zars furnace be seaven times more heated then usually, it no way impedeth Iesus the Son of God from making it his gallery; but the least spark of natural lust indisposeth the soul for being a receptacle for that holy Child Iesus he being both separate from sinners and sin, can have no Communion with Belial nor his imps, yea, if a David by en|tertaining of a lust, lose the warmth or for|feit the sense of heavenly joy, or Mary at a feast (who hath ears to hear let him hear) lose her Son and Saviour, they must both re|gain their Consolation, with sorrow and Care, and acknowledge with Naomi, that their Names are Mara that is Mary, by inter|pretation also bitterness.
All our Saviours actions have in their womb instructions to the world, concerning Converse, and particularly his being BORN

of a woman Virgin, doctrinas to Virgin-like simplicity, as some therefore abstaines from wickednesse for fear of pain, others of shame, or such like Carnal grounds, let Be|lievers make no provision for the flesh that Iesus may be formed in them more and more, that his left hand may be under their head and his Right hand embrace them, the for|mer healing and justifying, the other em|braceing and felicitating, the fist applying his merits, the last assureig his reward, the one offering food, the other medicine, yet behold the Phisician, and his first cure for the Souls support is innocence, attested in his Manlsse conception, that we shewing freedom from the deformity of brutal desires. Manlike may be capale to convers with heavenly intellignces, crying out in our acts, with those in Theodoret, who being igno|rantly, through Cunning made to offer in|cense unto Idols, we are Christians, we are Christians, keeping fresh the Image of Ho|linesse, becomeing Familiar as it were with Angels. Outstripping that modest heathen Archytas, who refuseing to utter an immo|dest word, yet desireing to sense his dis|course poutraid upon the wall with a coal somewhat significative to his purpose, which is but to trapan sanctity, and shutting our

Organ, that is our ear, against ribuldry, to offer it an inlet by the eye, an oran apt e|nough to smutt the soul, and sufficiently poli|tck to captivat the heat, wih its own con|sent, and betray it to destructive concepti|ons.
DRAW near you that are Virgins and behold this Virgin, you that are Mo|thers, and behold this Mother, you that give suck, and behold this Nurse, you that ae with Child, and behold this womb, you that are widows, and behold this woman no Maid, no Wife, you that are begotten of Men, and born of woman, and behold this MAN encompass'd by a woman, born for all kinds of condition, wherein woman can be found begotten of Man, that all living (as she in breeding) in Chstity, may be en|compass'd by this MAN secur'd against shame and misery, by imitating this woman Genus, this Marys warrinesse, this woman temperance, this Virgins holinesse, this Maids retiredness, for, its probable, the Vir|gin was alone when the Angel accosted her, and it may be conjectur'd at some good ex|ercise, as appeareth by his salutation, Th Lord is with thee, the Religion of the He|brews teaching them to blesse in the Name of the Lord, whom they found diligent and well

imployed as Boaz did his Reapers, and the Reapers again their master.
IMITAT also this Marys clean|nesse for the Virgin was pure in heart, that is, in eye, in ear, in feet, in tongue, walk and apparel, her compositum being cloathed, crowned with the vertues, as with so many robes and diadms of stares, defend|ing her (by nature) unfortified ear, from the assaults of immodest utterance, by bash|fulnesse, gravity, and censure; disdaining to soyle, or smutt her purer soul with the reports of obscenity, acted, either on the Theatre or seen in the wardrop: the habit but warping toward kindling of Concupisence in any, being condemned in the solidity of her Judgment; accounting it equally destruc|tive, to be casually an incentive of, as studi|ously to become a pander to lust in any; the Angels salutation, her Royal stemme and pedigree, cleareth all this and more; As if her word had been like that of Heraclius the Emperour, Insania lta voluptas, estimat|ing the usual, trivial, finical delights of the Daughters of men, to be dangerous, and their Gamboles to be very madnesse; because either being, or forming, or bordering up|on pollution; yet, (according to the Ac|cute Maxime in the Holy State of Virginity)

counted it Virginitie to be unspotted, not un|married, encompassing her self with Re|solves, of piety, industry, and purity, in all conditions, therefore she Saw GOD, and that with her eye, the invisible being in her, and of her, and to her, made visible the Father through the Spirit ercting a mansion place in her womb for the Son, she having had a repo|sitory for the Almighty his Law revealed to his Servants in her heart, from which issued an aptitude and disposition inclining he body rather to Kneel, then Dance.
Ought not this to perswade future Ages, for applauding and consenting to consciou  sanctimonious behaviour? Christ being th born for this cause, or then his coming had been casting pearls before swine. and the pro|duct of Christian profession little different from the frantick actings of the fable Jewish Armillus, (with them the same th Antichrist is with u) who before the come|ing of the Messiah (with them) is to be bo by, o breathed from, a Marble image of Virgin, unto whom the wicked of the world shall be gathered for incestuous copulation And under him their Leader bandy against heaven.
HOW advantageously hath the Ho Ghost baptized our Saviour (so to speak

with variety of names, titles and compari|sons? and how comfortably doth he expatiat upon that subject? that in all doubts, fears or discouragements his Name is as oyntment poured forth, Cant. 1.3. the word Mes|siah, the expression Christ, the phrase oynt|ment being all one, holding up the tapestry shewing the devout the inside of his worth, that the savour of his works, merits, and offi|ces may bind up and restrain the deluding pleasures offered by sin, Satan or the world, to our deceiving senses.
WHAT deductions faith can make from those Names, of the Rock, the Lamb, the Vine, the Sun, the Rose, the Shepherd, the way, the door, the Priest, pertaineth not to our province, but the appellation MAN in our theme, is so soveraign, so gravidat with blessing, flow|ing from Fraternity and Brotherhood, that the improver may observe a Magazine in point of war for all accommodation, a store-house in matter of peace for all conveniency, at first representing God in MAN and therefore in spiritual attaques, hellish conflicts, wrest|lings of Conscience, strugling with the world, interceeding with God, he is a MAN an accomplish'd Captain endowed with all re|quisits, required anciently by the Law of

Armes for accomplishing a Leader, viz. Age, Vertue, Trust Knowledge, Authority, Suc|cess, Blood and Gentry he battel ended and the Halcion days f peace being come, the soul in sweet Communion, holy Fellowship with God, uninterrupted joys of the Spirit, he is a MAN to advise with in the Manage|ment of all things.
INDEED the Angel appointed this MANS name to be Iesus, that is, a Savi|our adapting his name to his office, whence savation in its bulk, as also in its parts is as|certain'd to him, who makes this MAN his Iesus; an appellation which none of the Prophets knowing, or not revealing maketh evident, that Almihty wisdome con|cluded it fittest for an Angel first to utter, and next him the Christian, that both the one and the other might eternally adore, the impresse and signature thereof being cap|able to mlt the soul by its heat, but its worth proclaims a jubile to the most deponding sinner, in enclining his ear to these , that Iesus is born in Bethlehem, who a Saviour, Christ the Lord, which so traquillats the Conscience that it may disda the surmisings, the whsperings of Fear,  inviting the eye, and attracting the ear, th except Iesus be seen and heard, wise discourseing

is but babling; A holy Man disre|lised the (otherwise) sweet fluency of Tullys eminent (not to say) admited Rhetorick and immitable (because not bumbastick) O|ratory, in regard that Jesus was not among all his tropes to be found, that being the salt seasoning the highest expression of endear|ing Friendship or most allureing Eloquence.
THAT Signior, like name the Prophet giveth him, Isa. 9.6. exceeds all delecta|tion, that speaking him wonderful, Counseller, the Mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace, the first epresenting all the rest miraculous, being Wonderful, yet ami|able because a Counsellour, yet that hinting subjection, he is formidable in action under|stand to his foes, he is Mighty, and least that should be construed not to extend to om|nipotence, he is said to be the Mighty God, yet to conciliate kindnesse he is a Father, and to cause veneration, he is the everlasting Fa|ther, and that he might be known to be above all desirable, he is the Prince of Peace, made peace go before him, brought peace with him, there being either peace or Truce at his birth, all the world over, what can be re|flected upon here, wanting for the accom|plishment of a MAN? and what is not here evincing the rationality of his name won|derfull?
IN the beginning was this word, John 1.1. there's eternity; this word was with God, there's equality; the word was God, there's a Deity; and the word was made flesh, there's Humanity, and that word in flesh is called Jesus, there's Salvability, the Grace of God by him appearing, and bringing sal|vation unto all men, and how happy should we be if we would so far act as MEN, as make our symbole like that, the Emperou Jovianus, scopus vitae Christus, the end and perfection of my life, is Iesus.
FOR this cause the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. hath, as a Father observes, the Name Iesus, and again the Name Iesus in the first ten ver|ses, eleven times over, as if he could not, or would not, compleat his triumphant wishes, for the Corinthians establishment by other means; then by tuneing their ears to this Appellative Jesus; makeing it manifest to the most inadvertant, that the word Ma|ster, or MAN, or any other nown, had not in his judgement vertue competent to heal their sores, remove their follies, or si their quick silver, so much as Jesus: Or as if he himself by a holy inebriation of the juice or wine pressed from the signification thereof, had forgot the earthinesse of names, and sounds, but in heavenly Dialect could only

pronounce the Elements of mans salvation; view the stable therefore, the manger, the swadling-cloaths, and behold they all cry See Jesus, Behold the MAN, who being eternally enjoying peace, and splendidly ruling in heaven, was (as about this time) born MAN, a word also insinuating Mi|sery, vexation and wo, encompass'd from the womb with Legions of Devils, Princes, Pharisees and people; yea by his own Kin|red and Disciples was he perplex'd, being de|nied, forsaken and rejected saying, we have no pleasure in him, because they saw him a MAN that is, a compend of Sorrow, yet because he is a MAN, that is a compound of Excellency, behold his worth with chear|fulnesse, and Zeal as Simeon, Anna, the An|gel, and the heavenly hoast, who as they sang at the Creation, Iob. 38.7. would also rejoice at the Redemption of the world, wor|shipping him who was the first begotten.
HOW much more, ought man, for whom the Lord more peculiarly was made Christ, as the shepherds will shew you, who went to see and returned from Christ the Lord with great joy, two words expressing fist his Human then his Divine nature. The great Turk vanteth of his being Guardian of our Saviours Sepulchre, let us exult in his Au|thority,

glory in his Holy Name, Religi|ously improving the design of his comeing, that we may be redeemed from this present evill World. Gal. 1.4. that is, from the practices thereof, and designs therein, the mischief whereof can easily be discern'd, and from which no Angel could secure us there|fore their maker, Gods Son became MAN by consequence our Brother, voluntarily di|vesting himself of his glorious Robes, cloa|thed himself with the poor rayment of flesh and blood  buckled on the coat-Armour o bones and sinnews, to fight against the god of this world, who had projected ma thraldome to Eternity by the worlds gaity; whereas contrary our Iesus, is before us in a stable, Reprobating the worlds glo|ry in his practise, that others may abstract their souls from it in their Converse.
IT is said, that the herb, Christwoort, or Christmas flower, in plain English black Helebore, (so called for its springing about this time) helpeth madnesse, distrac|tion, pugeth melancholy and dulnesse: sure we are, that though Christ at this time did not speak, yet the members of his bodie, the face of his nativitie, the indigence of his pa|rent, the surlinesse of his hoast, says to the de|mented, witless, because prophane pro|digal,

Love not the world, cease from evill, and do good, subdue pride, watch envy, pro|voke not to wrath, Love mercy, do violence to no man, (he troubled none in the Inn by makeing intrusion into any Chamber there|of) least he fall upon thee, and smite thee with more madnesse, and astonishment of heart, Deu. 28, 28.
THIS last expression minds me to caveat the Reader, not to be angry at He|libore becuse it's called Christmas-flowre; for it, poor thing hurts no body that lets it alone, and Herbalists are to be shet, not it spoyled for that Name, as was the harm|lesse Hawthorn tree, near Glassenbury in Sommerset-shire in England, which being al|wayes observed to bloom so neare to this time, that it was reported first to budde this day, other Haw-thorns about it remaining dead, and naked, King Iames jestingly con|cluded therefom, our old style to be more Rgular then Romes new, but others of latter years more seriously concluding, the thorn guilty of old superstition, grubbed it up by the roots, and burned it to ashes; which comeing to the ears of honest Christmas, fearing her own fate, from that of her Har|bingers (receiving notice by a publick or|der) quietly retir'd, and keep'd her self alive

by the fireside of more Charitable Christi|ans, accounting it more honourable to ly by a flame, then dy in one: But this Bush hath almost put me from my path, and hoping  things, we proceed to presse the Christi|an in all temptations to lift up his heart soul, and all within him, Rmembring the of descent the Son of GOD, I should have said of MAN approaching towards us in the Chariot of the Virgins womb, moving upo the wheels of Humilitie, Charitie, Mercy, and holy Wisdom, GOD uniting to MAN, that ma might be reconcil'd to God through inscrut|able actings, by new things, Heaven being opened as in the Revelation. Angels ascending and descending as in Iacobs dream, joining earth and Heaven as in the Ladder, the Fa|ther saying, fear not as in Israels going dow to Egypt, here is the Door, this is the gat of Heaven, as in the Patriarch's dread, Th Lord shall be my God, as in the pilgrims vow Gen. 20.21.
BVT forget not as we ought to re|verence and adore him as God, in God, so ought we to respect and benefit all me since God in MAN became like one of us, Our Lords Natalitials and birth, being a mirrour representing divine Charity and bowels of compassion unto us, and loves swa|vity

or sweetnesse one with another, his ve|ry swadling cloathes speaking patience and benevolence.
FROM the time of celebrating our Lords Advent in order of nature our, days lengthen, our nights shorten, and was of old called Midwinter-day, or Midwinter mass, or feast. The Solstice formerly being near|er to it then now, however untill became, Darknesse was upon the face of the earth, and that so grosse that for eight hundreth years, none had the gift of miracles, for in working of them, none proceeded our Saviour save Elisha only, the Prophets taught the living, neither cured the sick, nor raised the dead, that the world by his miracles, might learn him to be the true Messiah, the very sun of righteousnesse, by whose beams the world being irradiated, errours might vanish, and Truth brake forth more and more, for the conversion of men; And that as the Cloud did Israel, we by his manhood might move and be directed in our motions through the wildernesse, in purenesse of behaviour and brightnesse of Doctrine, that by his firy light, we might have light, and constantly walk as Children thereof, old things passing away by the Spirits over shadowing, and heart be|leiving, we might also become new in Christ

Iesus, who was once BORN, and no more that the wo denounced against unbeliever in all ages, might deter the remiss and enforce a running into Bethlehem, the house of brea to see admiringly this great thing, and nei|ther complain, nor deride; nor scon, or turn again to the Egypt of carnal pssssion, bu vivaciusly embrace this Man in their arms living by faith, confesse that he is come i the flesh, which whoso denys is an Antichrist, he as God giving so clear evidences of his assuming flesh, shewing even before his greatest miracles infallible proofs o his Man-hood, cuing the deaf after sighing raising Lazarus after his weeping, and shakeing of the Earth, as he gave up the Ghost.
THE wedding then betwixt GOD and man, in him being come, let not the rooms be empty, but the faster invite Iesus to the Mar|riage, staying for your satisfaction in a stable untill your prepared hearts say as a Laba, Come in thou blessed of the Lord why tarriest thou without that darknesse of Soul and will being expelled thou mayst dwell, yea en|creass in light, evangelical for ever, as the earth receives increase of light for a time, And as it puts one hence forward a new dress the fields cloathed with a fresh green, the

ees in the gardens sed or lopped, the Vines n the Vineyard pruned, for the grapes grea|er sweetnesse, so he the Vine being planted n the earth, may through our sincere pray|rs, be engrafted and inoculated in us, that s the Vine we may have wherewith to glad the heart of God and of this MAN, cause|ing this days exercise to have a voice prepare e the way of the Lord lopping off all super|fluity of naughtinesse, and excscencies of Vanity, leaving the Drunkard, to be drunk in the Night studying to be sober and vigi|lant, as Children of Day, avoiding somno|lency or sleepinesse, ebriety or drunkennesse, the morning of temperance beginning with the Sun of rightousnesse, inforceing a be|ing wise unto sobriety, remembring the very supposed Father of this MAN was Ioseph, who was known to be truly a good, and a just man.
BVT the word Encompass imports the enliving, prodigious ineffable mystery, the most in comprehensible conception and mira|culous nativity of our Lord, of which suffici|ency of knowledge terminating the under|standing, is that which mortality can no ways be obliedged to expect, yet to attract eyes for yeelding respect to this astonishing birth, whereon the building of our happinesse

depends more then upon his rising from th dead; for, from the grave some have risen, bu from a Virgins womb no man yet came, an affoords new, yea strong consolation, more over all his other actings are bottom'd upo this of his birth; therefore is it to be weighed.
THE word expresseth encircling, enclosing, by which pure word insinuating hi confinement in the Virgins womb, an abideing there as in his proper Cell, unti the time of life, at which this MAN appeared in the world, but the manner of hi being compassed is concealed from us, the Angels expression. The Holy Ghost shal overshaddow thee; Remorats curiosity, Go thereby intending to conceal the manner, proseth wholly a belief of the matter, a shadow being but the absence of light by the interpo|sition of a body, the darknesse of the womb confineth our eye-sight, and the power of the Highest dischargeth prying.
TO shew that he was born, not to be admired, or gazed at, were easie; and to prove that he was born for us, is that which we all believe, to demonstrate he was not born for himself, but given to us, that hath been heard from the Prophets; For, say they, to us a Child is born, to us a Son is given,

Child yet before his Mother was, he was a Son, a wise Phisician, and tender Saviour, the omnipotent God, to us is given a Child a Son, respecting his two natures; the first, viz. Child, expressing him real MAN, as he was and cleared to be from his Genoogy, from his soul, body, eating, wearinesse fasting, sleeping, weaping, from his being called, Man,  the son of Man, besides such representatives as GOD made of him under the Law, as the seed of the woman, of Abraham, a Prophet from among your Brethren, and Davids righ|teous branch: The other word SON, expres|sing him real God which he was, being called alwayes the Son of God, after his Resurrec|tion, after which time, that phrase the Son of man is never used. He is the everlast|ing Son of the Father Creator of all things giver of eternal life, from the beginning con|fessed by the Angels, demonstrated by his fasting, by his miracles and that in the Temple, where never miracles were wrought by man, that being the place, wherein God significantly would have his Son to be noticed, and he proved from his working therein, to be the Lord who was suddenly to come thereto, Malach. 3. It being the house of his Father.
IN short by his suffering, dying, riseing

from the dead, he declared himself to be the Son of God with power, for never MAN, nei|ther Moses, Samuel, nor any that called up|on his Name, neither Priest nor Prophet wrought miracles at their Death but he, th exploit of Sampson, was rather wonderful then miraculous and came far short of thos upendious actings, at our Saviours giving up of the Ghost, but at his rising from the grave so far he declared himself to be God that these words, the Son of MAN, are no mentioned, he said it behoved the Son of ma to suffer, but being raised, it was, ought no Christ to have suffered?
HOW elegantly hath S. Paul, Philip 2. difference I shou'd have said, united these two, in these words, who being in the for of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, herein is the truth of his Son-ship, and first part of his nature, but made himself of  reputation and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likenesse of men here is the truth of his Child-hood, the other part of his being the Apostle expounding the Prophet would have said, He was given to us, who was in the form of God, and born for u who made himself of no Reputation, this is the beginning, middle and end of his nativity even to adore, reverence, that Love of God we

who after he had made all things, yet made himself MAN, so mans good, before this Child was born as a Son, he governed all things, but for nothing was he born save to serve, that men might injoy all things, and if the bith of this Child, this Son, be ac|counted fabulous, either by Iew or Greek, because incredulous.
I passe the Vengeance shown on a lewd painter, intending to draw our blessed Savi|our in the form of Iupiter, An. C. 436. whose hand by the Divinity of Christs pow|er withering, was again refreshed by Prayer, Repentance, and aith, in the two natures though reason could not unfold the Union. But let me know why the diseased lyon seeks out an ape by whose ugly tricks, he, as it were laughs himself into health? how or what can cause an ovel ball of Virgin wax, cast into the salt Sea, fill it self with fresh water? why should the Iew doubt of Marys Virginity since he believes, the bush burned and was not consumed? that Gideons fleece was wet and all the ground dry? that Daniels stone was cut out of the Mountains without hands, All these were antecedent to this, the Spirit trolling us forward to believe the Mystery of the Incarnation from a Virgin overshadow|ed, she being like the porch in Ezekiel, 4.4.

through which none was to pass, be|cause the Lord hath entred in by it; he was the occult sed, which had we wanted, we had been like to Sodom, 1. Isa. he is the fruit of Davids body: to sit upon David throne, other sons are the fruit of the Loins, Psal. 132. but Christ was purely a fruit o the belly, for from Iosephs piety, for Iesu Dignity, for the Honour of the Holy Ghost, as we know Mary to have been a Virgin, be|fore her Conception, so she is believed to have remained a Virgin ever after.
HIS Conception in the womb being the fund and bottom of all that followed, in hi Mediatory office, in it resteth the inscrutabl Mystery of the two natures, the possibility whereof in the Union of our capacious Souls with our finit infirm bodies is somewha cleared: but admit this should not be reflec|ted upon, Heaven it seem'd resolves that th A. B. C. of our profession should be wholly superstructed upon faith, that the  and Ground-sale might be conform to th roof, and both to stand upon his ipse  the word of the Lord, the Femal being  only placed for the parent, not a man to copasse a woman, whereby a man may be bgotten, but a woman a MAN by whic Iesus was organiz'd.
AND if heathens belived the possi|bility of Minervahs concepion in the brain of Iupiter, without a woman, may it not from truer gounds be trusted, that Iesus was framed in the womb without a man? it is cer|tainly fabulous; that Budda should have gen|dred in his side a Virgin, bu for this truth what direful things have not been suffered? and what consolation hath it not bred And the newnesse of the thing in the uniting God and man, is said to have been registrat'd in the book of Heaven it self for all to see, the Learned observing by their tables, that upon the observed day of our Lords nativity (viz.) December 25. their fell the greatest conjunction of the eight and ninth speares in head of Aries that ever was, and nature is not able to effect the like (say they) unlesse the world continue thirty or fourty thousand years, a strange conjunction upon earth, re|presented by another in heaven imports the Almighy would have it wonder'd at.
HER name Mary imports a star, and that of the Sea too, designed in this parti|cular to be eyed by such Mariners, or rather questionists who in sailing through the Ocean, of Divine Revelation  Mysteries will needs be exerciseing the plummet, and by the line of reason athme in the depth of the wisdom

of God, or coast it by the shoar of their own interest, opinion, faction, or concern|ment, Mary in this being a better pilot, by her own motion, above her own reason, in how can these things be? steared towards the bay of Faith, and of dependance in; Be i according to thy word, and to her Honour cast anchor within the port of God's verity and omnipotency, with God all things being pos|sible, and their striking sail saved her own Soul, bringing him forth who is made to us of God, Wisdom to cure our folly, righteous|ness to remove our irregularity, Sanctifica|tion to wash away uncleannesse, and Redemp|tion to obliterat our guiltinesse.
AND verily she had her reward and shall have; for may we not see with Eliza|beth, blessed is she that believeth? and in temp|tations to pride, to avarice, in the surges o a tempestuous world, among other Saints Mary as a star may be veiwed; and as a coppy followed in this her act of relying, upo Gods Testimony, which is thought no sooer to be done, then Christ was conceived That Holie thing said the Angel, pointing, a it were, then at him, now in her womb, the person of the Son of God bodily formed of he flesh  bloud, not by transmiting the deity into the substance of flesh, or flesh, into that of th deity, but by uniting both in one, subsistin

person, so that neither the Godhead was manned, nor the Manhood Goded, but both though dstinct, really united, qualifying the Impassible to suffer, the Immortal to dy, and the Eternal God who had ever been, to be, by a Mystery not to be apprehended, and is the Mystery of Godlinesse. God humbling himself for men, that is, for their good, to men, because born a MAN, above men, for though like them he was born of a woman, yet was he unlike them, in so far as in her, he was formed by the Holy Ghost, and born of her a religious virgin, in him also the God-head bo|dily abideing.
CAN we do here lesse then cry out blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave the suck? the womb bearing him who is the Author of all blessednesse to us, the virgin becoming Spouse to the Father, Mother to the Son, and habitation to the Spirit, hail Mary, thou art highly favoured be|ing made the restorer of thy sex, sorrow in bringing forth, imposed for sin by thee not felt, when from thee we received Iesus, God from the Father, Christ man from the Mother, therefore blessed art thou among women, the blessed fruit of thy Virginity expressing a blessing to all the Daughters of Eva, abide|ing in, following after, or cleaving unto, thy

pattern set them, of Simplicity and Faith even in thine, in their Child bearing, thou as a star emitting beams of light upon the earth, from thy breasts giving food to him, who giveth meat to all flesh, beareth the price of mans Redemption, the mean of the Angels confirmation, in thy armes, thou art highly favoured, God workng in thy belly three wonders for our astonishment and cureing of our heart, first in preserving thy Virgin purity in integrity though in flesh,  the Ark was covered with pure gold, in fructifying thy Virginity, and makeing it con|ceive, as the bush burned, and was not consum|ed. Lastly, by an meffable joining of earth|ly thins and heavenly together, thou  Iacobs ladder touching both; thou art highly favoured For in thee God becomes MAN a Virgin turns a Mother and the heart of m believes all, being peswaded thou at the Mother of our Lord yet thy Lords handmaid, that is, our Lords Servant, for tho was made by him, and if God be terrible o of his holy places, how much more won|derfull, when he appears out of thy bowels having been compass'd by thy womb? Tho art highly favoured therefore Hail Mary,  heavenly salutation, while thou was upon Earth; yet on Earth thy worshipping of him

ought to expound unto us, its robbing him of his just devoir to pray unto thee, since he was born by thee to become the Author of eternal Salvation to all that believe and to thy ignorant adorer I imagine, that is, I con|ceive thou sayes, Man what have I to do with thee? seing he is the Lord thy God, worship thou him; for its written, him only shalt thou serve. c.
THE english word compass is known, and the root Sabab is of the same sense, im|porting round about, or on every side, whence some apply the word to the Church, who should after much wandring and wan|tonnesse, cleave to embrace the Lord her Hus|band, as the barren womb doth a man; but this being no new thing, we make progresse in our first interpretation, affirming the words sound a retreat to the Church in her unprosperous war against God, perswading to a Reformation of life upon this new Crea|tion, beseeching them as els-where the A|postle, by the Mercies of God, and of our Lord Iesus Christ, who to cultivat our bar|ren souls, had first appointed the bloud of beasts in sacrifice, next our own in Circum|cision, and when both failed, the desined effect, by this new thing his last and great work, that from his mouth the mouth of a

Bab, the bloud of a Lamb, of this Lamb of God, we might be perswaded to bring forth fruit, upon the sight of such pure innocency, who not being heard when he thundered, might be heard when he weeped, yea, loved and obeyed; descending unto Earth, that he might be kissed of such who while he sat in heaven was not feared, God purposeing to ereat nothing to save the impenitent, this be|ing done to enforce abhorrency of every evill way, and the newnesse of it causeing wonder, might the more to enflam godliness; the wor|thies, Kings and Prophets of the former ages not knowing, not seeing this; that is, knew it not, saw it not fufilled; for though it be said The Lord hath created a new thing in the Earth, yet the time of utterance sheweth it only to be prophesied of, because of which the People of the prophets generation, might be ascertain'd that it should be, as if it been past and gone, God speaking of things that are not as though they were, and to come as though already done, so in after ages, A wo|man did compass a man.
ENDVED he was in probability with a rational Soul from the first instant of his glorious conception, the Holy Ghost framing by his power his pure body withut those previous preparations of natural formation,

infusing likewise his Soul before the ordinary number of thirty six or fourty six dayes, which casteth the birth upon the seventh or the ninth moneth, for though he was like unto us in all things, yet the exception of sin, includ|eth such effect as emerge from it, of which pain in conceiving or in bringing forth, is to be exempted from his Mother or imperfecti|on of parts, or lack of a Soul from himself, we speak not of the extension or delineation of his members, which must be by time per|fected, but of his bodies organization which how smal so ever, might be animated, that be from the beginning mght be both God and man, which of an Embrio could not proper|ly be allowed; and the body being immedi|atly the work of the Spirit of Power, makes diffiult to grant, the body of Christ to be shaped or figured according to the wonted manner of men, the Scripture as leaving it doubtful, expressing the Embrio, which can neither be caled Male nor Female fruit, whereas Iesus must be reputed to have al|ways been God and MAN, and MAN here enforceth the same conclusion, the word Child in other places not enervating the inferences, that being used more effectually to demonstrate the verity of his INCAR|NATION.
THIS one word MAN, proved a con|founding Topick to the Iews in their pungent hopes of a Messiah, foretold by a reaming Pro|phetissa of their own, who being with child predicted of a deliverer in her womb, her belly indeed grew, yet their hopes grew big|ger untill the Chast-Damosell was delivered of a lusty Girle, which brought her Country|men to bed of a brown, (that is, a shamefull and melancholy) study, But our Redeem|er, like the true Lamb of God Exod. 12. was taken from the flock of mankind, a Male, a MAN without blemish without sin; In the evening born in the last age of the world and to be eaten whole, believed wholly in, as God Christ, and Man Christ, without which what can be thought of these Scriptures but forgeries, as that he grew in wisdom and sta|ture, Math. 2. that is, as MAN, or that he knew not the Judgment day, that is, as MAN, or that he made the worlds, Heb. 1, or that he was in the beginning, which is to be un|derstood only as he was God so that our Ie|sus is canonically, I should say Levitically fit|ted to be a sin offering, by whose Masculine Vertue through grace the sins of the world, are to receive expiation: let none therefore in malice or in mirth, henceforward main|tain the Etymon of Woman, to be wo to

man, but derive it rather from wonder of men, all fixing and centering their eyes on this woman and this MAN, as objects, for sam|plars of joy and admiration.
SATAN at first by the Serpents craft abused the woman into credulity, per|swadig her too attentive ear, to betray the heart into lust, by which death triumph'd o|ver all her Sons; But here is a Daughter of Eva hearkning unto the words of an Angel of light, baling Satan, believing God ra|ther yea bfoe her self, and becometh a great instrument of salvation, wounding Sa|tans head (for her Son bruised it) in which his craft and tongue are both destroyed, and like David with the head of Goliath, erects trophees and signs of eternal conquest, over the legions of Death and Hell, Conceiving by aith, bearing by faith, pondering in, and store|ing up in her heart hatever could corrobo|rat her faith, unill her Son, had made both his and our enemies become his foot-stool. By his horn. FOR he is the horn of Sal|vation, Luke 1, (i. e.) his power and beau|ty as by the horn of a Unicorn, pushing yea breaking the Devils stem, not only antido|ting but annihilating any poyson, he can or doth lay in our way to hurt us; it is true that too great confidence made Eva talk with the Serpent, she being without fear, whence

even in a Phisical sense for her punishment, there yet is a pannick dread generally in her sex at the sight even of a dead snake, but thogh Mary was terrified or put out of countenance at the Angels Salutation or first appearance, conceiving him as is conjectured a man,  she solitary, whence good in the accost might be suspected, let in any case spiritual horrour, in Serpentine discourses, or Satanick blandish|ments, or sinful appearances (staining a good report) contrary to Christian modesty, to the fleshes satisfaction in any debauch, be always rooted in us, for avoiding the wages of either of these which is Death; And if any put the evill day far off, yet as the seed of the woman (like things long look'd for) came at last, so the Veracity and truth of God shall at length display it self to the terrour of all adversaries, and shall prosperously publish it self in accomplishing what ever it predicted, for the believers consolation, as after some thousand years, by and in a woman, was the promise of the seed in the person of our Savi|our perfected.
A woman shall compasse a man, is not this strength out of weaknesse? and visibly e|vident at his birth, she first bringing him forth, we read of no Midwife, next she wrapped him in swadling cloaths we find no

assistance, and she laid him in a manger.
BEHOLD a new thing, cheefly in civiliz'd Nations, in honest births. Tulliola the Daughter of Cicero dyed in labour, Iulia the Daughter of Caesar, dyed in Child-bed, and weaknesse generally is found in Travel, and help called for in bringing forth, but this Hebrew woman was strong, and in History neither had, nor demanded aid, Joseph her spouse not dareing to touch what he begat not, or it may be was exercised about some other employment, while she swadled the Child and laid him in a manger.
THE ancients generally record it to be of a rock, and histories registrat the truth of that to have been seen of many, and what more pertinent for the rock upon whom the Church was to be builded, then a rock for him (the Mystical foundation) to be laid in? (But of this cum Deo we shall speak els|where) and Ioseph standing by when the shepherds entered to shun the surmise of scan|dal, and remove the beginnings of an ill bruit, apt enough to kindle in the breasts of them whose hard heartednesse drove his great bellyed mother to a stable, for though there was at the birth of Iohn great joy; yet at Christs, save in heaven, and in shepherds, we read of little, but that world knew no bet|ter,

we have more full intelligence, and un|derstand, though our hearts be rocky, and our bosoms, as the stable, common filthy and un|clean, yet he is born a Saviour to deliver us from both, as a Moses to break the one, as a (Hercules, pardon the comparison) to cleanse the other for which let the Holy b glad, because here is a rule, let the honourable rejoice, for here is a fountain; the humble, for here is a pattern; the dying, for here is life; the sinner, for here is a Redeemer born, who purposeth to pay their Ransome, and for that end more enriched then was that Silesian Child born, A D. 1585 Decem. 22. In whose mouth afterwards was found a great jawtooth of gold, approaching to the Carat of Hungary, for he hath precious bloud (without which there is no remission) which as a pri from his holy body, he shall deposit to procure us from slavish servitude and spirit of bondage, and therefore in these days it is unlawfull to be surly out of spite, and unholy to be sad, except for sin; touch, taste and see that God is good, and rejoice, for to you is born a Saviour, Christ the Lord.
AVGVSTVS about this time, this good time, by proclamation order'd none to call him Lord, prompted, sure, unto it by a spirit, not of flesh and bloud, so let no lust

rule over you, but bow the knee to him of whom it's said; And let all the Angels of God worship him, pay tribute unto him; who is over all the world, evidencing, that where ever you are (as Ioseph in Galile) that there is peace with you, towards him having ei|ther yeelded, or being subdued by the most august, serene Lord Iesus, who was by the Spirit given to this woman, and by whom is published Heaven to be at peace with men, and women, uniting these two together and both unto it self, that peace might be on Earth, and goodwil towards each other, and both give glory by submission unto God, ceas|ing from contention, Salvation comeing by Iesus and Honour with Christ to men, who are but dust and ashes.
WHEN the Almighty doth wonde|rously, men should be surably affected, here is a Prophet created, a King anointed, a Priest consecrated, a Phisician born: what more? a Saviour encompassed, let this be your tyd|ings, Christ is born in Bethlehem, and leave your flocks, ascending to him, (who came down) in your heart and love, for in your Salvation there is utility, in his Vnction swavity, in his INCARNATION Majesty, for he hath bowed the heavens and is to be found in the swadling cloths, of

Precepts, Sacraments, and Promises, of all which the Angels of the Church have told you, because of which heavenly testimonies expect not a star in the air, I mean a new miracle or a new good way of your own chuseing; but draw near, and behold, this new thing, proclaiming it to each other, as the two cousings Mary and Eizabeth, that Jew and Gentile may both rejoice together in the birth of their common Saviour, and that with hast, our Saviours birth as his doc|trin, being prolifick, dischargeth oscitancy and slouth, having a proper work, which must industriously be gone about, (viz.) Sanctiy, the digity of the Spirits working in thi supernatural manner, having morally a coercive power to suspend teren matters, and carry the soul to the hilly Country by af|fection in the sweetest Cell of the Souls com|placency, and thence again to issue orders un|to all faculties to abstain from filthinesse to Love the Lord to speak good of his Name.
CHRIST being as at this time born, as at this time the Angels sang, the Heaven|ly host praised, the Shepherds glorified, which in our leading pious, holy and Religious lives, shal also, satisfactory to God, and Jesus our Lord, be performd for which this new thing was created, the World being grown

old, exceeding old, that is, thin, crazy and bare, Adams disobedience, the Angels fall, Cain's slaughter, Lamech's Murder, Nimrod's oppression, the Giants Impurity, Babels Con|fusion, c. had so marred the visage of this Earth, that the heavens groaned to be deli|vered from its aspect, from its scent, as if Mezuntus Tyranny had been anticipated, who tyed living men to stinking carcasses for their death and his own sport; But at last God sent his Son, in flesh, with water, that the Earth as the Garden of the Lord being well watered, and as Pharao'hs Kine made fresh, faire and well favoured, or as David of a goodly countenance, in imitation of this wo|man by humility; for though she was Mo|ther of our Lord, she visited, First, in cha|rity, for she came to help the aged, Elizabeth to assist the conceived, and comfort her cou|sing now impregnat; in her dolors, burthens, longings, faintings, and domestick affairs; in her Modesty, she was a teeming woman, and at the time of her delivery Mary the Virgin returned home; in her Oratory she spake so well that the Bab of grace leaped in the others womb; And lastly, in her Civi|lity for she saluted Elizabeth, no question, but with civil honour and Religious reve|rence, for the Mother salutes the cousing, the

cousing Mary, and the Baptist both, all with earnestnesse, and serious holinesse, mixed with joy; or if you please in imitation of the MAN, in Love, for as the Son of our Mother he is come down, that we may kiss him, with the kisses of our mouth, in comforting, the shep|herds when cloathed with darknesse, and it may be with sadnesse, were comforted with joyfull tydings, in suffering he endured the worst, a stable, a manger, for all his innate worth, and former glory he fretted not at,  he cryed, it was for mans sorrow, in doing he went about doing good, and so let us compas each other with Religious delight, celebrating this feast, very near as old as the Gospel not now only, but alwayes with the Church;  Virgin, yet the Lambs wife, by Faith hope and Charity, that they being found with us,  Ioseph, Mary and the Bab, were by the shepherds, may live as they, soberly, righteously and godlily, which perfected, we shal not be cast out of the heaven of the Church with Lucifer, nor out of the paradise of powerfull ordinances with Adam, but enter into the new Ierusalem which is above, by vertue of this new thing created in Ierusalem beneath.
THE method of obtaining which  included in the marrow and significancy 

such names, whose bearers were more peculi|arly grandiz'd in the history of Incarnation, Ioseph by interpretation is addition, Mary bitternesse, Zacharias minding the Lord, Elizabeth peace of my God, Gabriel strength or man of God, and Iohn gracious; now a good Name is in Herauldry accounted an accom|plishment gentilizing the vertuous. And we find in godly saints accrewment of honour to be attended with change of names, for the case in hand; let this days solemnity add one cubit to the stature of your knowledge, touch|ing the pravity and bitternesse of natural self, by reflecting upon what the Lord hath now done for our indwelling with him,  become|ing men of God, inspirited with peace, when the Spirit shall write on the table of the heart Grace, Grace, teaching us all our life long to celebrat on Christmas, that is, Christs-feast, in the old Saxon, the holy Eve of that Eter|nal yule or Iubile in the holy Hebrew where old Emanuel, now Iesus, shal be worshipped with everlasting Jubilation.
FROM this MANS encompassing, the Holy Ghost pleads for Israels returning, and  this back-sliding age, would suffer a word of Exhortation, I should motive for Modesty; now Pharaoch's physicians wold sense a childs onfinement in the womb, a womans nou|rishing

of her fruit, or how the Egyptian mid|wives would retail the particulars couched in the expression, I presume not to know; but there is a MAN, and a WOMAN in the text, and the copula joining them together, is chast, and comely; there is mention made, of the attire of an Harlot, Prov. 7. and we read of the solicitations of a whore; Gen. 39. but, the knowledge of Christ ought to instill sobriety in all our converse, Men, Woman, Women, Men, at meeting or a part contriving the contexture of their discourse, the Methods of their thoughts, the sentiments of their soul, to be spirited with that vertue.
A Father observes, that Ioseph gave no assistance to Mary, she swadling, she laying him in a manger, he not dareing to touch, so holy, a Bab, whom he Knew to be none o his, It's also, and there from, incumbent  the mystical beholding of our Lord, to retur from our irreverent behaviour, and give hi his just devoir: how unseemingly wil so touch Christ in the Supper as if the  were their own bread and wine when it is his body? How rudely will other skip, tread, walk, and frisk, upon  ground, as if it were their own furro their own tale, their own house, their 

Romance? Certainly the Gospel is scanda|liz'd, by the sordidnesse of some mens un|clean fingering, mouthing, writing, yea, Printing of the person of Iesus, so contume|liously, that it would be Death in Turky, to word it so of Mahomet; I know intimacy, and acquaintance is pretended, yet that ought not to offer rudenesse to the serenity of his countenance, the sanctity of his Laws, the dignity of his person, the excellency of his being, which are infring'd to that degree of mockage, that were he once again upon Earth, he might say to such, what a great, yet affable, Emperour said unto a Churle, who confidently made invitation, yet nigardly served up his meat, which was, I did not think there had been such Familiarity be|twixt us.
BELIEVE it, what in the state by po|licy, in the Church by Simony, in trade by defrauding, in Religion by opinionating, in faction by abetting, in the road by steal|ing, in the Sea by pyratting, in common talk by filthy discourseing, in print by unholy applying, in the house by slandering, in de|signs by oppressing; in the counting house by tricking and in our hearing of the word with itching, our holy and ever-glorious Lord, is made and accounted, as a common

thing: wash your hands therefore you sinners, purifie your hearts you Hypocrites; for how un|prosperously all this is done, is known long ago to the Jew, and may in due time be e|videnced to us Gentiles, if so besotted, as not already to have full instruction, since this new thing hath been created on the Earth.
A woman shall compass a MAN. This Generation (old, because so long, lying in wickedness) seemeth incapacitat for amend|ment; But as when S. Paul was weak, that is, in himself, then was he strong, that is, i Grace; and as when the impotent Man com|plained of his want of a man to assist him towards a cure, Iohn 3. The MAN in the text, said, Rise take up thy bed and walk, it is hoped there is an holy seed in the womb of our Mother Church, springing toward and hastning forward, the desire of the god|ly and truly Religions of the Nations, some holy Simeon, that is, obedient hearer, ex|pecting the Lords salvation and some devout Anna's, that is, gracious and merciful, wait|ing, that is, praying for the Redemption of our Israel from the division-ating hub-ubs, wherewith she is entangled, in practising and perswading for peace and Holiness, which

as from the womb of a Mary, or Mara, of all, or any, that is, in bitternesse for our grosse back-slidings, shall hasten the pro|duction of comfort and tranquility, in the knowledge of a Iesus born to save us from our sins.




MYSTERIUM PIETATIS OR THE MYSTERIE OF THE CIRCUMCISION OF Our Lord and SAVIOUR Unfolded, and applied.

Circumcision-Day, Tolbooth Church, 1671.
New Years-Day, Tolbooth Church, 1671.


LUKE II.XXI.
And when eight days were accomplished for the Circumcising of the Child, his name was called Jesus which was so named of the An|gel, before he was conceived in the womb.

_AS we find no nation, the old Savages of Mount Atlas excepted; but found a necessity, and from natural, as wel as politick causes, gave proper and distinct

names, to things and persons; so in civi|liz'd nations, ingenuity and law, prompted them, to pitch upon a time, proper for de|signing their issue by them; When Cain, Abraham, or Lot, were so denominated is not, so far as I know upon record; but Chri|stianity hath generally observed, and followed near about the time of the Iews, who were strictly tyed to the observance of the eight day, from Isaac, who was but eight days old when he felt the knife, and afterward in all ages, each Male was to have the sign of the Covenant in his foreskin, under the penalty of being cut off a phrase among the Iews, intimating a liablenesse, to the wrath and vengeance of the Lord in the highest measure, and was concluded to be the greatest  most cursed of all threatnings in Scripture, as a pu|nishment not inflicted by man, but an im|pending vengeance of God, on earth, im|printing (say some) the certainty of dying Childlesse, and towards heaven, (say others) importing the Gospel's Anathema Mara|natha; the offendour peculiarly being sepe|rate for a curse when the Lord cometh as hateing his holy institution, for which also his indignation may be felt in being cut off in the midst of their dayes, as is evident, in Moses tarrying in the Inn, fearing to go down to

Egypt, wherefore that irregularity in no rite might be charged upon the Son of God, now born of the seed of Abraham, when eight dayes were accomplished, they came to the Circumcision of the Child and called his Name Iesus. Circumcision importeth bloud, and since without that there is no remission; withal, being to speak of a Saviour, I know no better object to present before you, then a ruddy; then a bloudy IESVS, for because of the Circumcision he may say to the Church his wife, a bloody spouse art thou to me, and her name since Abel may be Aceldama, a field of bloud, as being bought with a price of bloud, and still sprinkled with that bloud which bought it, as that field was with his bloud, who took that price, as the text im|ports, Acts 1. or she may be called Damas|cus, a bag of bloud, where and because our Brother the Lord, as Abel was slain by his brethren Iewish Cainits out of envy, and whose bloud at this time beginning to be shed, crys loud to heaven, speaking better things.
CIRCVMCISION is a short word, yet of a large sense; and as applied here, maketh three miracles to be discovered. First, the eternal God who was before all worlds, and made time, dividing it between day and night, is found to be eight days old, next the

impassible Lord of Glory, unto whom there be no augmentation, or increase, nor dimi|nution or lessening of parts, is made lesse by the foreskin; Lastly, the ineffable Iehovah, who is above all Names in heaven or earth, is called IESVS.
IT was, and is ordinary with God to rati|fie his pretious promises to the Church, by appending signs as seals, reason it self being dim, except the eye perceive something il|lustrious, or takeing in things purely natural, how much more in spiritual the bow in the cloud, the dew in Gideons fleece, the change of Abrahams name, the whole pedagogy of Law, and among others this sign of Circumcision, held in so great veneration as to be reckoned above, that is, greater then the Law, for it was before the Tables, preferred to the Sabbath, for even on that day it was not to be omitted, hence S. Paul wisely ca|veating the Philippians, Philip. 3. against its use, reflects not upon the word, yer pres|seth its neglect, and chargeth warrinesse un|der the notion of Concision.
Being then purely a pareing or cutting of the flesh, not a sign of the Covenant, which as such, not only with Iews, but with Arabs, Mahumetans, Phenicians, is in high regard unto this day; though some more Barbarous

derids even its institution, suggesting it un|table, to the benignity of a merciful God, to delight in beholding bloud issuing from the oins of a tender Baby, and to injoyn it, un|der so severe a penalty as Cutting off: But this is to be wise above whats written, for to passe the Law-giver who is not obliedged to demonstrat by reason the equity of his Man|dats, to any, much lesse to such, who have forfeited their being to his justice, the speci|ality of its rise was to discriminat Gods own people from Ethnicks and Pagans, for which if man will be at no cost, he is very churlish, or at no pain, he is very selfish, and in these days gratulation is most becomeing, since God in place of Circumcision in our own bloud, (which as a Iudge in matters crimi|nal he required of our forefathers) alloweth, yea commandeth us, that of water, expec|ting in the Mystery but cleanlinesse of us, as a distinguishing character.
AGAINST sin; of old the adult whether men, or women, had a Sacrifice, but that being in the young also whether Male, or Female, God accepted a few drops of bloud from the Male, (when all was due) as an expiatory offering for both sexes, in their nonage, so that in this Circumcision, said of Mercy and Iudgement will I sing, Psal. 101.1.
WE have seen God contracted into a Man, let us see that Man contracted in his parts, and behold why he was circumcised, and why so named at his Circumcision.
VIEW the causes of his birth, and it's sai'd to be for us, Luk. 2. and as for himself, he was not born, so nor circumcis'd; for nei|ther he nor his Parents sinned, in God his Fa|ther there was no sin, in Mary his Mother no offence, (i. e.) in her conceiving, neither was there any guile in his own heart, so that he needed not, be circumcis'd, his being born without original guilt, infallibly removeing the merits of the smart, that principally eye|ing the pollution transmitted by, and con|tracted upon ordinary generation; upon which score the Baptist pleaded, his no need of bap|tism, but contrary he of his: Math. 4.13. unto which, our Saviour yeelded as a Truth: but requested of him a sufferance for that time that he (viz.) Christ might fulfill all righ|teousness, (i. e.) both of Law and Gospel, that sinners of all sorts might equally adore, and accept of him as Saviour, sanctifying in his own person, the signs exhibited to each assureing reconciliation begun; clearing that not offence, but his condition, as a man requir'd Iohns connivence, his own condescendence being in these words, It becometh us; that

is, both me, and thee; for as he took upon him the form of a servant, so was he to sub|mit to such; as were superiors, which is righ|teous, yea the hight of righteousnesse, all righteousness; for being found as a man, a sinful man, was it not expedient in point of honour, to submit to this law, for rendring himself more capable of converts, and more amiable of conversse? for what could now be judged would be the issue of an unbaptiz|ed Evangelist but scorn and contempt, for building up of that, in Doctrine, which in his own practice he disdained to stoup unto?
BESIDES he had took upon him the seed of Abraham, and purposed (as the Messiah ought) to be so accounted, for fit|nesse therefore (though not for necessity to) his grandour, he received the impresse of the Circumcision upon his flesh, whereof GOD himself was the institutor, elucidly discover|ing thereby to the Prophets of the Christian faith, the end of his mission; to be the ful|filling and ending of the Law, unto which Circumcision so eminently had made them debters, being now exempted from its bon|dage, Christ himself having undergone it and institued baptism a more easy, sweet, com|fortable Sacrament in it's place, being Cir|cumcis'd through infinit wisdom, for the

same cause that Paul baptiz'd Timothy, even to abolish Circumcision, Acts 16.3. which was to endure no longer then the use, for which it was appointed, did endure, and that was to difference Jew and Gentile, which distinction Christ removeing legal Circumcision, as well as priesthood, was to be changed and laid aside. Gal. 3.
The Cabalists finding the history of Miri|ams death, to succeed the laws referring to the red heifer, or Cow, Numb. 19. infer, the laws binding up, at the approach of the Messiah, that the heifer did typifie the ruddi|ness, sanguinolency, or bloodiness of a Saviour is a truth to be attested, but that the Prophe|tess death was a prototyp of the Laws depar|ture, is not so easily to be granted; yet this is clear, that as Abraham, ordered his ser|vant in swearing to put his hand under the thigh, whence the Son was to come, in whom all was to be blessed, and that Son to be GOD also is evidenced in the addition of the letter be to the name of Abraham, taken from Gods own name Iehovah, so our Lord the Son of God the Son of Abraham that ordains that by, faith which Abraham had, when uncircumcis'd which was in himself, we should know, whence we are hewn, even from himself, whose name is upon his thigh, Revel. 19. by spiritual ge|neration,

consequentialy receiving the bene|fit of Sonship from both, not in that legal, but in this mystical begetting, by vertue whereof as he, we are the Sons of Abraham not of his flesh, but of his faith, and such are still dfferenced, and separat from Infidels, and Cananits of the world, not by the Pale of Circumcision, but the waters of Baptism, Gala. 3.27 in which, as in Noahs ark, we are secure from that deluge, shal fall upon the ungodly, and liberat from that bondage which the Iews, as servants, as Scholars, were under, as sons of the flesh of Gods servant A|braham, and as Children of Iesus the beloved Son, hath the knife turned into water, and what the edge of the former could hardly cut off, is now by water and grace easily wash'd away.
THEREFORE our Lord was both cir|cumcis'd, and baptiz'd; as being prince both of Law and Gospel, and a corner-stone, for uniting Iew and Gentile in one unto him|self; receiving Baptism last, saying by that, of it, unto the Church, as of the other Sacra|ment, take ye all of this; do this in remembrance of me; and of Circumcision, first, because made of a woman under the Law; hence is he cal|led the Minister of the Circumcision, being under it, and preaching actually, personally,

to the partakers of it, the promises being made to such; whereas to the Gentiles, there was no such obligation of his truth; yet by Grace, did perswade to an entrance into the Covenant, by his Messengers and Prophets, Rom. 15.8. Mystically seen in his ver Baptism receiving it from Iohn, by Bethabera, in the river of Iordan, Iohn 1. somewh above the place where the priests of the Lord stood with the ark, while Ioshua and th camp of Israel more southward passed over into the promised land, where he circumcsed the people, Christ being the substance o that very ark of the Covenant, he being t mean, for reconcileing unto God both nations, beginning with circumcision, which h received in Isaac, untill he suffered in him, fulfilling the figure; wherefore we are said to be circumcised with the Circumcision mad without hands, obtaining the benefit promised unto it another way then by bloud.
PROVIDENCE, like the goodman of th house, knowing not only when, but how, th thiefes would enter, frustrats by Circumcision their design, who should a vouch our Sa|viour not to have had a real, corporal, but an aerial, or phantastick body; for as Alex|ander proved himself unto his flatterers to be no God, because when wounded he bled, so

the Gospel cleares him to be no phantasme because of the prepuce, and by it casts a mist in the Devils way to abate his fury, that though he might know the Angels revelation; yet as truly again, he might infer him guilty of sins tincture, which Circumcision did mainly respect: wherefore we read of no great rage, that either Satan, or Man, had against him, untill his Baptism, being then more clear because of the voice from heaven: yet still was there some dimnesse of his per|fect Deity, as appeareth in the first tempta|tion, Mat. 4. Our Saviour as a war-like Prince in his enemies country, cloathing himself in the robes of that country, to passe the more securely undiscerned, and (pardon so strong application) to destroy his adver|saries the more surely, and make them inex|cusable.
WHAT more? the ends and uses inten|ded by God, and the profits or benefits re|ceived by the Church, in the Circumcision were of old comprised in this distich, and, applied to Christ, are proper;
Cauterium signum meritum Medicina Figura,
Exemplum fuit olim Circumcisio dura.
AND as an issue or cauter it emitteth

putrid matter from the body, was a Charac|ter or badge of discriminating the people of God from the worshippers of Idols, and to them also represented their merits for sin committed, which in justice might have made the whole man to be cut off, by which it proved Medecine or physick, some say a|gainst the Carbuncle; sure it is, it figure lust in the Soul, and shewed what puri ought to be in the heart, the corruption thereof, being moraly evacuated, and caus|ing each one become a good example to ano|ther of continence and vertue.
BVT the design in the Circumcision  the Son of God, was for the fulfilling of t Law, which he came to do, Mat. 5.  again to abolish the law, which as a shadow went before him the body, untill he wa incarnat, which being done, as a shadow must go behind, and at his ascending, vani away, he himself being the substance of th shadow, perfecting throughly what it in  only endeavoured, therefore must  children of Israel, (according to the  Ios. 5.) be circumcis'd the second time,  this Ioshuah, to whose law, according t Moses doctrine, they have been circumcis once, but these leading them by Faith  Christ in the Gospel, they must undergo cicumcision

the second time; by which their reproach shall only be rolled away, and their ga|thering together to be glorious.
YET subordinat to this, it is worth considering, that he opened himself unto this first fruits of his suffering, for the same cause he payed tribute, (viz.) that he might give no occasion of offence, that all might splen|didly adapt themselves, for obedient walk|ing, and not justle with Superiors upon ac|count of priviledges; wherefore we should hammer our pernicious designs, and curb our extravagant affections, not as untamed heifers in a conceit of our own worth, plead immunity from law, or from premisses of Dignity, Excellency, Piety, Liberty, or Birth|right, maintain a disorderly carriage, Christ presenting himself in this as a Samplar, for us to work by, as a rule to act by, as a law, oblidg|ing us to conform, yeelding to those in autho|thority, and laws in force though in all things we be gratified; nor in all parts there be no necessity for them, hence he is said not to be born but made under the law, Gala. 4. where|as we are not made but born, and ought the rather to be Subject.
THIS Sun of righteousness rising in a red cloud, caveats against murmurings, com|plainings; having something in it, to be seen,

to be loved, and also to be imitated induceing to a Circumcision of the foreskin of our heart, the badge of Gospel mortification, and teck-merion of self denyal, his bloud and name hinting at salvation even from our selves.
STEPHEN chargeth his impenitent country-men with Vncircumcised hearts and ears, by which he understands the whole man; Ears implying their hearing such doc|trine as tended to depravement, Hearts; insinu|ating their peculiar kindnesse and approbati|on of it, to that height, that the eyes beheld it as delectable, the palat as delicious, the hands as prosperous, the feet as an easy journey so that heresie, impurity, vanity, iniquity, sensuality, with practice without consideration, become the love of him who is carnal, and prevails to seduce the undiscerning, to the subsequent way of ungodly folly, the whole Man be|comeing prize to the Tempter, for all irregu|larities, the universal intendment of the Soul being Guadrat to the appetits of the corrup heart, which therefor is to be keep'd, that is circumcised above all things, Prov 4.23 by which the eyes shall let in no vanity, and the ears be stopped, that is circumcis'd, against rotten communication, the Spiritual Palla shall taste and see that God and his ways are only good, the lips shall be preserved from

lying, and the tongue from speaking guile least at any time we grieve the Holy Ghost, Eph. 4.30.
WE find upon record an universal Circum|cision of the whole Tribs at one time, by knives or sharp flint stones, Ios. 5. that service be|ing omitted in their travel through the wildernesse, not, because the northwind blew not, for scattering the cloud, which had been inconvenient, as the Iews foolishly suppose, holding that wind most seasonable for Cir|cumcision, but through their unfitness to ad|mit the same, in regard of tedious, and un|comfortable travels, which being ended and the holy land entered, God thought it expe|dient no longer to be delayed, and therefore ordered Ioshua no more to procrastinat or put off, shadowing that such who would pos|sesse Jerusalem the holy City,  spoyl the po|tent adversaries of our rest in succesful battels, must by faith in Christ the rock, make holo|causts, that is, burn'd offerings of beloved lusts, though as near, or dear, as the skin it self, by declining from evill, and doing good, keep|ing the soul from rapin, bloud, covetous|nesse, and wrath, solicitously by the sharp and two edged sword of the word of God, which Christ brought into the world, restraining every thought, and bring it captive to the

Laws of piety and sound reason, that being a discerner of the thoughts, and intents of the heart, a divider betwixt the soul and sin.
CIRCVMCISION being nothing but a purgation of the soul from vice, which who so scruples to deposit, must not be reckoned among the faithfull, but as uncircumcised, be deny'd entrance into the holy temple, the holy Citty, holy IESVS being only King of the Iews, that is, of the Circumcision, not of the letter, but of the Spirit, not of the Body, but of the Inward-man, and the precept being given to Ioshua, intimats, that as death and lust enter'd upon all by one MAN, we are not free from either untill by his Antityp Iesus, we be redeemed from our actual, or origi|nal transgression, by applying faithfully his life, and bloud, as expiatory for sin, deny|ing ungodliness and worldly lusts, which is a deliverance from our vain conversation; and in one sense, a being crucified to the world, and in another, Cicumcised in our foreskin, they being; (with some, as it) superfluous and no way necessary for felicitating soul or body.
THE Hebrews say, Sem was born cir|cumcis'd and he was happy, but that the fore|skin is not necessary, is figured in the eight day, seven being allowed in proportion, and

revolution of time to all in common; but the right, is that eternal day, expected by the Elect, and forestall'd already in those occult joys, which emerge from liveing Soberly, Righteously, and Godlily, in this present world, and their names being written in heaven, con|templats upon the felicity, their Spirit shall possesse the week of this wearisome world, being brought to its final period.
IT is said of Severus, that no day passed wherein he did not something that was good, and beneficial to others, and without much arguing its evident, how soon our Lord am|ply discovers earnestnesse, passionatly to offer himself a Lamb indeed for the sins of the world in his yeelding so easily, so suddenly to breath a vein, (as a wise Physician) for the cure of his mystical body; (now in a Spiritual) raveing and sinfull feaverish distemper; Man go thou and do thou likewise, do good, and yet more good, and by whom thou art ac|counted base, of them at last, thou shalt be had in honour; God incarnat having here begun, to lay down his life for thee, be not ashamed to lay it down for another, at least estimat what can be done for thy Brother, and reckon that to be a debt, due from thy Savi|ours stupendious humility.
WE mistake, if we conclude our selves

heavenly born, untill as heaven, we influ|ence the Earth with benign aspects, and Eight times, or days, or duties must passe over us, before we ought to repute our selves of the seed of the faithfull or circumcis'd: for in the opinion of Holy Bernard, we must first be just in our dealings with men, he who would raise high,  must build low, and Ia|cobs ladder had its foot on the Earth: another is, the avoiding of Fellowship with evil men, Christ was separate from sinners, and his fol|lowers must hate the Congregation of wick|ed doers: A third is, watchfulnesse, and ob|servance of Enemies, Our Saviour not being ignorant of Satans devices, disappointed his stratagems, he left him unresolved of his be|ing the Son of God in the wilderness, and of his wanting original sin by Circumcision in the Cradle, and in both prevail'd. Another is, Sobriety as becometh men, the Believers life is a warfare, and if lust, pleasure, or cares of this world overcharge that day may come unawares upon us, Luk. 21.34. Another is, patience in all things we suffer among men, for a few evill days, we must neither with Cato, put out our lives, nor with Thrasillus run out of our wits, but keeping a good heart, we shall never want a place, not to say, a whole wherein to hide our head. Another is,

Humility, Our Lord humbled himself to the Death, and that the soul with Mary be ex|alted, Remember he visited her in her low e|state, Luk. 1.48. The seventh is, Piety and Devotion, in which by contemplation the Chil of Grace, celebrating a Sabbath by resting from works of sin, and walking with God, ought not to be reckon'd a Son of Be|lial, but as on the eight day, declared by the Angel of a good Conscience, or rather is by the Priest of the new Testament, called the Son of God, and gets a new name which none knoweth but he that hath it, Revel. 2.17.
THERE are who will have the eight day to imply the eight ages of the world, reckoning the first from Adam to Noa, the next from him to Abraham, the third from him to Moses the fourth from him to David, the fifth from David to Christ, the sixh from Christ to the end of the world, the seventh to the Dead, the eight represents the Resur|rection, at which time all the true sos of the Faithfull, shall receive their true name and true inheritance, in being saved from their sins, and approved for their Sanctity; But the more sound, and far more probable ground for fixing upon the eight-day, was, because of the infants strength, being then more able to bear the sharpnesse and smart of the knife,

then when newly born, and yet not after the eight day, for they growing stronger, and imagination more forcible, the pain had been greater, that time was therefore chosen, when the skin as more tender, could renew and repair it self; but it is nice, that to this day, the Iews circumcise none; but on the eight day; that is to say, never at night, how|ever it be, it's said, that the pain is greatest on the third day; nature tending then to a healing, for which cause Simeon and Levi slew the Shechemits, according to which its given out, that the three offended in each sin, viz. our selves our neighbour and our God; the third and last is the forest, and its remembrance most dejecting, as appears from Davids confession, in matter of Vriah, and Iosephs admiration in the temptation of his Mistris.
THOVGH I conjecture not that the eght day, was allowed for the body of the infant to be inflenc'd by the seven planets yet according to the Doctor of that Philosophy, concluding the sun to operat upon the head and heart, we may alludingly teach, that the beams of the sun of Righteousness, must shine and opera upon the head  heart of Adams Sons, before they can have a living Soul, or be brought forth in the second birth; yet, let

none pin their abideing in pollution upon God, for the Sun beams shine in the Ministry of the Gospel; but many as the swine in a hot day, tumbles the more in the pudle, and what is vitiously observed of circumcised nations, as Egyptians, Saracens, that no people is more lascivious, may shamefully be applied to Christians; none being more filthy, more unclean then they, who have been washed, being the more defi'd thereby, that they commend it, yet mockingly rise not from forbidden pleasures, from condemn'd delights; Mahomet in a great measure encourageing those passions, allays the guilt of his Dis|ciples; but being discharged by Christ, by Christians are to be the more abhorred.
THE Iews circumcised but in one part, and that part by which the whole body is most defiled, where lust, and luxury tyran|niz'd and play'd rex; but the Christian must be circumcis'd all over, to extinguish, not only the heat, as by pores; but the very sum of uncleannesse, in his eyes for restraining Vanity, in his ears for debarring obscenity, in his tongue withdrawing from ribbaldry, in his hands by shutting out iniquity, in his whole person and converss, laying aside all super|fluity of naughtinesse (for that as the cir|cumcised part, may be well spared) least

emasculating themselves, they walk as the Daughters of men, that is, not worthy of God, that is, not as his Son our Lord Iesus, who being to introduce a new doctrine into the Church, of Faith, and Love, got in a new day, and as is supposed the first day of the of the new year, a new name, and was cal|led Iesus not by chance, or choice, but according to the order of the Angel before he was conceived in the womb, which fights a|gainst and impugns our old courses, pregnant|ly inviting to a new and holy life, for matri|culating, or ingrafting our selves, in a real, not nominal, Spiritual, not political, and in|nocent, not blasphemous, way to the Socie|ty of Iesus,
TO work a cure against the distempers of the whole body of the Church, was the head thereof, as about this time, let bloud, and by whose vein breathing, the body be|cometh more agile, and every member more apt, to exercise it's peculiar office, for the good of the whole: therefore, ought all, as spiritual Eagles, (a bird who by casting her feathers, and breaking her old bill, occasions a fresh growth, and repairs her strength) to arise from old, and dead works, Mount towards the heaven in new desires, and new affecti|ons, testifying both, by new lives, unto

which this Child, this name Iesus, strennous|ly attract's, there being in it, when opened, a treasury of all riches, a ganer of all provi|sions, and a ware-house of all excellencies, sounding first from an Angels mouth into a Virgins ear, nothing but what was heavenly and of a heavenly vertue, being fit to express it, or capable to apprehend it.
ITS true, we find some of this Name besides him, yet of such eminency, as demon|strated them forerunners (i. e.) typs of this Ie|sus, it is of the same root, and sense with that of Ioshua who was Captain of the Lords host, and possessed Israel of the holy land, another was a holy and high priest separat for expia|ting the sins of the penitent delinquent Zach. 3.1. And to passe the Apocriphal Iesus, who yet was a wise and prudent teacher, we have mention of another Iesus, Colos. 4. a compa|nion of S. Paul, and fellow-labourer with him in the Kingdom of God; it was in short a common, and an honourable name among the Iews, but out of veneraion to our Lord Iesus not now used in the Church.
NAMES of old have been adopted by Friends, or parents, according to the hope conceived of the person named, or by some accident about him, or done by him; but none of these here, for our Saviour was seen by

by none when he was named, nor thought upon by any when he was called Iesus, a Sa|viour, not from hope, which still includ fear; but from assurance that he should save his people from their sins, which untill revealed, might be unknown, even to the Angel who brought the message, so that nothing of the creature was instrumental in this nomination, but purely drawn from the benefits should accrew unto the world through him, which obiter and by the way, enforceth parents to elect such names as may import to their pos|terity some duty, befitting them, that their names may teach sanctity and true piety for as if something had been in that name Ioshu|ang, or Iesus, we read not of their sins, not of their scandals, as we do of other's; we have Iudah's incest, Solomons apostacy, Da|vids adultery, and Iudas the traitor, as if Salvation in the others name had transfus'd it self working detestation of prophane cour|ses; Adam named his wife Evah because she was mother of all living, and the name Ga|briel enforceh the bearer to be a man of God, the name Nicholaus to overcome the people in good, Iohn to walk graciously, William couragiously, Thomas to behold each man as a brother, the word importing a twin, such are good, and sutes Christianity, whereas

Hercules, a sturdy heathen, Lout, Diana, a fam'd huntresse, savours (pardon my bold|nesse) not of the font, not of the Laver of Regeneration, not of baptismal water, and therefore to be retir'd, least Mars, Iupiter, Vulcan, and other names of Baal, defile the Baptistry, the name Patience: I cannot con|clude ill, but that Femal one, of Faith, in my judgement is to be avoyded, as all o|ther that in any direct way, tends either, to sin or revieve the memories of the prophane.
WHICH evill, the name Iesus, in it's ve|ry initiatory letters doth abrogat, and cancel, improving the Saints, in all degrees, to the highest blesse of Saintship, speaking Iucun|dity, or gladnesse to the sorrowfull Eterni|ty to the mortal, Sanity, or health to the languishing, Vtility, or profit to the poor, Satiety, or plenty to the hungry; in Greek it's anagram'd,  thou art the sheep, or lamb, viz. which is given for the sins of the world; it is oft writ in 3 letters thus, I. H. S. Iesus Hominum Salvator, shewing the Salvation he brought to man-kind, and thus drawn in the body of the Sun, is it the armes, and publick seal, of the segniory of Genevah, shewing her light, to beam from the rays of this Sun of righteousnesse, her inscription about that, being, Iesus, Sol,  Scutum meum, Jesus

is to me, both a Sun and shield; but others expresse thereby, his Innocence, Humility, Sublimity, he not being conceived in sin; yet under-went death for sin, and because, he, is man, is made Lord of all things.
GIVEING of names, is a sign of authori|ty and dominion, and given by Jewish Fathers at Circumcision, as we do now at Baptisme, it's the first act of jurisdiction Fa|thers exercise over their Children, the Scrip|ture shewing plainly in Abraham, and Za|charias, that the Mother hath no right to impose them, and if they do, the Father may alter them; as in the History of Benjamine is conspicuous, he being never called Beno, and though the Mothers name should stand, in holy writ it is to be understood by the Fa|thers indulgence, as is famously clear in the Register of Leas fruitfulnesse, her husband gratifying her in that particular, and not without reason, but this name Iesus was not imposed by Ioseph, who was no father, no by Mary though a Mother; but by God, who hath power over Christ as man, and exercis'd the same as a Father; before his birth, that he who is the King of Kings, and Son of God, might not be made subject to his parents; but so far as his own knowledge, discretion, or goodnesse, in riper years, should

concede unto, as is evident from several pla|ces, his subjection being commended, and, oman, what I to do with thee, being expres|sed.
YET to condemn the obstinat and re|fractory, this name is not publickly proclaim|ed from heaven; but given to Mary, and af|ter that to Ioseph, who gave it to his sup|posed Son, at's Circumcision, and by that name which his parents gave him, was he known in all the tract of his life, God in this occult way, preserving the order and ho|nour of paternity, disallowing such, who assume the boldnesse to rebaptize themselves; and write new names which their parents knew not.
HE is by the Holy Ghost, yea by men, sometimes called Iesus, sometimes Iesus Christ often our Lord, sometimes this, and again that other name, every one of which, have some peculiar eye, to some relation he bear|eth towards the Church, and in all those glorious precepts for divine celebrating the Supper, that is, the holy communion of the Church, by S. Paul, he speaks of it in that style, that would hardly make that phrase the cup of Iesus, the death of Iesus, to be pro|per, speaking constantly of the Lord as the Lords Death, the body and bloud of the Lord,

a word importing the founder of that com|munion, and fellowship we have with the Father, from which this may safely be drawn, that men should discreetly expresse the tittles gven to their Saviour? It is a truth, that some have spoken of him under Epithets purely, that is, scripturally applicable to the Father, to the Spirit, to an Angel.
THE most celebrated tittles are Iesus, Christ, and the Son of God, this last, when Iews deny him, mock, raile, reprobat, laugh at him, c. is proper to use, Christ intima|ting his anointing, hinting at the means, whereby he saved us, as preaching, fighting, conquering is pertinent for us; the Son of God he is called, being very God, of very God, the second as he is Man. God by assuming hu|manity; but his name Iesus represents him God joyned to humanity, united to the hu|mane nature, and here wisely given, yea be|fore haveing three times been so named (viz.) at his conception to Mary, next to Ioseph  a dream, and lastly at Circumcision, for then they called his name Iesus a name majestick, a name consolatory, holding forth his Deity for besides this Lord, there is no Saviour and his Humanity also, for by it, he mak|eth propitiation for our sin, nay we find it i other writtings, not removing, but prevent|ing

sin; even that of robbery: for a paddist, or High-way-man, attempting to spoil a preacher, ordering him to stand, and asking what he was, was answer'd I am a the servant of the Lord Iesus, the Paddist trembling at the answer, said again, what are you? and had the same answer, and so a third, the Robber as amaz'd, forgot both bloud-guiltinesse, and covetousnesse, and called to his unjustly de|tained Captain, for the sake of Iesus depart in peace; and ruminating to himself whose ser|vant he had been, in this debauch'd trade of life, being cogitabund, cryed out, Iesus, Ie|sus, Iesus, blessed be the name of Iesus, who hath keeped me from sin, and forsakeing that course of life walked after in the path of ver|tue.
LET none inquire touching the utmost extent of this name, since it's secret and won|derfull, Iud. 13.18.19. above all mans conception, and expression, having not un|der it the name or shadow, but the essence, and verity of all Salvation; yet know he is not called Iesus, because he saves from war, or sword, for these may be good but from sin, which can never be but ill, therefore it com|forteth the heart when opened, delighteth the Ear when hearkned, pleaseth the mouth when expressed intimating, from sin freedom,

and predicts glory, in place of misery; But yet, not by the aiery sound or letters thereo whether utter'd, or impress'd, for the Devil spake it to Christ himself, and had a finger in the py, when it was writ upon the crosse but when applyed by faith, and conforming to the Doctrine of him who bears it, as he who learning and studying Iesus well, pro|posed to himself for a Coppy, a meek man,  humble man, a sober man, a chast man, merciful man, and finally, a man endued with all honesty, and full of all sanctity, which is a sweet way to make him to every man Iesu (i. e.) a Saviour, that he as being Almight God, created them, so as Iesus that is Go and man, may redeem them from this present evill world, by his omnipotent unspeakeable goodness, compassing  strengthning by his me|diatory office what ever is his own within the oul  abolishing by his Royal power Christ-like vertue what ever besides that, the heart hath contracted,  to prevent relapsing let the man Iesus be our example, and Iesus God your chief support, leaning upon him as your beloved, and the name Iesus shall assure sal|vation, secure heaven, not otherwise.
THE name Iesus is admirable, for by it all wonders have been wrought, and because of it all Devils trembled, it's, also amiable,

sinners having by it been justified, righteous gladned, the dejected raised, and all that ever called as the blind-men, Iesus, thou son of Da|vid have mercy upon us, have been relieved: it's lastly laudable, for it's glorious, it's holy. it's new, it's exalted above every name, and the name that is given to us, for us, whereby only we can be saved, therefore glory ye in his holy Name.
REMEMBER you are his by purchase, be having redeemed you, not with corrup|tible things, as with silver and gold, but by his pretious blood, of which summ, he this day gave part in hand, as earnest, and payed the whole afterward, in grosse upon the Cross, and might there be not more, then a com|mon providence, that upon the first of Ianu|ary there should be fewer Martyrs in the primitive persecution, then on any other in the year, each day produceing when laid to|gether, five thousand save that; since the faithfull witnesse himself, by whose bloud their's was accepted, did, as upon that day, enstate us into the passage leading to the spi|ritual Paradice, by applying his merits in Circumcision, as the first fruits of the land or earnest of our forgivenesse; makeing hell to tremble as being spoyled of its Dominion, Earth to rejoice as being redeem'd to God,

and Angels, to triumph as being confirmed in righteousnesse: all which passionatly excits to a confession, that Iesus is the Christ, to the Glory of God the Father, makeing his Regi|men in our souls the more arbitrary, when by way of reserve we reflect upon that pur|pose of the Father, that every knee shall (mark the word shall) bow, that is, yeeld and submit to the name Iesus, that is, the power, authority, and Judgement of Iesus.
FROM the name Christ, are we called Christians, that implying both his, and our Unction, with the graces of the spirit, whence also came that name of the Messiah (i. e.) one that is anointed (viz) above his fellows, as Christ is said to be, Isa. 61. with gifts, not with material oyl which had been improper to him as a King, for his Kingdom is not of this world, or as Priest for he was not of the order of Aaron, nor as a Prophet for their un|ction shewed their lawfull successour, where|as he succeeded none, for all before him were thieves and robbers, Iohn 10. insinuating that all the Prophets were either after him, or came along with him, art thou the Christ said the Messengers to Iohn? is not this the Christ? said the woman of Samaria, that is, he who was to be the Messiah, the anointed one, and this name of Christian from Vnction

is most proper for men to use, they, if believ|ing receiving some measure of that holy oyl, the Spirit of God, which was given to him without measure, But some contrary to this name, delight in the word Catholick, and some of these Catholicks again, glorie in the ap|pellation Iesuits and both of these scandalous|ly use, some countries in particularly in Italy and in Rome it self, to make the glorious and honourable name of Christian, to signify an Idiot, a Dolt, a very fool, which shews their impious arrogance in boasting of what is pro|per to Rome, nor Romes Doctrine as now taught, the word Catholick being of no worth unlesse Holy be added, and their spiritualiz'd pride, in stamping the name Iesus, upon a few, making him the head of a faction assum|ing a name so glorious, so ineffable, as if salva|tion were only to be found in their colledges, and Christ himself to be only of their order.
GIVE us the name of Christian, signify|ing out hops in his Authority, and the sense of it also as heirs of his purchase, together with the obligation of it, as being bound to his doc|trine, chiefly  first in reprobating the worlds vanity: for, Io. 6.15. perceiving that they would come and take him by force to make him a King he departed, next strennously to exercise repen|tance, for he was the lamb slain, then fervidly

to exercise Charity, for he prayed for his ene|mies; and lastly studying purity, in the whole man for he taxed the Pharisees, for cleaning the outside of the Cup.
SO being Christians in truth let's leave others to boast of being Catholicks, and brag of their Iesuitism, we shal exult in our Lord Iesus Christ, honouring, revering, but not dareing to assume the name Iesus, there be|ing no other name under heaven by which we can be saved; Christian including only our duty obedience; and respect unto Christ; whereas Iesus imploys his office, and be|nifits towards us, and therefore no project, how devoutly so-ever carried on, ought to appear under that notion in the world; and truly the interpretation of the same, being known, the inapnesse thereof, as to Ignati|us Disciples would as clearly appear, as the incongruous name Cosmographers give to the Magelanican sea calling it Mare Pacifi|cum, that is, peaceable, whereas the Pilot finds it still rageing and stormy which they are, to that degree, that they are a burthen, a curse, and cursed by the generality of that Church, wherein they so monstrously breed; and if obedience, Laws, designs, scops, give names, they are neither to be called Ignatians nor Iesuits, but Popelings.
IESVS is his name, and Salvation is his office, and our profession proclaims our ac|ceptance of him for a Saviour; yet, who will enter a cut, or a bruise, because he hath a salve or oyntment? or break his arm upon confidence of a skilfull Chirurgeon? So no lesse warrinesse against offending, issueth from the knowledge of a born Redeemer, whom we are to use, not as Mountebanks for sale of their balsoms (viz) try his efficacy, or skill, by putting our selves upon spiritual haz|ards, and run risks in eternal concerns; but as wise men, avoid both danger, and infecti|on, and either happening, consult him, as we do a learned, wise Phisician, agait the impurity of our birth, unrulinesse of our les, and horrour of our death, against all which he is a Saviour and ready to help, for he was called Iesus.
IT hath been an old complaint, that the celebration of our Lords Nativity in these days, hath been polluted by Pagan-like be|haviour, as if by it, we had been liberate from God, Sabbaths and Temptations, and tyed to nothing but idleness, gluttonness and wantonnesse, not as God, but as if the Devil had been incarnat; and this is not of yester|day: for we find the Ancients exprobating the case with Christians, for their beholding, observ+ing,

some wanton rites of Ianus at this time celebrated; yet their zeal was attended with greater knowledge, then to raze these dayes out, or expunge them from the Kalendar; but rather their people from sin, the observation of which time being accounted by them (as it is yet, with the Churches of the Saints, at home or abroad reform'd) a godly, a goodly practice; the protestants in Holland, France, Switzerland, Germany, c. joins in this practice with the Church of old, and we as Brethren, ought in charity not to condemn them, though we withdraw our Amen. In not consenting to that observance.
LET us (abhorring the lasciviousnesse of the Gentile, the scandalous practice of the irreligious, equally avoiding the malicious|nesse of the Iew) serve the Lord with fear and rejoice with trembling, Circumcising our selves, in our flesh, externally, by seemlinesse in our apparel, to be in our actings irreprehensible, and in our speech, that it be not contemp|tible, and in the Spirit also internally, which consists likewise in three, as in our thoughts that they be holy, in our affections, that they be pure, and in our purposes, that they be ho|nest, all which is most necessary, though they may be thought severe, as was cutting off the prepuce of the foreskin under the Law by

 knife, importing how fast sin stuck, and how dear lust is,
BVT off it must, or we shall be cut off, rther then which, let it go, and as about this time there was for our good a new birth, a new mother, a new Son, a new Song, a new Marriage, a new Spouse, a new Brid, a new Testament, a new Inheritance a new Sacrifice, a new Sign, a new Child, a new Yar, we ought to have new lives, laying a|side the old leaven of malice, wrath, envy, and all uncharitablenesse, going beyond, that is, exceeding the superstitiousness, not to say the righteousness, of those Pharisees, the Iews, who will not eat what is either sour, or bitter, on their new-years-day, but sweet almonds figs, rasins, as also fish, a type of that candor inoffensivenesse, that they are to shew tow|ards all, the year after; before whom, their good works must abound and multiply, as fish in the Sea, that is, numerously; exercising our selves sincerely at all times, in the things that may accompany Salvation, and wherewith one may edifie another, unto which Circumci|on of old, did morally enforce, and Christs Baptism with ours also, doctrinally propo|seth.
IN the Kingdome of Portugal, there hath been for above three hundreth years, an

order of Knight-hood, entitled of Iesus Christ that King being Soveraign of the order, and held in great esteem, (not to sensure the Acts of Princes) if Cnicht, or Knight, in our old Saxon English be interpreted, a servant as Iames, and S. Paul were, of God and Christ, how soon might the rude swaine, the country lossel, the clownish Boor, the whistling plow|man the earthy drudge, find out a way, for nobilitating, his family and Gentilize|ing of himself, in observing the rules and orders, belonging to the badge, and pro|fession of the Gospel? Let those of Castile, passe for born Gentleman, the Bereans are far more honourable. Alexander and Nim|rod, may do great, strange and bloody feats, while Paul and Cornelius, keeping their bo|dies in subjection least they should be cast-aways more splendidly writs their name, and with a greater flourish in the volumns of repute.
TAKEING heed to Gospel rules, holy laws, observing the outgoings of the King of Saints, even of the paths, walks and orders of Iesus the Soveraign, and Heir of all things and Kingdoms, being King eternal, immor|tal, invisible, the only wise God, 1 Timo. 1.17. maketh the clown a Gentleman, the Gentleman a noblesse, yea all men from the basest of Pesants, Kings unto God the Fa|ther,

and younger brethren to our Lord, (that is, partakers of the whole inheritance with the Son) of which dignity if you be religi|ously ambitious, or earnestly covet after you shal do well; for Iesus then, in all cases, shall be a Iesus, that is a, Saviour in time of trouble.




MYSTERIUM PIETATIS OR THE MYSTERIE OF THE WISE MEN, Unfolded, and applied.

For Epiphany-Day Ian. 6. Tolbooth Ch. 1671
But preached-Sunday-Ian. 8. Tolbooth Ch. 1671


MATTH. 11.1.
Now when Iesus was born in Bethlehem of Iu|dea, in the days of Herod the King, behold there came wise-men from the East to Je|rusalem,
Saying, where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen his Star in the East, and are come to worship him.

_THOVGH it be said, that God is no respecter of persons; yet its to be understood, in his eternal decisi|on and sentenceing men to hap|pinesse, or misery, conform to the Regula|rity,

or extravagancy, of their actions; for otherwise, he eminently signalizeth some above the masse of plebeian beauty, by signs and wonders, makeing their ingresse to, or egresse from, the world prodigious, or au|spicious, by unusual occurrences; not to speak of the three Suns, which appeared when Nero entred upon government, or that fear|full comet some months before his slaughter, nor of that shining bright, before many lights of the Germain Church, were extinguished by death, as being portentuous: it is upon record, that glorious worthies, have been saluted at their births, by visions from hea|ven, auspicating the felicity of their govern|ment, grandour of their lives, and glory of their fame, as his late Majesty (to passe old and musty Registers) of glorious memory, journeyed from his Palace to Pauls Church, to render thanks, for the birth of a Son our present Soveraign, about ten of the clock May 29. in bright-day a star was seen to shine predicting as some then said, his out-shining and breaking forth at last, though for a time, he might be out-shined by another; not to comment, God doth not always speak by his Prophets only, but by the meteors, and elements likewise, in persons especially born for government; and if in persons meerly

temporal this be, what shal indicat to the world, the birth of the King of Kings rather then a goodly star, and that in the east? by whose rayes, the Religious Magi, whether by Day, or night could spel, if not read, the birth of the King of the Jews: for as there were many new things about, and at our Sa|viours birth on earth, and all wonderfull, as the Angels appearance, Zacharias dumbnesse, c. It was seemly that, the Heavens should also lift up their voice and declair, that won|derfull work of God, which lay in Iury; yet shined to Persia; coming to them who were nigh that they might be saved, and to them who were afar off that they might be re|deemed; Therefore there came WiseMen from the east, c.
HAVEING seen our Lord born for, and circumcised by the Jew we should wrong our selves, if we beheld him not worshipped by the Gentiles: for though Salvation be of the Jews, Iohn 4.22. yet it's effects are to the ends of the earth; at first, the Shepherds adored, here Philosophers are come to adore, they directed by an Angel, these conducted by a star both from heaven, to him, who was to unite them in one unto himself, and of them so united, as living stones to build a Temple for the Holy Ghost, that is, a Tabernacle for himself.
IN a Mystery behold Araunah the Je|busit offering gifts, and David the Jew, doing service to our God, for the health of both and salvation one of another; the Gentile exceed|ing the Jewish spectators, in his the Lord thy God accept thee, he knowing the Israelite to have (as he had untill the Gospel was re|vealed) a more peculiar interest in God, so Christ was King of the Jews, that is, emi|nently, but not only, for he was also the God and King of that King-like Araunah, a Gentile.
ONE day, (viz.) Ianuary the sixth, hath been fam'd among the Ancients, and it's first appearance highly rever'd, because of a four-fold miracle, wrought thereon, God even the Father proving as on a Theater the Di|vinity of Iesus his Son: for when he began to be about thirty years of age, and baptized in Iordan, the Trinity was discovered, the Fa|ther being in the voice, the Spirit in the lik|nesse of a dove, the Son in the flesh, and pro|claimed to be the Son, well-beloved; whence by them that day was called Theophania, the apparition of God (viz) from heaven, that same day of the next year, he at the Mar|riage of Cana of Galile turned water into wine, because of which, they called it Beth|phania, the appearance of God in the house;

On the same day next year, he fed the five thousand with five loaves, and two fishes, wherefore they called it Phagiphania, the appearance of God eating, or in eating: of this last there is some more scruple then of the other; but let him be Anathema that denyes the appearance of a star unto these Wise-men, which some will have to be shining, when this King was thirteen dayes old, others will have him two years old, however the day from this was called Epiphania, the ap|parition of God above or from the heavens, and this as being more sacred  more miracu|lous, the Wise-men seeing, believing, journy|ing, searching adoreing and offering, have in the Annals of the Church swallowed up, al|most all the other, that is, for the time, he be|ing adored now as God; which we find not to be done in the other wonders, by Jew, or Gentile, and the solemnity by the Ancients, in all ages, is especially observed upon that account; unto whose venerable, and gray-headed practice, we shall in all humility con|form, this universal Lord, and Sun of Righ|teousnesse, having a morning star in the East, giving intelligence of an approaching day for mans perfect Redemption, and by it good tydings to these Magi or Wise-Men, and by them to Ierusalem, and thence to all the

world, whereof we our selves are witnesses; and if I speak the language f the Prophet, Arise, shine, for your light is come, I hope you will obey the ensuing charge, and lift up your eyes, and see, and then as convinced shew forth the praises of the Lord, which is also foretold, and as Gentiles, come to the light, Isa. 61.
IT was said of Solomon the Kings of Tarshsh and of the isles shall bring presents, the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts; its true Tarshish was never a Kingdome, but by it is prophesied, what the rich Kings up|on the coast of the Red-Sea, near unto which Tarshish was a famous inland Town, should do, and what the Kings of Sheba a chief Cit|ty of Ethiopia, and Seba, another in Arabia Faelix, both famous for gums, and pretious stones, should perform as tributaries or as Favorites to Solomon, a Preludium of that homage and good-will, which the world owed unto, and should repay unto him, of whom Solomon was but a shadow, even to that King whom these Wise-Men come to worship.
LET us veiw these holy pilgrims, and their pilgrimage; in there came Wise-Men from the East, the place they travelled unto Ierusalem, their Question in that place, where

is he that is born King of the Iews? their er|rand with him, we are come to worship.
THEY are called Wise-Men of the east, otherwise Magi or Magicians, of old an ho|norable appellation, and applied not unto vizzarts, or negromancers, as now, but to the students of Philosophy and Mathema|ticks, observers of the motions and govern|ment of the Luminaries, Sun, moon, or stars, inferring conclusions for orderly walking in matters of regiment and intrinsick projects of state; and got that name from Meditation detecting and diveing into natures deepest secrets, foreseeing the probability of things,  were held, of old men of renown, by Indians call'd Gymnosophists with Grecians Philoso|phers, Caldeans in Babylon, Druydes in France Sapientes with the Latine, and with Persians Magi, who were of that high esti|mation, that none was thought worthy to reign, except he had studyed their art; and from their Colledges were persons taken, for being petty Princes, and governours of coun|tries, whence, it may be, sprung the conceit of these Magi, being reputed Kings.
WHENCE they came, is not yet deter|mined, some brings them from Caldea, they worshipping the stars, others will have them of Balaam, who prophesied of a star; There

are who fetch them from the utmost parts of the earth, its most likely they came from Per|sia, because of their gold incense c. of their motion it was east from Ierusalem, from their learning, there being in the Citty Susan, the Kings seat, near the Palace in a stately garden, a Philosophical Colledge of Magi, students of History, Philosophy and Divinity, with whom Daniel, Ezechiel, in the captivity conversing, and by their unwearied serious|nesse, in searching Records, and Antiquities, might arrive to the knowledge of much of the Law of Moses, the promises to Abraham, the truth of the Prophets, and of the ex|pected Messiah, which by the weeks of Da|niel might be by them now looked for; not omitting the wisdome, or direction of the most high, to those, whose acumen was to unty knots and Mysteries, qualifying them, to become tutors unto Daniel, in all humane literature, whose religious Zeal, in grati|tude might bequeath some of his spiritual in|structions, for their own, and others advan|tage, pairing off the excrescencies of their en|deared studies, by his life, wisdom and visi|ons, that they might be more intent upon that one thing necessary; whence in probability flowed at this time, their worshipping of Iesus; for they believed and therefore enqui|red, and therefore offered.
HAD they been called Philosophers it might have been conjectured, they came from Greece, but the term Magi, speaks them Persians, being given by that nation to per|sons studious of knowledg, only if the distance of Susa from Jerusalem be computed, which is 920 miles, it would be imagin'd they could not come so soon after our Lords birth, as our observance will allow, which is but 13 days: not to speak of the swiftnesse of Dromodaries, upon which in those countries men travel'd, the star might appear sometime before the birth, and in their travel, their stay in Je|rusalem, something more then a year might passe; for certain it is, that Herod, according to his information of the stars appearance, slew the Children of Bethlehem, from two years old and under and this interpretation seemeth more agreeable to the text; though it may be the star appeared not, untill the birth, and hast, care, zeal, with true piety, mght cause the journey to be expede in the alloted time, though in the appearance of the star, Herod might be mocked (there being greater slips not censured in Scripture, of more experienc'd Persons in Divinity,) the men wisely forseeing hazard to themselves, and danger to the bab.
TOVCHING their number, they being

called Wise-Men there can be no lesse suppo|sed then two, and in regard there are three sorts of gifts, some will have them so many men,  tell you a tale of 3. Kings of Evilah, where there is much gold, of Magonia where there is much frankincense, and are so wise, that Appellius, Amarius and Damascus must be their Hebrew names, Galgalath, Mega|lath, and Sarachin their Greek-names; Cas|par, Balthasar, Melchior, their Roman names: more then twelve I have not found them to be thought; it is likely there was a train, a retinue of the most curious, pregnant, devout, learned in the Society, with the worshippers, for they put all Ierusalem in an uproar, and Herod himself was troubled when the intelligence of the Shepherds but six miles off for ought we read was not so much as headed by either.
THE heavens to David declaired the the glory of God, and to the Magi the birth of his Son, the Jewish shepherds had an An|gel and tokens perswading them to belief, the Gentil Philosophers had only a star,  yet they believe, both seeing that one Christ, which was then born, and design'd a corner-stone for uniting these together; giving them his right and left hand, from the affection of his heart, both being now alike pretious to

him, because as they, he is the Son of Man. The Shepherds were nigh, the Magi a far off, yet both received, he moderating the Jews insolence, because of the synagogue, and il|luminating the Gentiles ignorance, because of his light, joining them, as one build|ing, himself as the corner-stone, both beau|tifying and strengthning the structure.
AND into this Church as into the house, with the Magi, let us enter, he being our Lord; and saluting him, let us worship, they opening the door for all nations, as Ambassa|dors of peace, offering to his greatnesse; the mercy of God in Christ giving ample assu|rance of reconciliation, to all offenders, though Magicians, Wizzarts, consulters of witches, as to Manesseh, when so wise as to lay aside the works of darknesse, and behold his wonders in the firmament of his works, and heaven of his word, wherein they shall perceive that Christ is born, that is, the pro|mised Messiah, in whom all the Kingdoms of the earth is, and was to be blessed; therefore in no Nation is there ground to despair.
AND though some degenerat from these their religious Gentile Ancestors, either by loyttering at home in their carnal security, purposing neither to take pains for, nor travel after salvation, or play at the door in their su|perstitious

formal idolatry; or Debauching within, by their scandals, and impure de|portment; yet having wise Preachers, ex|perienc'd in the study of heavenly Scriptures which as the star over the house, shew where Christ is to be found; let us unite in devotion, and being faithful, with the Saints, part with whatever lust is dear and sweet, knowing it is our wisdom so to do being Christ and his Gospel are above the price of all lusts, though supposed Rubies.
LET Herod be troubled, and great men moved against submission to the scepter of Christ, (for touch the Mountains they will smoak) and Jerusalems inhabitants be in an uproar, each one about his particular concern suggesting trouble and war by changeing of Kings and Governours, upon which (in all probability) their fear was grounded; for none went with the Magi from Ierusalem, either fearing to appear, despairing of suc|cesse, or for such like cause; yet this is but the course of wordly wisdom, which being Earthly, sensual, is to be avoided by the Man of God whom neither Herodians, of ambition, nor Ierusalemits of pannick fear so far shal obscure wisdom, or occasion de|filing of conscience, as to make him afraid of, or tremble to hear of Christs approach;

but rather calleth, why tarrieth the wheels of his Chariot, having a desire to be with Christ, obeys that sound, of heaven the charge of Ie|rusalem his Mother, the Church, going forth to meet this King, Cant. 3 11. now crowned in his cradle, and having heard of this in Ephrata, seeks and finds him in the wood of the Cratch, and ark of the Church, rejoyce|ing as they that find rich treasure; and good reason, for he is found in Bethlehem (i. e.) the house of bread, and under that notion, implys all happinesse to his visitants; to his Receivers, the tittle of life adding Eternity to his crums, which when enjoyed, the snars of death are avoided.
AS these Magi left Ierusalem a crafty Herod, the skilfull Scribs, who durst not de|ny what the Scripture recorded; yet shuned to believe what the Wise revealed, bringing damnation upon their souls, the more spee|dily, for their base ingratitude, the more de|sparingly for their great knowledge the more inexcusably for dissembling with Herod; so let us relinquish and turn our backs upon those Sirens, stopping our ears against the songs, and counsels, devices, secrets, that by the wicked witty, the demure in hypocrisy, the knowing in disobedience, are laid any way, to debar us from the regular path of Gods

revealed will; in persuance of enjoying that blessed sight, which is in the star light of a promise, offered to us, how difficult soever it may seem, to flesh and bloud, leaving the politick and carnal to their Interrogato|ries, their Questions, their fears their scruples, what may be? what shall be? rather then what is to be done? things; which is to be feared in our days, have made our Lord to go further from us then he was once, dare I name that place to be, in Egypt?
HERODS Hypocrisie made him pro|mise adoration, his timidity made him search and ask, not where the King of the Iews, but where Christ should be born? the Question to the Iews is made in privat, by the Gentiles it's made in publick, the reply represents and infers the Jews to have answered, where our Saviour, not where their's was to be born, be|cause they believed not in him, nor rejoy|ced at his birth nor travel'd to his lodging; and at this day for unbelief they are a scat|ter'd people through the earth, still behold|ing that faith published, and gloried in, un|to which they are enemies, which no doubt adds to their torture shame, despondency and grief having neither Temple Priest, nor sacrifice of their own, as other Nations, yea hardly retaining their name, but by a few ab|surd

and ridiculous ceremonies, for which being derided by all Nations, and accounted murtherers, Iesus being deemed innocent, increaseth their astonishment, and is recko|ned by Travellers, the formal cause of that pregnancy or rather subtility of wit, which proverbialy, is applied unto them, their Reli|gion putting them under a general odium, they are driven, to help them-selves by base shifts, whereby bandyting themselves against the rest of mankind, they are better studyed in malice and mischief, then other men, for which each Visier, and Basha of state in Turky, keeps a Iew of his privy Council, by whose malice, wit, experience, intelli|gence, it's thought most of that mischief is contrived, which is executed upon Christen|dome; yet at the same time, that Iew is so hated, that would I might die a Iew, if this be so, is one great curse in Turky, and he dare not, yea cannot become Turk, unlesse first Christ be acknowledged, a true Pro|phet, which still must edge his envy, and more ferment his spite.
IT is said one of these Magi was a Black Moor, and master-painter, limns ac|cordingly; but I shall not swear to the truth hereof, yet there can be no danger to main|tain to such who credite the report, that in

our addresses unto Christ, the outward ap|pearance, the difference of, or about things external, the clearness of the souls knowledge, or doubtings in the bosome, blacknesse of the soul, contracted by fear and horrour, or dwelling in the torrid zone of persecution, affliction, or desertion, as it ought not to de|ter from the embracements of our Lord, in the house of the Church, so neither in others, should it represent any cause, of interrupting their well intended progresse, in those reli|gious duties, of prostration, or adoration, since the Saviour of the world is an Advoca with the Father, speaking peace, and shal ac|cept of their attendance before the throne, in good and comfortable words; as be of good chear, thy sins are forgiven, whereby they shal not only be cloathed in white, but like David have a goodly and ruddy countenance, that is, be well favoured, in the serenity of a good conscience, marching forward toward their own, because desired, country, with as large strids of zeal affection and discourse; as amply how, and which way their ser|vice was accepted, prayers heard, doubts cleared, as any of them whose complexion, (i. e.) whose soul, at fist setting out, was of a more amiable colour, or allureing tem|per.
ARE there not persons, who with the Scribs can readily inform where Christ should be born, and that he is to be believed upon in faith working by Love; can talk of the Kingdom of God; tasting the powers of the world to come? by many fathoms go deeper, in the speculative parts of Divinity, speaking as if they had seen the Trinity, talk|ed with God, first take wing; and then flee, out of the sight of ordinary capacities, pro|nounceing words in talents of election, the Sons mission, Antichrists destruction yet in the mean time as great strangers from true worshippers, as the black Ethiopian (yea perhaps more) whose Divinity may be is no higher then the star light of dim nature, dicta|ting unto them an, unknown God, whom yet knowingly they might worship; And should we meet with these men, we might with the Magi get a true answer and sound direc|tion, burthensome enough also, yet with the Magi again, must serve him with solitary de|votion, those Pharisees refusing, to touch the enjoyned load with one of their fingers, that is, in the least, to walk according to those impositions they in a pretended strictnesse recommend to others.
IN all Zedekia's Court, there was none pleaded for, nor pittied Jeremiah; in the

Dungeon, but the black Emedmlek only, the star was unseen to the Magi, while in Ierusalem, yet none of Ierusalem goes to worship, but they of Persia only, whose gifts when baby Iesus received, he might have said, what afterwards he did, in riper years, Verily, I have not found so great Faith, no not in Israel; the forementioned pretenders to Sanctity like the Scribs resting upon notional acquaintance with things divine, pursue their own particular; and in the end con|clude their peace, not once going forth to negotiat for, or seek after, the pearl of price, contained in Christ, and in his merits; and it's to be feared, that young Indian Christi|an, in the story, (I call him young, because but two years old in Christianity) who being asked what sin was? answered, It is a con|tinual sicknesse in my heart, shal condemn thou|sands, that wonderfully can expatiat upon, it's being a transgression of the Law.
FIND we not ignorance, attended with fervid desires, of knowledge, in the Magi? where is he say they who is born King of the Iews? which is yet infinitely prefer|able to the knowledge of the Iews, at|tended with supine sloath, being but a key they put in the hand of others, for opening a door of Salvation; yet not offering to turn the same for their own en|trance

into blesse, discovering as the Angel to Hagar the fountain of life to others, yet dy|ing of a desperat drought themselves; happy these pilgrims, though not knowing, yet asking where their Lord lay? happy the ig|norance of those infants that dyed for him; yet inquir'd not after him, but cursed be that knowledge, that can, as a statue, demon|strate the way to the citty of refuge; yet stand still, or as the Gnomen on a dyal shew how the Sun moves, yet still remain fixed to the plate; in Ierusalem the Prophets speak are heard, and understood, but not obeyed, in Susa the star is seen, and followed, knowing more by, and fearing more for, that, then they by the other, fulfilling that of the Prophet, For that which had not been told them, shall they see, and that which they had not heard, shal they consider, Isa. 52.15.
INDEED they had considered so well, that they question not of Christs being born, though they found him not in Ierusa|lem, the likliest place, in the whole world for to find the King of the Jews, the Citty of the great King, and justly now expected to have been the joy of the whole Earth, their old Kings being dead, strangers rule|ing, and a King of their own country born, and in it, among them, unto them, and not to be found in Ierusalem? is strange! and yet

it's not strange, to see Adams Sons, when leaning to their own understanding in finding out, or searching after, the marrow, con|tained in the cavity of things mysterious, to be as it were befool'd, the plain Shepherds in Bethlehem, instructed from above, had broke this bone where is he? and saved much cost, care, and it may be lives, for that Ierusalem had been a citty of bloud, that it's temple was prophan'd, that the Law was corrupted, and in a word, that true Piety was banished it's gates, that Bethlehem Ephrata, where David was anointed the second time, South of Ie|rusalem was to be the place of the nativity was not clear, or it may be, not known; but that he was born they knew, and that he was not heeded they wondred, where is he?
Condemning the Iews, that being subjects to others (for it was in the days of Herod the King) should know nothing of their own King, whom they, though strangers came to worship, let Herod be troubled, or the Syne|dron either whom likely they went first unto, they say we are come from the east to worship your King, and as unwearyed we are still up|on search, you that are wise, and understand these things, where is he? and knowing where delays not, the meannesse of the house, the poornesse of the furniture; yea the mean|nesse

of the dresse, staggering them not into unbelief, and really, it's faith in the truths of God, that holds out longest, and only un|belief makes men blind, neither now nor then is the union of the Gentiles to the Tribs yeelded unto, (which might be one motive for the Scribs not to travel with the Magi) or that Iesus is the Christ, though Moses be read every Sabbath in their synagogue, in which they read Moses to Mary an Ethio|pian woman, that Iaphet must dwell in the tents of Sem, though in Abraham all the nations of the Earth were to be blessed, Mel|chisedeck to be priest of the most high God, though Rahab the Harlot was saved, and converted at Iericho, though Iethro was Father in Law to Moses, though Moses spake of a Prophet, and speaks of the Scep|ers departing from Iudah, which it was, when these men came from the east for Herod was King, and that Christ was that Melchi|sedeck read of in the Synagogue, offering in Bethlehem, the house of bread; the bread of life, and not of that in Iudah, but of that in Ephrata, (i. e.) fruitfulnesse, having store of all fruits, and what if I say of the Vine, to offer them as Melchisedeck; if they will en|counter the Kings of their lusts; the reign|ing of sin within them; but all these will

not do, they, yet remaining under the dark|nesse of infidelity, which is the shadow of death, especially when attended with tene|brous and dark calamities, which every where befalls them, yet not beholding this star, this Gospel, which is his star, newly creat|ed, differing in cleannesse, nearnesse, and in motion from all lights, the ordinances, which God ever gave his Church.
AS Moses with them, so Christ, is day|ly taught in our streets, and whereas we ought thereby to grow warm in our de|sires, after the sense, and vertue, of the doc|trine, in receiving the Holy Ghost, it's su|spected, were the question put, the known answer would be returned, we have not so much as heard if there be any Holy Ghost, that is, heeded, or felt, what those gifts are, whereof the Holy Ghost is inspirer, which ve|rily is the ground of all our sinful debaurds (viz) our unbelief, leaving off heavenly matters, if not acquir'd by a wish, a look, hearing may be half a Sermon for a whole one, is thought infallibly to do it; yea some tarrying at home dreaming as Pilats wife, waking, give good directions, thinking all as true Revelations, what their fancy, ma|lice or prejudice, can suggest, as was that of the Wise Men to return to their own Coun|try,

concludes their salvation to be sealed, not considering that their wisdom, made them travel onward, embraceing difficulties chearfully, and that they saw not the star, untill they left Ierusalem, and that they had no vision in their sleep, untill they had sought out Christ, diligently, when they were a|wake: so that in earnest, that text, which most of all, grounds the Iew in his incredu|lity, and what they, stick most unto, in their malice against the Gospel, (viz.) neither did his brethren believe on him; may be by them, Atheistically urged but neither do his followers believe on him; and to our shame may be a dead stroak, to the point, for which they presse the former.
WE read that Simeon had revealed un|to him by the Holy Ghost, that he shold not dy, untill he saw the Lords Christ, the occasion of which revelation, we find to be this, (vi.) He doubting of the truth of that Prophesy, A Virgin shall bring forth a Son, an angel stood by, assureing his not tasting of Death, untill he saw the accomplishment of that truth, whereof he scrupled; not to comment upon the story, it is sure, that inadvertence, idleness, and sloath, in things spiritual, are not attended with the knowledge of sacred Mysteries, Da|niel saw the vision,  searching for the mean|ing;

Gabriel was sent to cause him understand, when the Angel appeared to the Shepherds, they were keeping their flocks, and the star appeared to the Wise Men, at first employ|ing their gifts for advance in learning, God deals oft with men in their own way God gave Hezekia a sign from the Sun it is given out, he was a great student of the Mathema|ticks, the second time the star was seen they were upon their journey, in Ierusalem they saw it not, there is time, and place wherein Christ is enquir'd, after, and not found, to seek consolation, in things terrene, is to seek the living among the dead, or as Ioseph, and Mary, among their kinsmen and acquain|tance; some seek him as Herod, to destroy him, to many we may say, ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amisse, to bestow it on your lusts, there is, place and time wherein Christ is to be sought and found; Mary sought him, and found him, in the Temple, yet she was at pains three days; the woman found him in the garden, yet they sought him with tears, Zacheus sought to see and found him on the Sycamour, yet he sought him with care, and our Wise Men sought for him with care, haz|zard, zeal, love, and cost, and found him.
FIRST let's know our selves to be Magi, Wise Men, own and know our selves to be

but MEN, that is, flesh, such as have sepa|rated from God, worshipping stocks, and stones, and given over to direful lusts; next, let's come from the east, with Abra|ham, Isai. 41, preferring Christ to country, kinred, despising gems, riches, and costly Jewels, chiefly to be found in the east, which as soft beds ull the Soul asleep, makeing flesh contemn the invitations Christ maketh for entrance and do this betimes, at the sun rising of our days; Mary Magdalen came a|bout the sun rising, saw the sepulchre, not her Lord; and being there were several of these Wise Men, let us learn the benefits of re|ligious Associats, for where two or three are gathered together to seek, he will be found; but our meeting must be in peace for they came, and they came together, and they came toge|ther to Ierusalem, the vision of peace, for on|ly when we are in peace, he will come and speak peace, saying, be not afraid I am Iesus whom ye seek.
OBSERVE there is not a state, or condi|tion, wherein man can fall, but Christ hath been discovered and in it found, as in a mar|ried estate, under which he was born, though not by it, in a Virgin estate, in which he was born, in a studious estate, for he was found a|mong the Doctors, in an Artificer or handy|craft

estate, so he was oft found with Ioseph at an honourable treat, so he was by Mary Magdalen, in a croud, or pent up, in a throng so by Zacheus in a Garden, so by the woman, in poverty, so by the Shepherds, in any place in Iudea, in Egypt, among the Samaritans, and lastly in the house, the poor house, the despi|sed house, as by the Magi, yet still as con|demning idlenesse, and exciting to diligence, he was found of them that sought after him.
WE have seen his star in the east (say the Magi) but whether they in the east saw it over Ierusalem, or over themselves in the east, or if it was an Angel as a star, or a star and a Child in it, is not worthy of search, or refutation, for it's, we have seen, and are come, exemplifying promptnesse, that with Lot we should not linger, when by some se|cret inspiration, we are warned of removeal, as Lot did, when advised to leave Sodom, but as Simeon, when the spirit excits to enter the temple, remembring also Lots wife, seasoning our selves by her salt, that corruption being exsicat in our mortal bodys, we may go for|ward, in our spiritual progresse, at the re|moving of the Ark, or moving of the cloud, it's motion being not for satisfying of our sight, but for putting forward our feet; not to stand by, but to follow after (i. e.) these

Wise Men untill we see our Lord, and who shall by the noise of the worlds confusion. Jerusalems trouble, or by the beauty of gu|dy pictures, of appearing benefits, slight the powerfull documents of the Gospel, de|spise the beautiful face of an amiable Iesus, will be condemned by these Philosophers, who in duty set their face as though they would go to Ierusalem, not fearing the wrath of the King, though enquiring after another then he, or Augustus either, though over the Iews they had made themselves Kings, whereas he whom they seek was a King born, and exceed|ing Sapores of Persia who yet was crowned in the belly, the crown being set upon his Mothers womb, for suppressing faction, but this, was a King, and so conceived, and therefore named, before he was conceived in the womb, had a star, to indicat his regality, which they call his star as being deputed for that office, others, being made for times, and seasons, yet this, for this time, to shine, to move, to stand, according as our progresse toward him advanceth, or is impeded, and when that is done, to withdraw it's shining;
NO ways giving countenance to these two-peny, I mean Mercenary Astrologers, who pretend from the stars, to judge the futurity of events, depending not so much

upon natural causes, as reasons, and deliberat consultation, seconded by providence, assist|ing, or maring the design, it were no puz|zeling question, to demand if the Magi by this star ordained to signifie our Lords Nati|vity Solely, knew or foresaw our Lords crosses, temptations, poverty slights, melancholy, so to speak, since we read of his weeping, (not of his laughing) torture, death, burial, c. The probability of the contrary being so evident, or apparent: This is not spoken to disgrace that noble Art, whether Astronomy, or Astrology, being perswaded that the stars are both for seasons, and signs, and works on this inferior world by natural qualities, and operations, as our herbs do growing in our garden, known to the learned Phisician, in their vertue, upon man; yet as this pours no honour on the head of cheating Mounte|banks, or Empericks, so nor the other, upon them whose covetousnesse, ambition, arro|gance, or other selfish interest, hath made them pry into acts of Kings, Counsels, Armies, and as they desired, have made the heavens speak, to the discredit of the Ingeni|ous Artist, and could they blush to their own confusion, we are sure, to their scorn and re|proach we have seen this star-gazer so oft, to erect Schemes, for such different purposes,

with different tones, unskilful prophesies, that laying him aside, let us worship GOD in love, reverence and fear, as the Magi.
THIS King, we have not the star of his birth; that evanishing the sun of righteous|nesse himself, shining with meridian luster, in ordinances, and means, yet no industry in the work of God, among us, but contem|ning Religion, revileing piety, scandalously by cleaving to the earth, refusing to eye the heavens, though the signs of the Son of Man, be come, wars, and rumors of wars, scarce faith on the Earth, and the love of many waxing cold. These men of the east shall rise up against us, and condemn us, who it may be repented, at the preaching of this single Star, and arising from their bed, awakeing as men out of sleep, came and worshipped.
WHAT more? all here is Mysterious Christ being born in Bethlehem, which is sup|posed to be the center, or midle part of the earth, that the vertue of the Son of Man might be more regularly diffused to the Cir|cumference of the utmost bounds of the glob, and he again to be their object, as equally near as equally dear, uniting in him, who is called the desire of all nations, the impulse or star lead|ing to the house, is that lively and heavenly gift of Faith, by which the serious, and in|dustrious,

shal be led for embraceing of save|ing truths, the Air, heavens, or firma|ment, in which that star was, and the star it elf again, speaking as it were with a tongue Christ to be born, is the Church, and the Prophets, Apostles Ministers thereof crea|ted, that is, qualified, for that end (viz.) edifying of the Church, untill she come, to the stature of Iesus Christ. The Ethnick Magi honouring Christ more then, and far above, the Iew, tipifys the amplitude of the Gentiles conversion, and prognosticks, it shall be more then that of the Iew, Herods slaughtering of the infants to the number of an hundreth fourty four thousand, (not to be thought incredible in so populous a place as Iu|dea) though others shrink this full mouth'd number, into fourteen thousand, where of his own son was one, manfestly shews the Devils rage, his emissaries fury against the Church of God, and of his Christ in all ages, yet as Christ was preserved in Idolatrous Egypt (in which by the by, it's said the Idols fell at his entry) so shall his Gospel out live all hea|then vanities, Christianity, at last, enjoyn|ing all Idolatry, as holy Alexander in the Tripartit did the Pagan Philosopher at Con|stantinople, who preparing to dispute, was charged thus in the name of the Lord Iesus, I

command thee to be silent, and the Philosopher immediatly was mute, so great shall be the force of truth, of Christian verity.
THE Magi were Wise Men, Kings say some, Ambassadors from Kings, say others, how ever good-men, and who perceives not, that not Manners with Wickams motto, but Religion makes the man, the prophane have|ing, but an external sign of Man hood, a Fool, a Mad-man, as beside himself, for though Reason make a man with the Philo|sopher, Honour with the Herauld, yet Reli|gion is all in all with God and good men, hence these are called Wise Men.
WHEN the Magi entred the house, they found saith the Holy Ghost the Child  his Mother; it cannot be granted to them, who thinks, there was a good providence here, that Ioseph was absent, least he should have been taken for the Childs Father; since that same Spirit, that revealed so great a matter, and inspiring them in so high a way, as to adore him, did in likly-hood forestale any such surmise, yea possibly every punctilio of the conception, might not be reveal'd to them and so her Virginity not thought upon, for the scruple about the Father, might have come in their heads whether Ioseph was pre|sent or no; the Mother may be only named

here, as in other places afterward, she be|ing indeed real mother to Christ; Ioseph not named, not from his absence, but as haveing no relation to that Child before whom they fell, and worshipped, first next opening their Treasures, presented unto him Gold, Frankin|cense and Myrhe.
THAT which is here called worship, is in our civil adoration called homage; which in Scripture language is Kissing of the Son, and unto Kings, is a symbole of subjection, ac|knowledged here above customary salutati|ons, exceeding all court-ceremony, being a paying of homage to Divinity and respects both soul and body, adoring the Word, in flesh, wisdom in infancy, the truth of the Deity, truly in humanity, the blessed Lord hideing these things from the wise and prudent, who at the birth of a King, had looked for pom|puous trains, splendid attendance, stately lodgings, ravishing musick, but these men had not so learned Christ, falling down, give|ing (as is the custom yet in Eastern countries) head and knee, hand, eye, and love, zeal, and true adoration, preferring him to them|selves, their learning, their possessions, pre|senting with some of the fruits of their land, as Gold, and Frankincense and Myrhe.
THE two last being plentifully offered

to God under the law, which being now fi|nished, the reserve, and store, is returned to Christ, there being no more offering for sin up|on the altar; but the Gold, typifies their trampling upon secular, or worlely wealth, in comparison of those riches they had ac|quir'd by his advent, which proceeded not from inspection into glasses, books, or maps; but from heavens inspiration, that giving the sign, gave also the thing signified, the Myrhe which preserves the dead from pu|trifaction; offered to him, is in the Mystery acknowledging both ours, and their hoped for Resurrection, to proceed from him alone; Gold the price of our Redemption, to be told down by his satisfaction, and righteousnesse, the incense (a perfume used in sacrifice with both Jews and Heathens) given to him; shadoweth abolishment of all legal offerings and diabolical services, that he (viz.) Christ may be all in all.
A King they asked for, a King they found, and like unto a King they offered, Herod said seek (not the King but) the Child and I will worship him, in scorn at them, in scorn of him, yet willing to secure himself a Christ being to be born, Go seek and I will worship but just as Iehu would worship Baal, these sought the young Child, the King of the

Iews, found the young King at which God, made them old in knowledge, they giving gold to him, as a King, Incense, they know|ing him to be a Priest, Myrhe they saw him to be a Prophet, Gold they gave him because he was great, incense, because he was God, and Myrhe for they knew him to be a man. To have brought gold only, his mothers po|verty considered, had caused men to suspect her supply; had only been regarded, or at most his education, but Myrhe and Incense, intuats that his paternal eradiation is concer|ned, yet all the three a help to their indi|gency in going down to Egypt, for in all the highest matters of heavens acquisition, the necessities of men, may be turned upon, and behold, and then it's our duty to relieve them.
AMONG the Persians it was thought dishonourable to salute, and therefore there was a Law, against, accosting, the King without a present, whereby to procure his friendship, or his Grace, wherefor one Si|netes, in travel meeting Artazarxes, and having nothing, ran to the river Cyrus filling both his hands with water as being at that time the readiest present, which the King caused to be received from him in a golden cup then, and sent afterwards to him greater

presents, as a persian Vest, a golden cup, wherewith to bring water always from the river so acceptable are presents, that they e|ven reconcile an Esaw to a Iacob and mak|eth the Queen of the south more acceptable to Solomon, which these men knew, and from their own country custome offered, yet led by a higher law, having either heard of or read, or inspired with that law of God, com|manding none to appear before him empty handed, Exod. 23. prompting the Magi to obey, and in them gives order, against un|charitable devotion.
THREE gifts are mentioned, if it be questi|oned, whether all gave three, or each one, one to allow in this the wise mens number to be three it's sure they either had particular trea|sures, or then several treasures for all in one, which were first closed, then opened, Faith closed up in the heart, without confession of the mouth, being of no avail; but that each one gve for himself, may be drawn (with some) from the gifts given, they shadowing in him, the union of God, and Man, which each one particularly believed, as also the three persons of the Trinity, and if delivered by one to the Baby Iesus, makes the heart reflect upon their unity among themselves, Christs three fold office of King Priest and

Prophet, being also believed by each, hath som influence for this belief, they worship|ing whole Christ all of Christ, first in body they fell down next in mind they worshipped, thirdly, in goods, they presented unto him.
GOLD the best of mettals, and most re|spected, and which looseth nothing in the fire, earthy its true it is, but if well managed, can be beat out, unto a heavenly length, and to be parted withall, when Christs poor members are in want: yet remember, it's a proper gift for a King, therefore offered here with worshiping, for untill we depart from evill, by fearing the Lord, our alms, and charity cannot be accepted frankincense used in sacrifice to God, and so necessary for per|fumeing, that the prayers of the Saints in the Revelation Chap. 8. are said to be sweetned thereby, and Cornelius prayers, and Alms came up together, for a memorial before God, Myrhe, a bettrr yet conserving gumme, used in enbalming of the dead, and prayer, when at|tended with mortification of flesh, is then most savory, and sweet, it's as it were the tears of a tree, woozed out, and how preva|lent Piters bitter tears were woozing from the bitternesse of his heart, is known yet each Wise Man had all these three, or the most part of the Ancients are out of the way; and

in the assurance of our Saviours Divinity, Hu|manity his Priest-hood, Prophetick, and Re|gal office, each believer for himself, must offer up, to him, and for him, praise, pray|er, and Alms; the oyntment of Myrhe in ho|ly and brotherly communion, that being gi|ven in charity to the dead the incense of a sweet and innocent report, which we ow to our liveing brother, the gold of a bright, pure, and shineing conscience, which we ow to our great Creator King of all the earth.
FINALY by gold, understand thy self exorted to rejoice in, and love God, for the good things he hath performed towards thee, by incense, religious thankfulnesse, for the good he hath prepared for thee, by Myrhe unfeigned sorrow, for what evill hath been done by thee, the sincerity whereof is best discovered, if thou separat thy self from sin|ners, and thy life from bloudy men, in not returning to thy old companions or sinful counsellours, as the Magi did not to Herod, nor liveing in thy old path of vitious courses, as they returned another way (I shall not say, lodging in caves, and dens, for fear of He|rod) into their own Country, the birth of him whom they visited in its purity, innocency, harmlesse simplicicy, perswading to tempe|rance, and the Magi as the first fruits of the

Gentiles by their gifts, in coming and go|ing, inforceing retirednesse from carnal ease; sinful sloath, cruel intentions reverent acti|ons, Religious obedience, which once ac|quir'd by pains in study, prayer, and medi|tation, with practise, though but with star light, yet untill we see him who is invisible, we shall have Angels (not to say dreams as the Magi had) to direct us from hurting o|thers, or our selves, growing in familiarity with God as they also did being afterward baptized by S. Thomas, one who could as sensibly assure them, of our Lords Passion and Resurrection as they him, of his Nativity, and being born, of all which being well per|swaded, they proved instrumental in saveing the Souls of many, in their own country as the Eunuch after them is also said to do) preaching the truth of that Iesus, whom they sought, and savingly found, according to that promise, he made to his, They that seek me early shall find me.
CONCERNING the death of these Wise Men we have not any probability in re|cord, but the reported death, the cost, care, diligence used by Queen Helene, in getting, yea gathering of their bodies, bringing them unto Constantinople, for honourable sepul|ture, there translation afterward to Millain,

their removeal the third time, to Colen, whence Vulgarly they are called the three Kings of Colen, being there worshiped, with great reverence and pilgramages, made unto them, by the ignorant, and superstitious hath no Mystery, save that of Iniquity, and of lying Vanity, therefore not of our province; being also perswaded, were the bones, or dust, of these Magi there, and could speak, they would be so good, so Wise as to say to their simple worshipers, Dearly beloved flee from the Idolatry, 1 Cor. 10.14.
IN the Kingdom of France of old, an order of Knighthood was institute, called, of the Star, which in the days of Charles the seventh, became contemptible, the Honour becomeing dishonourable, being given to pages, yeoman of the guard, and other at|tendants; so that the Knights laid asside the badge, and cognisance of the Star, whereup|on the order evanished; the Magi in a holy, and respectfull sence, might be termed of the Star; but Religion in Gospel preaching having descended unto the poor, many great in their own esteem (as the Iews repineing at the Gentile) shifts off devotion to their Chaplain, and servants menial; and in a distinguishable sense, is it not sadly visible, that the poor have the Gospel preached un|to

them? great men landed men Wise men, or men (for any thing) of renown, gilding their sword, garnishing their board, embroi|dering their apparel, as if birth-right, nobili|ty and gallantry, did ipso facto, and of it self, qualify for glory; piety, and religion, in the mean while, exposed to nakednesse, and con|tempt, bleeding, and trod-underfoot, as in|jurious unto (because debasing) greatnesse, and suiting rather the Tenents, then the Land-Lords habitation, whose revenue provyding, against course fair, hard beds, shifts off pray|er, reading, holy living, as inept guests, or complemented with a dinner, and then fare|well.
VPON this score, not many wise, after the flesh, not many mighty not many noble, are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. yet because their are not many, it would seem, their are some mighty and some noble called, wherefore free|ing your souls from this abuse, embrace ho|linesse as an honourable inmate as the Crown embellishing al your vertues, the preservative of al your excellencies, the engine, mean, or instrument, to augment your fortunes, enlarge dominions, dignifie your issue, protect your dwellings, guard your persons, secure your consciences, and acquire gloy, for Godli|nesse hath the promise, and the sinner will dy accursed.
THE Natural Sons of the Kings of Span, by law are never to enter the gates of Ma|drid, Don Iohn, (as we read) was never nearer it, then a league, the court leaving the pallace, that that mighty Austian, might be capable to give a visit to his Catholick Majesty; as if their were so black a stain, or so thick a fi|bre, somewhere in that great body, that roy|al blood could not so encircle the person, as to nobiliat, and on all quarters, in all parts, properly make him, his Highnesse, his Serene Highnesse; just so it is with wickednesse, and unbelief, no gold can beautify it, no silver adorne it, nor throne, honour it nor greatness make it, or the breast in which it lodgeth, to be capable to see the face of God, or admit it to his holy Habitation.
INDEED God condescends so far, as to descend to sinners and by them may be visited, and spoak withal, in the acts of his worship and temple of his Son, as Christ, was beheld by the Magi, but so, as we find not first, and second; he as Death makeing no difference between Rich, and poor, High and low, and if any, it is to the poorest, (that is) in Spirit, all before, and in comparison of him, being but dust, and ashes, and he who is loosest upon the earth (that is puft up) is because such, soonest, and easiest blown away;

all epithets declairing greatnesse, being un|succesfull fading, and evanishing, as smoak, from the tunnels of their own well furnish'd kitchins: known it seems to Ioan Queen of Spain who gave on a glob a moulting pea|cock with Vanitas encircled, as if all earthly glory, without the coronet of Sanctity, and piety, were but like the splendor of that fowl and beauty of his train, which a rainy day, will cause to disappear, and a warm spring (a smal calamity) shall make the prey of any baser born, scattering them in the path, of this world's contingencies, to adorn the cap's, of it may be their own Skip-Jacks, followers, and footmen.



MYSTERIUM PIETATIS OR THE MYSTERIE OF OUR LORDS CROSSE Unfolded, and applied.

Passion-Friday, April 1. High Church, 1670.
GOOD-Friday, April 1. High Church, 1670.


PSAL. CX.VII.
He shall drink of the Brook in the way, there|fore shall he lift up his head.

_WE read of a Holy Man whose library being ill stored, furnished himself richly, with store of Lite|rature, by serious revol|ving, upon the matter contained in three books; whose leaves were of different colours; one whit, wherein he was directed, to walk,

talk, and do, conform to that favour, pati|ence, long suffering, God had exercis'd tow|ards him; another was black, representing, the formidable number, and sad consequence, of his infinit, and multiplied transgressions; the third was, red which to his affections passionatly discovered, the great secret, of the wisdom of the Love of God, towards, and for his Soul, in contriving the death of his Son, whose blood as the Red Sea de|stroying the Egyptians of his lust, made him both rejoice, and weep.
IN which meditation, holy men of old as they were moved by the holy Ghost, (nothing being more usful, necessary, comfortable, mysterious, then the knowledge of Christ and him Crucified) were much conversant, and among them David is eminent in many places, particularly in this Psalm, pointing both at Calvery, and Olivet for he shall Drink, and then he shall lift up the head, which expresseth a triumh, a Trophe after a victory, and fight he must, for he shal strick through Kings, and fill the places with dead bo|dies, ver 5.6. which cannot be done with|out some losse of blood unto himself, which eventually, shall procure honour, and that for ever, the Lord saying to my Lord that is to David, yet in the Mystery unto Davids

Lord, Christ, sit thou on my right hand untill I make thine enemies thy foot-stool, the Father giving him not only the right, but the Act of dominion, judging, governing all things, untill Devils, Belialists, Hereticks, Shisma|ticks, Antichrists,  every evil work be dash|ed in pieces, the fathers grandor not being ec|clipsed by this donation, he reigning in the Son, and remaining in that account, stil Lord, also by him for ever, his sweating, bleeding, dying, burying, serving but as medicine, to evacuat his holy body of humors, and dispo|sing him to rest; after which, as a Gyant re|freshed with wine, he shall rise out of sleep, and smit his enemies in the hinder parts, make|ing them a shame unto themselves, in unco|vering their folies, before the whole crea|tion, and in the sight of Angels of men, con|tumeliously causing them smart, for their heart enormities, when he shall after his drinking lift up his head.
AFLICTION is in general compared to water and bearing of the CROSSE to drink|ing, and the measure providentialy alloted for each creature, may be pertinently expres|sed by a cup of which it's decreed by hea|ven all must drink, though not all alike, the dregs of the cup of Tribulation, being ap|pointed for the wicked: Psal. 75. Let the Jews therefore this day fret, curse, murmur,

in their carnal way,  a pompuous Messiah, while the more spiritualiz'd, exalt the name of Iesus who as another Paschal lamb, was on this day slain, in the even|ing of the world, before as another Moses he could deliver us, from hels Pharoh, and sins slavery. Now the waters of Noah are falling, and we are to enter, into the wooden ark of his CROSSE, the bloud of this our Abel, slain by his brethren, calling, and in|viting us, to expect, and enjoy, better things from which, though the Tribs run; Let us run to seek him; and know where he is laid, to carry him into the more proper sepulure of hearts and consciences.
HE shall drink is prophetical, and in the Gospel accomplishment it is that he gave up the Ghost, that he was bruised in Genesis, or that he washed his cloaths in the blood of the grap, with Iacob, is with the Evangelist, his drops of blood. Adams coat, made him of the skin; of those beasts killed for sacrifice, is in the mystery, robs of righteousnesse made by faith in the merits of his death, for dy he must, since Isaac was offered and upon a tree, for Adam sayes, if enquir'd, he eat of the tree; Abraham will testifie, that he must bear his own CROSSE, for Isaac bore the wood, Iacob assures, he must dy in the

open field, for there, he saw the ladder, and visions of God, he must be nailed, and then lifted up, upon the CROSSE for Moses lift|ed up the Serpent upon a Pol, he must be sold, at a smal price for Zachary saw him vallued, he must dy among thieves, for he was numbred among transgressours, he was also to ly in Iosephs tomb for he made his grave with the Rich, Isa. 53. He shall, shews futurity (i. e.) that it was to be done, and let the mystery of the bloody Sacrifices be vewed, this draught is foretold, yea the rites of the heiser. Numb. 19. respects the sublime work of Christs death, and if Mathew be enquir'd, he saw all this done, nay himself, and Moses, spake of what he should suffer at Ierusalem.
YET let none expound this shall, as de|noting compulsion, or hinting coaction, as though he did not consent, for though by Fther let this cup passe from me, he seem to savour himself, and to plead from fear, from infimity; yet not my will but thine be done, is from the spirit, the first instructing what he was to suffer, even terrible things in this red sea, the other what we ought to do, when encountering hazard, even embrace them, say|ing welcome be the will of God, not repineing, or starting back, from the burthen, so as with

the Romans to have us goaded forward, as unwilling of the CROSSE, or pricked to march on, as slaves were, whence that phrase, to kick against the pricks but chear|fully, to undergo, what God thinks fit to lay upon us, for though there was a necessity, that Christ should dy, in respect of the inten|ded end, for our redemption, and of the Fa|ther, in respect of Iustice, against sin, and as Christ, before as man, he could enter into glory, yet still not my will, but thine be done: is a strong reserve against all objections, proveing, he was not dispirited in himself, but teaching us his Disciples, least raveings  dispair in cups of adversity, should cause a disrelishment of the sweetnesse, kindnesse, and good things of God.
THE Father sayes, he shall, the Son sayes, I will: for a mans consent was appended to his sin, so must his Saviours assent, be ob|tained for it's remission, as it was, not only in the garden, but in the manger, all the parts, and changes of his life, being but as so many little deaths, or draughts, before his large one upon the CROSSE, a potion, which he saw prepared and appointed in all it's ingredients and yet not withstanding drank of it, giving his back to the smiter, say|ing to the Traitor what thou doest die quick|ly,

the words not of a desperate, but of a pre|pared man, even so Father, because it seemed good in thy sight.
THE Scripture speaks of his flying from place to place, yet not fear of dying, but care to dy, at his hour, is to be understood an unwillingnesse to work miracles at mans pleasure, that is, at mans lust; and that precept, arise take the young Child and his Mother, and flee into Egypt, to passe the ap|plication thereof unto that law, thou shalt not seeth a Kid in his Mothers milk, Exod. 23.18 if he were not to be killed young, the charge insinuats a pilgrimage, rather then a flight, for out of Egypt was GOD to call his Son, and that his escape from other place was not principled from fear, is deducible from this, that afterward he chused to dy more shamefully, publickly and more tor|mentingly, then any death formerly his e|nemies had forecasted; he resolving to dy, not by necessity, debility or weaknesse, these having no hand in his death, as his loud cry at his yeelding up of the Spirit cleareth; dis|covering such a degree of divine vertue, that the Centurion impungs all proffers, enervats all accusations, in this one truth, truly this was the Son of God.
WE read of some, who could sleep when

they pleased, and wake at the same time, as Henry the 4 of France but Christ can dy when he will; and untill he will, he will not, pas|sing through the midst of his haters, and escapeing, he having only power to lay down his life, and at his own appointed time laid it down.
HENCE it's not to be inferred, that he was not killed by the Jews, for it is a truth he was, though not as other men, in whom things natural, are not subject to the will, as the conjunction or separation of the soul, with the body, for then is a man said to be killed, or murthered, when that is done or suffered, which in it self, and in nature did, or natu|rally doth, produce that which is called death; Now Christ had a will in spite of his enemies, to cede, or not, to yeeld to death, as he pleased; but because they put upon him such apt means of destruction, and ten|dencies to dissolution, it pleased him to yeeld unto death, having really suffered so much, as in nature might have procured death, in them who were purely natural; and mee men therefore dyed he, before the thieves, becaus he would, therefore also before the thieves, because he had suffered by watch|ing, fasting it's possible bleeding, (since we read not of their removeing the thorny

crown) his scorning also, and reproach, ad|ding to his langour and in Pilat's wonder, Hastning his death; before their's, so that with Stephen, it is to be attested, that they, viz. the Iews, were of him the just one, the betrayers, and the murtherers.
THE pronown He is personally to be un|derstood He, that is, the Lord, the second person, shall drink, therefore He that is, again himself God, shall lift up his head: He that is the man, shall drink, therefore He, that is, the Father, shall lift up his head, and in this Mystery of Godliness, of the passion, we are not to separate, what the Father, and Spirit, hath joyned together, (viz.) God and Man; confirmed by two witnesses, not called, but compelled, he is the Son of God, said the Cen|turion; A just man, said Pilats wife: which under the pain of damnation, is never to be really separat from our creed, both being re|ceived, and both to be believed.
PILATS wife, his own disciples, were against his drinking, both of them haveing pitty of him, but yet he would drink have|ing compassion for them; and not for them only, but for the whole world; for which he was sent to lay down his life: and as at La|zarus death, when observed to weep, it was said, behold how he loveth him, see him drink|ing,

all may say behold how he loveth it; mark how he loveth men, of which the inscripti|on over the CROSSE or tittle (on which the Romans declaired the crime for which the party dyed) doth amply discover being in it called Iesus of Nazareth King of the Iews, in Hebrew, Greek, and Latine, shew|ing the vehemency of his affction; for as all nations had heard of his works, Pilat resol|ved, that each nation should know the cause of his death, and these three languages, an|swering to the three fam'd parts of the wold, (viz) the Romans, the most powerful, be|cause martial; the Greek, the wisest, because most learned: the Iews the holyest, because of the Law, and the Devil prompting to this Iesus of Nazareth for nourishing a grosse er|rour, that Iesus was of Nazareth, whence the Messiah was not to be, but of Bethlehem, that none in this respect should behold him as that Prophet, which was to come, and though some|times that expression is used, yet it's ever un|to the Iews, whoso supposed, and expressed him that way; for all this contrivance of men Gods intendment was, that all, of all nati|ons should on the CROSSE behold their Sa|viour, and that Iesus was to be their peace|maker by his blood; and this to be reported, in the three quarters of the world, then all

the world, that Jesus of Nazareth King of the Iews was crucified at Ierusalem, accord|ing to the Scriptures.
THIS riddle to unfold, veiw the sense of each word, Iesus, that is, a Saviour, for sin, a Redeemer of captives, the hopes of the exiled; the Strength of the labourer, Enlarger of a strained soul, the Cooler of a heated, and Comforter of a galled conscience, behold him, Of Nazareth, this name was given for ful|filling of that Scripture, He shall be called a Nazaren, Mat. 2. by interpretation it signi|fyeth a branch, one of his names, in the old Testament, and who was to build the temple of the Lord, by joyning as living stones, the elect of all nations, kinred, and tongues; s also crowned, sanctified, and seperat be|fore, for that holy use, shewing the authori|ty and commission, he had to save to unite, from the Father, which was fit, since he was King, a word of old pronounced Conning expressing his wisdom and skill to govern his subject by known, and established Laws, and therefore not a tyrant, deserving not so much as a censure of that people, who were Iews, Gods people, glorious in David, and to be blessed with the whole Earth, in the poste|rity of Abraham, they remaining faithful as Abraham; who believed in God, who now

had accomplished his promise, in sending that people a Prophet like unto Moses, and cau|sed them to behold Davids Son, by which they are the more culpable in importuning his death from a Gentile.
AT last, that cursed Nation for their cursing shall come under the Scepter of this despised King, and worship at his holy foot-stool, mourning for his wounds: for which though himself did not, yet the sun laid aside his robes of day, cloathing himself in mourn|ing night like darknesse, rocks broke and rent assunder, because no Iew did rent his garment, at crucifying their King Mary weep'd, (not he) what the Son of my womb, the Son of my desires, while he boasted, and would not come down from the CROSS, but suffered from the Gentile, by means of the Iew, what both could inflict, for the salva|tion of both, Iew and Gentile, then and at af|tertimes, the voice of their Brothers blood crying still, what he did at first, Father forgive them, (i. e.) for my sake for I am thy Son, for thy own compassion sake they being my Brethren, for according to the flesh he was the Son of Abraham, the Hebrew, as flowing from the loyns of Heber the Son of elected Sem, he was also the Son of David the King, and so a Iew, who was the grand|son

of Ruth a gentile a Moabitess, and so in fraternity to both, by Father and Mother to Gentile and Jew was he a Brother.
PRY into his holy zeal, which for Gods house did eat him up, and how was he strait|ned, and with desire desired, to eat his pass|over, his viaticum, his last-food (unlesse the Angel even that way strengthned him) sweating, untill every thing that stood in the way of mans happinesse, was removed; he not laying down, but drinking of the brook in the way, swallowing up hels kingdom, hast|ing runing to destroy the works of the De|vil, his redoubts and entrenchments, yea all that both his hands in drawing to sin, and halling to punishment could effctuat, weak|ning the one, destroying the other, that he should no more lead captive at his pleasure, into labour and dolour, which Iesus here, not only beheld, but made entrance into, because of the first he cryed in David, I am poor and needy: and because of the second in Ieremiah he sighed Is it nothing to you all ye that passe by, behold and see if there be any sorrow like nto my sorrow which is done unto me.
YET as the Ichneumon, an Indian Rat, enemy to the Crocodile, will watch untill he sleep and leaping into his throat, descends ino his entrails, and eats out it's way, through

and side of that his terrible and great foe, and so destroys him, our Iesus did enter in|to the jaws and through the bowels of this Devourer, liberateth himself and all be|lievers, allowing perfect freedome in the rest, peace, and continual feast of a good conscience, in joy unspeakable, that they tri|umph with S. Paul, over Hell, over Death, over the grave, with an, O Death I will be thy Death, O Grave, I will be thy Destruction.
A work of great and excellent contrivance of laborious difficulties, if the number, strength fury, policy, of adversaries be respected, and the torrent which flow'd from heaven, more imbittering the cup be considered, the impetuousnesse of all these together towards Christ, in the word brook shewing how plen|tifull his sufferings were, and what store there is yet behind for others that come after.
THERE is a cup of red wine which the ungodly must drink up Iesus drank much, but not all, the Son of God drank deep of, but not the brook dry, yet largly of it, for it was a brook which some will have to be a rivulet flowing more or lesse with water, as the clouds more or lesse shal empty themselves therein, which though not granted, yet it may be pertinently inferred, that his suffings, outcryings, were more or lesse, as heaven lesse, or more, ordained them to flow, or

swell, he was silent before the Governour not terrified at, but contemning his accusers, suf|fering innnocence to plead for it self, in strong though mute oratory; but directed in ser|vour a prayer to heaven, for acquittance, for deliverance, for exemption, from the Death he feared, discovering more dejection then ordinary malefactors, nay then the thieves that dyed with him; but upon this score, that they had only men, he had Al|mighty God, and omnipotence revealed from heaven to struggle withall, for neither Ponti|ous Pilat, nor Iew, nor Gentile, to the worlds end, dare, or can, make any profes|sing Iesus, to undego that, but which hea|ven hath before hand determined to be done, and when all have drunk sufficiently, the brook shall be dyed up.
THERE is a cup of new wine the feel|ings of spiritual comforts, refreshing the soul in the apprehension of the Love of God, whereof many of the Saints drink; another of sour wine in the grief, anxiety, and soul rent|ings, feelings of the horrours of accused, and accusing consciences, darkned minds, occasi|oned, by the noysome vapours of sloath, lust, or uncleannesse, this the penitent must par|take of; lastly there is a cup of worm wood water of suffering hard things, dolefull, calamitous, inward, and outward, perplexities, of which

Iesus drank and of which, all after him shal; because heaven hath so appointed, allowing such, and so much, to each one, as by infallible wisdome is found to be for spiritual health, and good, which when acquir'd, the dregs poured forth upon the ungodly, the Religi|ous then, prosperously enjoying rest, being elevated above the level of indignity, and abuse, yea attempts of Hel.
FOR the Lord said, to my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, and then the Lord said to his Church, he shal drink of the brook, for the Lord God had said, thou shalt bruise his heel, and he shall bruise thy head, after which, he shall reign, and his enemies become his foot-stool, wherefore he got this Commandement from the Father to lay down his life, John 10. From the Father, because he fitted him as Man, to suffer hard things, though spotlesse, exposing also his naked body to the contempt, and malice of the Iews, and his harmless soul, to the darts of his own displeasure, for that sin, which by imputation with God, and reputation with men, he had took upon him, for he was numbred with transgressours, that is, esteemed one of them, this com|mandement haveing also received from the Father.
WHILE Herod, Pilat, Priests, Scribs,

Pharisees, were in there stately lodgings, pa|laces, and parlours, drinking wine in bowls, that is, at ease in Sion, was Iosephs antity the Son of God drinking bitter water, salt water, not from a Sea but from a river; not from a river, but a brook, muddy water as it were rainy water, for as in life, he had not thereon to lay his head, so at death not where|with to satisfie his thirst, but a brook, no Ta|gus either, where in is golden sand, no fam'd, because rich Ganges, as n India, nor Padus s in Italy, to encrease his treasure; but as he came to the world poorly, so he leaves it a|gain in poverty, he borrowed an Ass in the way, he lived as he dyed, and both dyed, and lived, as he taught (viz.) blessing Religious and innocent poverty, as that naked young man, mysteriously inculcats, Mark. 14. and if the Gardners son, this observe is good that neither idlenesse, nor sloath nor plenty, nor abundance, was to be expected upon at|tendance of Christ Iesus; Cinna of old, was poor to the utmost degree of necessity, and re|solved to be accounted the poorest, so would Christ; yet because he was a King unto whom soft cloathing is allowed, his woven vesture was singularly majestical, indicating great|nesse, and recording his God-head, that being one, and worn above, as more noble then

his garment: which some will have to sound forth his Man-hood; in both which God hath set him as a King upon his holy hill.
THERE are four brooks, celebrated in Scripture, first Iabock, where Iacob saw al|mighty God face to face, Gen. 32. the word signifies to empty, or scatter, and here Israel scattered the cloud of Esaus fury, by soft words, and emptied his heart of rancour, by goodly presents: the second is Zered, Deut. 2. where the Tribs made a famous passe from Kadesh Barnea the word signifieth a going down, as if men ought to descend, and search the low vallies of their deepest thoughts, be|fore they go up to Canaan; a third is before which David oorded in his persuit after the Amalekits it signifyeth glad tydings or incar|nation, which indeed as relating to the Words being made Flesh, was good and refeshing news, to all in heart circumcis'd Isralits the whole being recovered what was took away by the Amalekits, of lust, the two wives of Iew and Gentile lost in Idolatry, and un|cleannesse: regained again, by the edge of the Lords sword, the Lords, so that this, may be the burthen of this days exercise, this is Davids; that is, Iesus spoile, 1 Sam. 30. The fourth and last is Cedron the word importeth blacknesse, the water whereof, rising from a

mountain Southward from Ierusalem  through the vally of Iehosop, a far, and ruitful soyl, receiving a blackish tincture, and is lesse or more filled, as the weather proves more or lesse rainy,
OVER this brook Christ in David crossed, when that King fled from the face of Abso|lom his Son, and over it also did Iesus in per|son foord, when he entred upon the last act of his passion, Iohn 18. unto which pass, this text might have an eye, and as the Disciples eat of the ears of corn, in the way for hung|er, I trust, it may be no heresie, to affirm the probability of Christs tasting the water of this book in his way to Gethsemany, for thirst, occasioned from deep resolves of an ensuing violent Death, though we read not of it, as we read not of the literal accomplish|ment of that Prophesy, in the history of his passion, I gave my back to the smiters, and cheeks to them that plucked off the hair, Isa. 50.
BROOK then is to be expounded the flouds of ungodly men, the blacknesse, and darknesse was brought into his very soul, by the gathering, and falling of the many wa|ters, of the desperat multitude, hurrying him, (as Cedron was to the dead lake of Asphal|lites or cursed Sea of Sodom which God judg|ed) to the death of the CROSSE, a cursed

death of old; because on a tree, such who dying thereon, being lifted up from the earth, as unworthy to touch it; being judg|ed for sin, which flowing from the tree, the tree is cursed above other deaths, and Christ enduring the curse, must undergo the tree, by which also; now is taken away the curse from the tree, no death since his, being accur|sed in it self, the sinner being penitent. The Ground near Cedron was also accursed, there standing the Tabernacle of Molech, as if e|very thing: or any thing, relating to the death of Christ had been appointed for a curse, so ineffable are the Mysteries of his CROSSE, and horrours of his suffering, and yet his drinking thereof: (that is, the en|during, and undergoing of them) exceed|ingly pourtrays the vehemency of his de|sire for accomplishing mans happinesse, which all his Sermons, miracles, actings, watch|ings, fastings, evince, saying still, I thirst, but at last conquered, and triumphed over the Devils and men, makeing us this day to blesse the Lord, in the house of the Lord, as did our elder Brethren in the day of Iehoso|phat, when fighting againt the Moabits and Ammonits in this same ground, calling it Baracha that is, blessing, 2. Chro. 20.
THE curses being removed due to fallen

man for sin, maketh no death, to be, though the sinner may d, accursed, wherefore in death, the tree is, still, and may be used, though in honour to our Saviour the use of the crosse, was abolished, by Constantin the first Christian Emperour, haveing seen before his famous battel with the Infidel Maxentius, in the South, a shining crosse in the air, with this inscription in hoc vince, he conquer'd by which the Church had peace round about, Christ sent his Disciples two and two into every City, where he was to come to prepare eyes, ears, and heart for his own reception that at his comeing, they might receive the Holy Ghost, so eminent was his thirst, so longing his desire, whe|ther in eath or heaven, for mans benefit, for mans Salvation.
DAVID in many things was a typ of Christ and in this prefigured him also, that as the Hart panted after the water brooks, so panted his soul after God, David in Christ was cru|cifed, and Christ in David, thirsted as the Hart, which beast, bearing naturally an antipathy to Serpents, first sucks them out of their holes, then rents them they again when not prevailing by force claspeth about his horns, lyeth on his back to bit he for de|fence roulleth on his back, and brusing them,

layeth them, with which he is so heated, that he is not at rest, until he drink; the ap|plicablenesse of which to Christ is conspicu|ous, who by the power of his breath comman|ded the Devils out of the possessed, and by lying on his back a few hours in the grave, overcame their greatest force, before which how mightily he did glocitare, pant, and roare out, that terrible cry: My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? an expostulation, in death, shewing the things he suffered, and contents of what we are to do, speaking this for his peoples instruction, in taking inspec|tion in calamitous times, into the principal cause of their distresss where faulty with the thief, to say we indeed justly, if other|wise sinceity appear in our tendencies to please him, then to plead with him; Remem|ber, Lord said Hezekiah, I have walked be|fore thee with a perfect heart: why then should I dy Childlesse? why should thy pro|mise made to my Father David fail in me?
THOVGH with Iob for a while we suf|fer for secret causes, yet with him let us hold fast our Faith; as Christ, not saying, O God, but My God, my God, why hast thou forsa|ken me? words that discover so much of a man that, but, for, to Day, shalt thou be with me in Paradise, we might demure up|on

his being God; and in themselves hard to be understood; yet this is perceptible, that in strong temptations, the truth of things being hid, we judge of them, and of our own state, worse then they are, the ingemi|nation, shews innocence to be enflamed, be|cause it suffered; and the affluence of his sorrows so directed, as to Ecclipse in him the won|ted consolations in the Fathers fellowship, which though wanting, yet he endured, his own zeal, unexpressibly irritating him, for ins removing, his teeth on the CROSSE, be|ing set on edge; because we in the field, so greedily had eaten sour grapes.
CEDRON is also said to be black, from it's shadinesse, as being shadow'd by the mount of Olives, over which David pssed bare-headed, and weeping; his Son our Lord was appointed for the same pilgrimage, though not upon the same ground, David weeping for his Son, who had moved Re|bellion, Christ weep'd for sins committed by Rebellion, David saw something in himself; meriting that blacknesse, and there|fore, cry'd: Christ saw that nothing was in man that deserved clearnesse, yet that his head might want no oyntment, and that his garments might be always white, he travelled towards this black brook, under Olives,

the very place inspiring this observe, that be|cause of it's fruitfulnesse of oyl used in me|dcaments, and one of the ingredients of the Samaritans recipe, for the cure of the woun|ded traveller our Lords death is declared, proper for cure of our spiritual wounds, for strengthning our weaknesse; in wrestling a|gainst principalities and powers, Devils who may by permission embitter our waters; yet as the horn of the Vnicorn, is medicinal in healing infected fountains; the plunging, whereof by it, causing other beasts to drink securely, so application to his CROSSE, as Moses to the tree, Exod. 15. maketh our bit|ter waters to become sweet, our afflictions to become easy, our burthen to become light, he having antidoted their evil; by drinking, that is, by bearing of them, before us: yea by it our sins shall, our very lusts shall, have a tendency for good, the remembring of Pi|ters sin, made him bitterly weep; yet may we not say; it made him diligently to watch, he afterward not comparing himself with others attested his own Love, not falling back again into the condemnation of the Devil by over|rating of himself.
FILTH or Earth may cause ones hands to scour the better, and after washing to become the whiter, this was designed in his

blood (viz.) that we should be pure, white and holy, by washing our selves therein, his bloud having that property to make our very garments white as in the vision, Reve. . hinting at that remission of sin, which by blood was obtained in the Law; As Herod therefore sought this Holy Childs life, to take it, and destroy it: let us seek his death, that is, the benefit of it, that we may live by it and in it, with as great earnestnesse, as he laid it down, for he is said to drink of the brook in the way.
IN the way, that is, walking forward, that is, takeing no rest, untill as Naomi he had setled his Church, he being that Goel, Ruth. 3.9. the next kinsman, appointed Redeem|er of his Church, and by right of inheritance, to betroth the Gentile Church, as Ruth unto himself, he as Boaz being a Jew born in Bethlehem, not by pulling of his shoe, but by being stripped of his garments, yea robbed of his life: Judas lingred as did Lot, but was oused, with a what thou dost do quickly, a charge not enjoyning diligence, but eviden|cing impatience, wishing for, and suggesting sufferance of that, which a treacherous heart had in dissimulation contrived, and concealing from the other Apostles his trea|son by this declaration, least a moments stay,

had been occasioned by debates and quarrels, which our Saviour so prevented, that when Iudas asked, Master, is it I? least his silence should have betrayd Iudas, the answer was thou sayst it, (i. e) thou hast said it, not I, thou condemns or betrays thy self, not I.
WHEN the band told him, they were seeking Iesus, being strengthned by an An|gel Michael, say some, he being Captain of the Lords host, Revel. 12. Gabriel, say others, the messenger for his birth, and his name im|porting the strength of God or the man of God, fittest therefore to comfort God Man; being, I say, strengthned by him, both in a na|tural way, by food as is thought, and Ghost|ly Counsel; he told them, I am he, they not knowing his voice, discovered not his person untill he pointed out himself, which voice made them affraid, letting go forth so much divine vertue from his face, mouth and eyes, as to make them fall before him, through fear, though armed, their knees (as no crea|ture is) being not able, to support them when conspiring against God, unlesse even God whom they oppose, let out of his clemency some emanations of beaming power to up|hold them; respiting them from that grave, that death, that hell, which waits upon them, in, and after, their sinful complyance

with paultry lust, to reclaim men, when convinced by wonders, or put to straits, from the errour of their ways, as here was done, when they came, as in the Psalms, to eat up his flesh, in their stumbling, and falling, yet the second time he suffred himself to be taken, checking them for their delay, and ordering his Disciples freedom to goe away, John 18. the set time of his departure being come, his hour being come, and all things near to be ful|filled, touching his delivery to the Gentiles he hasted, as the Sun unto his setting, being judged, and condemned, in one night, and that the first of his apprehension, whereas ordinary judgement, and sitting in judge|ment by law, use and custome, in other ca|ses among the Jews, was still in the morn|ing, Ier. 21. Eccle. 10.
GIDEON trying the valour, or cowar|dice, of his Army, was ordered to observe at the water who lapped, and who bowed down, such as bowed, were in probability the stoutest, not fearing the enemy, and those that lapped, the more fearful, not dare|ing to stoup for drink if the lappers discove|red Zeal, shewing earnestnesse for fight, or those who bowed down, wearinesse inflight, or whether the lappers were the most cow|ardly and chosen therefore, I disput not: this

is sure, that our Lord ran and drank, that is, hasted to his sufferings, and suffered with hast, dying in the 33. year of his age, resolving not to be old, least the world should dy in sin, and men go to the grave, their bones full of the sin of their youth: and let all the ages of the Universal world be reveiwed, it will be found from the vexations in them; that of all things next being born, it's best to dy betimes, was a true saying of the Philosopher: but the sins in them, and temptations to sin, encreasing a hundreth fold; the dotage of the world being more encumbred, and plagued with perillous times. the end of life being also glo|ry, to be translated by death, with Enoch to be taken up to God, early, is a blessing with Divines.
THE first that tasted of death was Abel, he was accepted of God, and was in heaven in the our of his youth: not tasting, not knowing of old age; a center of diseases, a very treasure, continually emptying it self, of Rheums, Catarrhs, defluctions, gouts, hydrop|sies, gravels: to the tormenting of men; all which to evite, as Ioseph stood before Pharaoh, being thirty years old; our Savi|our beginning, to be about the same age, stood up, preaching of plentiful times, for spiritual

food, for the twelve hours of the day; but ight shall come, says he, and then no man shall work, in which time, if the years of plenty be remembred, it shall only make the hunger of the damned, the more biting, which he prophesied of, and forwarned in such zeal, that, in or about three years, he finished the work that was given him to do, which was to take away the sins of the world, sins, both of soul and body, defraying the one in being hea|vy to the death, the other in bearing death, and the instrument of his death, for he carry|ed his CROSSE, chusing that death, before Iohn the Baptists sword, or Isaias saw, make|ing it as the tree of life, to stand in the midst of the Church, communicating it's vertue, fruit and shade, for life and salvation, to all the world about, no deadly weapon being capable to sense the fruit of his death, nor answer the typs thereof so well as that.
OVR Lords CROSSE being David's shep|herds staff, Noach's ark, Samson's gates, Isaac's wood, Iacob's ladder, Moses pol, Esdras pul|pit, the Spouses palm tree, Phineas spear, slying the Zimri of thoughts pollution, and Cosbi the inventer of lyes, for such almost are their names by interpretation, that the plague might be stayed from the people

which had been brought among them by he counsel of the first Balaam that is, destroy|er of the people, the Devil by a woman, in place whereof the CROSSE affoordeth life and health, by beholding it as the Iews the Serpent to be cured, giving life, in open|ing our eyes, as the honey on Iona|thans rod to see, pursue and overtake our e|nemies, all by his death; the immensurable pains whereof, with infinit patience he en|dured; being the more bittering, that it was lingering, for the removing of that guilt, which by mans dallying with, and delight|fulnesse in sin, had been contracted.
WHAT he did typically here (viz.) drink, and really afterwards did, (viz.) dy, must Mystically, by all his members be followed, the first condition of Christianity, being self denyal, and that unto death: for to that must his steps be followed, Pet. 1.2. we have in much pleasure drank of the goblets of Sa|tans mixing, to expiat which the black Ce|dron waters of mortification must be tasted, going forwards with him to Gethsemane, by interpretation, a fat, or plentiful valley, as affoording (especially when Christ is in it) abundance of good things, new and old, new for pleasure, old for health; for though in the gardens of earthly paradise, whence sin had

it's rise, there may be pleasant fruits; they are but seemingly so, and if not so, they are on|ly so, that is, pleasant; whereas this garden hath store of all manner of all good things; for all purposes, times and seasons: Christs bloudy sweat, having watered it, for excel|lent products, the Universe being but a wil|dernesse when compared to those fragran|cies, wherewith the garden of the Church is planted,  replenished: which to him who fals in a spiritual agony as Christ, religious con|flicts, and in earnest sweats, in the resistance of the old man, that he may do all accord|ing to the will of God, shall from heaven be strengthned, as he by an Angel: and know that Grace is sufficient for him, and in that garden, shall find from self experience, the brusing of the serpents head.
PROVIDED he come not as Iudas, to betray him, or his cause, for love of this pre|sent world the poyson whereof infecting the heart of Iudas to mercilesse treacherie, eating up the bowels of compassion, made (to retaliat his crime) his own bowels to be cast into the earth: yet, not so low, but they stand as a beacon, that we may avoid an evill custome, pilfring and stealing, the con|sequence thereof, an evill conscience, and the perfection of that, the place prepared for hy|pocrites,

and unbelievers: but what Pilat said, thy own nation have delivered thee unto me, may both Turk and Pagan say of Christ the lives of Christians scandalizing the nati|ons, through avarice, pride, interest and malice, contradicting that good confession, My kingdom is not of this world, securing, Pilat from fear of rebellion, or disturbance in his Government, by stratagems of war, or engines of State, whereas by both, we seek not only to invade the territories and dominions of those differing from us; but maligs, corrupts, deames enviously, cal|ling, away, away with them, who in prin|ciples of Religion, are one with our selves.
AS Iudas avarice one the on hand, o Peter's Arrogance is to be avoided on the o|ther, ingoing over this brook, he also went with Christ, arrogating to himself, what was not in him, he seemed as the Pharisee to des|pise others, and gave to his Master a flat contradictory speech, in the vehemency of his supposed constancy; a warning for the strongest to say, I am weak, since his fall from the occasion of it a Woman, a Maid, a Wench, pricks the bladder of self confidence, and causes the informed to bear a low sail, least if by his example, doctrine be not drawn of humility, Pride become our ruine, as we see

in those days, in which holinesse, that is, strictnesse, getting an honourable name, be|comes a shelter, a pent house, for more sub|tile sinners, their subtilty being only in this, (viz) in a high ungrounded conceit of them|selves, from which if we this day arise, it shall be good-friday; forgetting the lcks (which by many of you is eat this day as a proper food) as well as the onyons and gar|like of earthly sensuality, makeing the breath of our Spiritual converse, too too ranky fast upon the sour herbs, of lowly, and repen|tant considerations, being circumcis'd Isra|elits, and proper for the Paschal Lamb of the Gospel, compensing the dshonour we have given the most high, by sinfull, because fleshly dainties, by the sorrow and sighings, bitter reflections, from a mortified because con|verted soul, for denying the Lord that bought us, being first remembred by the Cock cro|ing, next by Iesus looking, that is, by the sound of the word; next by meditation thereof, re|membring he said, the Lord resisteth the proud but giveth Grace to the humble, as the justify|ing the Publican in the paable discovers.
THE ancients in their baptism, did dip or sprinkle three times the baptized, in remem|brance of the holy Trinity or the three dayes lying in the grave of the Son of man, that

even in this demersion, they might be confor|med to the sufferings of their Lord; and how hath S. Pa. boasted of his being crucifyed with Christ? and presseth to the likenesse of his death, for our being crucified, by keeping from the filthinesse of the flesh, and walk|ing with Zacharias, Righteously, one hand being nailed, that is bound up against the injustice of the world, and with Elizabeth Blamlesly, the other hand detained from the intemperance of the world; making straight paths for our feet in a prudent heeding of our ways, our hearts, and sides, pierced with the spear, or sword of the word of God, and thence as bloud and water, to flow forth, Love to God charity to man, crowned with the sharp thorns of inward compunction for our folly, and of outward compassion for our Brothers adversity, beholding the solidity of this world; to be but emptinesse of a Spunge, and all it's delights as Vineger, to the teeth forbearing to drink of that Myrhe of envy; malice, and all uncharitablenesse; where|with the world doth in extremity, furnish her prisoners and captives, as Christ knew.
THEN may the soul cry, the prince of this world cometh and findeth nothing in me, and again, Father, into thy hands I commit my Spirit: which at the bowing down of the head

in giving up the Ghost by dying to sin shall cause thy soul be cloathed with the fin linnen of the Saints, and be admitted into the Para|dise of joy, the body being hid, during the three days of suffering what God shall im|pose, labouring to keep a good conscience, and grieving for the abominations of the world; after which, in the morning of the Resur|rection, by the Ministry of the Angels, meet the Lord in those mountains of Galile, where|of he hath told us, that is in the clouds.
IF any will be so charitable (as who should not) to heed and see where Christ is laid, re|member he hath been laid in three Sepulchers or places, first in the Vnity of the two new Testaments, which is, as the Virgins womb; next in the bosome of the Church, which is as the manger: the third is Iosephs rock, which is the soul and heart of the elect: watch this last, and make it as sure as you can, but wake him not, by the noise, tumult or rumbling of unruly and unholy, because unruly cogitations; which are not pleasing to him; but rather provide oyntments, with Nicodemus, of Myrhe, in continence and chastity, of spiritual sorrow for all delinquen|cies, of Aloes, in withdrawing from such as are disorderly, and cleansing your selves from the sin that so easily besets; makeing a

mixture of both these, by eyeing the doctrine of the Law; which requires inoffensivenesse towards God and man: and working them into an oyntment, wherewith to enbalm the poor members of the body of Christ, refresh|ing them, that their loines may blesse you.
THE Paschal lamb was slain in the even|ing, so was Christ, which it prefigured, give|ing up the Ghost about the ninth hour, that is, three in the afternoon; he came to give light unto the world, which by his life, doctrine and miracles, he did effectuat, and none hateth him but they who hate the light, least he should detect their evil deeds; he came in the evening of the world, to enligh|ten the Gentiles and be the glory of his people Israel; he crossed the book Cedron, in the evening before he suffered, still endeavoring to have the end of things good, Iudas leav|eth him in the evening Peter boasted of himself in the evening, he enlightned both, because he forwarned both favoring neither the one, nor regarding the other, looking still to the close of things, a policy, yet Christianity mantais allowing good be|ginings, but approveth only continuance in good; Ind had a fair morning and began well, ended miserably, selling his Master, and buying his own damnation, for three

pound fifteen shilling sterling, his rendition of it, not abating one farthing of the guilt, his confession at it, not assoiling the soul, for in or|dinary law, the money was neither his, nor their's, to whom he gave it; being the price of the highest sacriledge, and of which as of the censures of Dathan, and Abiram God was to have been heir, and by consequence, the poor, which the consciences of the Scribs knew, and therefore laid it out upon, and for, strangers, as their own charity, he makeing no confession of his former theifts, discovered not the manner of his apprehension, hged himself, a sad ending, a fearful close, a dismal evening, of such a fair day as the Apostleship presented to him.
IT is much to purchase, but a greater mercy, to secure goodnesse and grace: if therefore there be any good thoughts this day, for Christ, saying if it be so, why am I thus? with Peter, sink not for fear, with him is love and forgivenesse, with Iudas, sell him not for greed let not the cares, pelf, or trash of this world, chock that good seed, remembring that Peter and Iohn, was only sent to prepare the passeover before he suffe|red, the first signifieth a rock, the other grace, and such as are established by grace, in their heart, are only they with whom Christ the truth of the passeover shall be found, for

(because with) the cup of remission of sin, which shall in the evening of their days, as the bloudy mark, secure them from the de|stroying Angel.
FRIENDSHIP of old was effiged bodi|ly with an open side, discovering the very frame, figure and position of the heart, without which, it was concluded, true a|mity and fellowship, could not be secured; and is not true kindnesse represented on the CROSSE? where bodily our Lord hung, with a peirced side, not only shewing, but, the heart emptying it self unto us, pouring forth bloud, and water, not blood only, for justi|fication, as by beasts slain, under the Law, but water also, for purifying the vessels of the young men, that they be holy, and this visibly from the heart, being sub dio, of the Brook, that is of the field, not the wells of a house, dying, that is drinking at Ierusalem, a publick City, at a passeover, a holy feast, not in the town, but on a mount, not privatly massacred, but publickly adjudged by Ponti|us Pilat, not in the Temple, by Tumults, least Jews should plead a priveledge, but in the open Air, by the hands of the Gentiles, for purifying of the air from the defilments of both Nations, clearing it also that he dyed for both, and is as clear as the parting of his

garments which yet being divided in four e|qual parts, projects his merits to be open,  to be applied by many in the four quarters of the world,  that in the self same day, wherein there passed four glorious occurences, emi|nent passages in relation to the Church, the day of his death (though at long distance) being the selfsame day, in which Abraham was called from Vr of the Caldeans, in which the Israelits were called out of Egypt, with whom went a mixed multitude, and in which the decree went forth to build the holy City, to which the Gentiles contributed, these three meeting with this, according to the time of the passeover, and the best compu|tation, denoteth the general influence his Death, the last of the famous four, hath up|on all the world: and in evidence whereof, he would not dy a privat death, chusing ra|ther to drink of the brook in the sight of the Nations, that is, in the way.
IT is said he was crucified, with his back to the citty, as if his prophannesse had been so great, that his face was not worthy to be|hold their holy Temple: but was it not (if true) a shrewd sign of the fulfilling of that prophesy, I will shew them the back, and not the face in the day of their calamity, Je. 18   hath so long taken his countenance from them,

that that wherwith they apbraided Iesus, of his being a Friend to publicans, to sinners, is now their greatest, and most ordinary em|ployment, in point of trust, among the Turks, they being under that disgrace, that in no Nation, are they martial'd or embodyed in an army for the field; and as they alwayes re|sisted the Holy Ghost, and became the murthe|rers of the just one, still they persist in that obduration, seeking the bloud of his followers and Disciples, polluting in their desperate malice, the pure annual celebration of this our Lords death, with crucifying to death Christian children, in derision of our Saviour and oft to their own destruction, in the shed|ding of their own bloud as murtherers, and banishing their posterity as the vilest of mis|creants as from England, France and ma|ny other places.
IT is stupendious, what is recorded touch|ing that mystery of iniquity, the necessity the Jews are in, of haveing Christian blood, a secret not known to many Rabbies, disco|vered but An Dom. 1500. by a converted Rabbi of Ratisbon: avouching that they at point of death, annoint the sick with Chri|stian blood in these words; If he who is promi|sed in the Law and Prophets, be already come, and Jesus who was erucifi'd, be the true

Messiah, let the blood of this innocent man, who dyed with faith in him, wash thee from all thy sins, and also conduct thee to Eternal life. So that his blood, upon them, among them, and by them triumphs.
AND of old, after the destruction of Je|rusalem, those of Tiberias would whisper in|to the ears of their dying relations, believe in Jesus of Nazareth, who was crucified whom our Princes slew upon the CROSSE: for he is come, and will judge thee at the last day.
SO that yet he lives, his drinking, being but in the way Everlastingnesse or Eternity, having no power upon his sufferings; for by this phrase, Way, understand the brevity of his passion, being but to taste of death, which as a sleepy drench, a potion of popy water, had a while dominion over him, and then he awaked, to their shame, sorrow and astonish|ment, as the wisest of them at this day de|clare, observing since his death, their desola|tion, finding no term of their captivity, as in the other two, nor promise of a third re|turn to Canaan, which either from policy, or conscience, made those Iews, who of late, An. Dom. 1666. had the eyes of the world upon them, pretending to a restaura|tion, give out that they were the posterity of

the ten Tribs, carried away into Babylon, who never returned, and not of the two who did, and therefore not the successors of such, who put Iesus the Son of Mary to death, which yet did not hold him, for want|ing sin, whereby the dead are fettered in their graves, he first stouped, drank, dyed; and then lift up his head, it being impossible for death to retain him; because of innocence.
BVT as at his death, his very disciples were offended, that is, in a Scripture sense, stumbled at the Crosse; and it's not to be questioned, but something of doubting ente|red into Maries soul, as if all her hopes, me|morials, relations, revelations, about her Sons kingship, Government, Godhead, had been so many gracious mistakes in her, of the Angels Anunciation, so it may be, some are now offended: and those even good, at this memorial of our Lords passion, accounting it Idolatry to speak so particularly of his death, at this time; and indeed as Mary, so the Church of Christ, which is his Mother, is yet wounded by slanders and misreports, and made to drink of the brook: and taste of those black waters: some of her Children offer to her; But know, that as Christ was innocen, for all his dinking, and harmlesse, though crucifid to death, as Iudas will pro|claim

him, though not yet judged by Pilat, who found no fault in him, and his wife who accounted him a Just man, as he was, Cere|monialy, being circumcis'd, Moraly being subject to his parents, politically paying tri|bute, religiously, for he gave eyes to the blind, knowledge to the ignorant.
IN summe, the reid heifer was to be without spot, and he was found without sin, though put to death as seditious, and with se|ditious persons, executed as most guilty, whence that word King is affixed on the Cross in scorn to the Iews, for except for one crime, two dyed not in one day among them, there|fore the three dyed as troublers of the peace; thou art, said the other thief in the same con|demnation, viz. with our Saviour as dy|ing for the same cause with them, and they suffering all for one thing, viz. Sedition, Luk. 23. yet as Christ, If I have done evill, bear witnesse of the evill, if not, why smytest thou me? so me thinks this day speaks to our Opinionators, I say, this day, in which he was lifted up, and (though innocent) account|ing it superstition, to behold him on it, or it to mind us of him; his white robs this day worn, darkly shews his non-guiltinesse; and the voice of our Brothers bloud, calling to hea|ven, it is strange if the sound may not be ob|served:

we find Pilat to have been a Bastard, and in sober sadnesse there is none will con|demn Christ, nor Christs Disciples that are legitimatly begotten of the Church, whether ancient or modern, in this holy service of at|tending to behold the man: for, know,
THE Church reformed, keepeth this day and others relating to the mysteries of our re|demption, expressed in sacred Writ, as Ger|many, Helvetia, Hungaria, Transylvania, Suitzerland, France, Holland, haveing prin|ted Sermons, in and upon those days preach|ed; and were the least of these three memor|able things said, to be in the death of Christ ob|served, we should not account them Chil|dren of the Church, who would condemn these there brethren, one is Patience be not therefore offended, that the Church primitive observed such days, holily, though they could not as they did not, attempt to make them holy: or that the Church Reformed estimats them worthy of celebration, being anual ca|techisms for edification: the other is Humi|lity, and none here ought to be so unsober in their talk, or so haughty in their own con|ceit, as to account the Church of God, for so many ages, not so wise, nor the present Church not pure, nor so holy as themselves; the last is Charity, and therefore let none con|demn

them in this their practice, no us their brethren in our conformity, to which if they assent not, they may withdraw, but not judge, for the Lord cometh, the judge is even at the door
IF this will not stop some mens mouths, but will still call crucifie it, crucifie it, I shall ay more, then Father forgive them, for they know not what they do: for as the brazen ser|pent was lifted up when the Isralites were stinged with serpents, though, as Naturalists observe looking upon brasse is hurtful to those so affected, who knoweth? but as the Centu|ion such who may come, to crucifie this ser|vice, or with the rabble to behold Christ dy, in a discourse, may go with Augustine somewhat affected and smitting their breasts; and though nothing of this be, yet to the pati|ent, Humble and Charitable Soul, it is a lift|ing of him up, for imitation, and let no man trouble these, for in those they bear about the marks of the Lord Iesus.
FOR fear of disturbing the good-man of the house, or troubling his family, wherein our Lord eat the passeover, and wherein it was made ready for him; among other my|steries, he retired into a garden there to be taken by the Iews; it being a matter of grea|ter moment to scandalize, to trouble the soul, to disturb the peace of the Church, even in

this particular, in repeating the story of the passion, then some of our pretended Zelots do imagine, the Church in all it's vicissituds, having accounted this a good-day indeed, bear|ing about, and holding up, the instruments and fruits of her Lords death, as trophies of that victory which he had, and she expects to have over all her enemies.
IN it dehorting from sin, particularly from reproaching, or tempting to reproach, the observers of it, least either the curse of the serpent, or the reprobation of the thief be their portions; for as there were three about the tree of life, one condemned for ever, and two pardoned; so about the CROSSE (an Embleme of life and Hierogliphick of e|ternity among the Egyptians, and figured upon the breast of their filthy Idol Srapis, though not figured as the Crux Immissa thus  whereon it is thought our Saviour dyed, but of that Commissa after the form of a Roman T. whereon also it's given Moses lif|ted up the brazen Serpent) I say about the CROSSE there were also three, two carried to paradise, and one left in his sin; from whose punishment, reasons against taunts, upon known sobriety, might be multiplied and drawn, unto that leangth, as to cause the dicerner glory in the CROSSE, professing

their belief in him who was crucified and slain, burying him boldly in the new sepul|cher of a new because broken heart this day.
AND if any yet say, the bloud, that is, the guilt of the contempt of this service, be on us and our Children, I say again, fear he issue; for the affixing of a Iewish taunt upon a Christi|an exercise, may have a Iewish, that is a cur|sed end; the CROSSE it self teaching bet|ter things, the height thereof, typifying our aspiring to things above, the breadth of it to the works of charity below; the length of it perseverance in that good untill the end, the depth of it, that good will of God, in his own bosome yet now revealed for our beholding of his Son, finishing the work of our re|demption.
ACCORDING therefore to the custome of the Jews, let one be released from death, by judgement, it was done as some say, in remembrance of their delivery from Egypt, at the passeover, of Isaac's, with others, from being sacrificed of Ionathans from Saul: how|ever let it be our duty in those days of judge|ment, to let the Church Reformed escape, and then we trust to stand not fall in judge|ment. And as Annas, and Caiphas, Herod, and Pilat, at Christs death were, ruleing to|gether, pointing at the division, and con|tention

of the people, yet united, and agreed against him, let us, for his sake, not fal out with one another, but agree, to crucifie those lusts of envy, whispering, uncleannesse, back-biting, which war against the Church:
WE are not graduas in all Arts, knowing but in part, and ought not to be positive in our determining, Christ is dead leaving us an example of humility, seldom found in the Chambers of the Censorious, this day we preach of our freedome from the curse of the aw: and I charge, by the Lord Iesus, judge of quick and dead, and who before Pontius Pilat, witnessed a good confession, curse not the day for us, nor us for the day, cry out rather with Tremel, that famous Iew, when demanded at his death, if he continued Christian? (Jewish converts though to the degree of Priest-hood being to be suspected) answered, in detesta|tion of his cursed country-men let Christ live, and Barabas be crucified.
AS Kings judge not their Crowns suffi|ciently honourable, without the CROSSE (shewing it's victory and conquest) be on the top thereof, judge your worth, to be of no worth, if not viruated by the doctrine there|of, whereby as Friends, or Sons, we shal have happinesse in receiving, or understanding the nature and wealth of these legacies he left

his relations; Leaving on the CROSSE Persecution to his Apostles, Peace to his dis|ciples, his body to the Iudge, his Garment to the souldiers, if they were such, which is doubted, being rather servants to the execu|tioners, and called souldiers, in a general way as armed and guarding him for death, the number four makeing it probable, his Mo|ther to his beloved, Paradise to the thef, and his Spirit to his Father, which last shall not be received, if not attended, with Mars tears, Iohns respect, Theifs confession, Ioseph of Arimathea's a Jew, his justice, Simon of Cyrene a gentile his asistance: when Christ in his poor flock, is at a pinch, with Christs own Purity, Humility, and Love, which a|lone, and together, shall cause thy conclama|tum est, or consummatumest, thy end, to be happy: for then its finished (i. e.) the Law, and Prophets in thy obedience, and the de|sire of the holy Angels in thy conversion.
BVT whereas some think Romes doctrine is here asserted, alleadging we symbolize with Papists; know it is not Romish, though taught at Rome, but the doctrine of the Church taught in the purest times that were, and of the Greek Church, that is, enemies to Rome more then we: and as the Iews, made Christs death the medium, or mean, to keep

the Romans from them, and it proved the very cause that brought them, it's evident the Reformed Church might say to such con|cluders, (for this and several other positi|ons and inferences,) verily, verily, one of you shall betray me. c.
THANKFVLNES for our mercies in enjoying the truths of the Gospel, might be more becomeing, that our eyes might be towards him, for Grace, Mercy, and peace, from his merits blood, and wounds and what ever properly may be produced and effected by them, walking after that light shewn us by oyl from him the olive, in the religious performance of Borgius Duke of Gant, who seven times a day, presented himself before God praying for seven gifts, conform to that seven times, our Saviour shed blood, desire|ing for the honour of the Circumcision, to attain wisdom and chastity, for what he shed in the garden, knowledge and abstinence, for what he shed in being scourged, tendernesse and cha|rity, for what he shed when crowned with thorns humility and fear what he shed when his hands were nailed counsel and compassion, for what he shed, when his fet were pierced, courage and perseverance, and for the blood which is|sud from his side, godinesse and patience, that being therewith sprinkled seven times,

as the leaper under the Law, he might be pro|nounced clean, that as Christ himself said, when I am lifted up, I will draw all men unto me; he might do that all in men, that is, all spirits, souls and bodies, being raised, that as sinners we may detest our follies, as penitents receive hope, as Iust prepare for the Crosse; apprehending with all Saints the extent of the love of God, revealed by it, answering in carriage and manners to our Saviours tri|umvirat, the three beheld him in the garden, having Peters confession, owning him for the Son of God, Iohns affection, in standing by him to the last, Iames devotion in fervent cal|ling upon him, for it's said his knees were hard as a camels, by frequent kneeling in prayer. by which, despair being closed up, there shall never be cause, finally to say, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me.
FORSAKEN, may be Ierusalems proper name, as it was once her nick-or by-name, Isa. 62.4. once the Ioy, now the scorn, of the whole earth, formerly for her inhabitants delight, and to Forrengers admiration, her coasts furnished her with abundance, of ne|cessaries, of delights, her meadows storing her with milk, her woods sweetning that milk with honey her vallies storing her with wheat and barley, her mountains as, high in

charity, as in height, (though brassy bowelld) out of compassion heated themselves, and in case of reluctancy, did beat and knock one another that she might have plenty of mettal, for her strengthning, 8. Deut. 9. And she her self thinking it dishonourable always to take, gve them again gold, silver, pretious gums, spices and honour, in such plenty that Israel became the glory of all the Lands, Eze. 20.6. Yet now hath not where withall to buy her self bread, save what relats to our glorious Saviour, his sepulchre, and it's temple being the greatest ornament within or with|out her walls; besides which, so insignifi|cant is her pot, that when Selymus, the Tur|kish Emperour, came on purpose, to behold so fam'd a place, he almost disdained to take on nights logding within her avenues and quarters: her pristine, and Jewish glory, lying contemptibly in the dust, the very ground where Solomons temple stood, being covered with a Mahomean Mosk, into which if any Iew enter, he is certain to meet with death at his comeing out.
AT such a distance hath her Lord  husband put her for multiplyed adulteries, and so tarly hath he drawn up her bill of divorce, that neither the Art, power, reason, indul|gence, graets, priviledges, Heathens, Egyp|tians,

Iews, Christians, Turks, could ever cause her have a good coat, a clear face, much lesse a fair one: Christianity was at much pains, for pitys sake, to have her restored to her Lords bed, and for fourscore years, was their Kings and Patriarchs of Jerusalem, in Jerusalem, fighting for and preaching up our Lord Jesus, but in the most perswasive entreatings, and more earnest solicitations; I mean their bloodiest, and most chargeable encounters, to preserve her, there were seen and heard almost, as many hundreths of ter|rible visions, astonishing cracks, and sights in the Heaven, Earth, and Air, evidenceing heavens dissent from such amicable proposals; God resolving in probability, to make her a-cast-away from Royalty, since she crucifi|ed her King, having only a name among the many empty and flaunting tittles of the great Turk and the Catholick King: both as re|lateing to Christ, the last without honour, the other with much profit, arising from the customs, and imposts, exacted of pilgrims whom criosity, or superstition, shall con|duct unto that soyl, where if any will en|gadge, to avoid dishonest gain, reconcile differences, shun the company of infamous persons, refrain from swearing, perjury, blasphemy, drunkennesse, and pay some mo|ney,

undergoing some ceremonies, he may by the Pater Guardian of the Franciscan Con|vent, be ordained a Knight of the holy sepul|chre of our Lord Iesus Christ, in the Name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost, of which or|der (as most seemly) the most Christian King is, or was Soveraign.
HOW should our Christian Cities flourish, in the fight of the Nations, and the Theaters whereon our Lord coquered, and trium|phed over all his adversaries: I mean not the places whereon, as Bethlehem, Gethsemane, Mount olivet, and the rest, but the Registers wherein these things are recorded, as S. Mathew S. Luke, S. Paul, and the other Apostles, if all that Travelled through the Holy Land of the Christian Dominions, were qualifi'd for this Honour; But to our shame as Turks, in Ierusalem, we make advantage, our scope, in designing honour to the Gospel, so far crossing it's true intent of Godlinesse as it's crosse, th'warts the projects of our self|seeking, lucre, gain, betraying in kissing Christ, a-fresh in our covetous enterprizings, and crucifying him, while we Crown him as a King, in the blaspheming and villany of our actings.
BY the Mapps of Ierusalem in Christs turnings, and returnings, from Annas, to

Caiphas, from him to Pilat, from him to Herod to Pilat back again, from Gabbatha, to Golgo|tha, that he travel'd the best  greatest part of the Citty over, is visible to be seen: he ren|dring thereby his passion more publick: and offering the fruits thereof unto as many as would, or will by faith, come forth to behold him; hath he not travelled through our lands and Kingdoms? and as cursed Jews have we not scorned, mocked, compelled him to bear his CROSSE? in our charging him with deplorable actings, the most inhumane butcheries, pretendedly said to proceed from the zeal of his Spirit? Is he not dayly in his members persecuted by our uncharitable talk|ing of, and walking before one another? whereby ruine may easily be predicted; and a divorce suggested ready for sealing, that we may abuse Gospel-priviledges no more? as is seen in that Babylon where our Lord was crucifi'd, wone once from the Turks by the slaughter of twenty thousand of them, by the sword of Christians upon a Friday, about three in the afternoon, as if for once God would beautify Christian verity in that Unbelieving City by putting it in their hands, who profes|sed the Gospel, and who wore the CROSSE on their cloathes; the same day and hour, his Son dyed upon the CROSSE.
FROM which let us fear least Mahomets growing greatnesse, occasioned by our Un|christian broils, provoke God, to make him become a scourge, and a CROSSE to our Cities and Nations, pretending adherence to the Gospel, but not receiving the same in the love thereof, by bowing down our heads, giving up the Ghost, in walking with all low|linesse of mind, and dying unto sin.



MYSTERIUM PIETATIS, OR THE MYSTERIE OF THE RESURRECTION of Iesus Christ, unfolded, and applied.

Pasch-Sunday, April 3. Tolbooth Church, 1670.
Easter-Sunday, April 3. Tolbooth Church, 1670.


PHILIP. III.X.
That I may know him, and the power of His Resurrection, and the fellowship of His sufferings, being made conformable unto His death.

_THE holy men of God in Scrip|ture, mentioning the death of Christ, seem oft, as posters, to hat from, and briskly to ex|ped that subject, intending to lodge, that is, to insist up|on, and rest in the doctrine of the Resurrecti|on:

not slighting his passion, as if not comfort|able; but because not satisfactory for Gods justice, or mans happinesse, unlesse the ri|sing from the dead be a consequent thereof; he stiled himself the first and the last, I am said he, he that liveth, and was dead, and be|hold I am alive for ever more, Revel. 1.
SO our Creed, as fearing to damp belief, goeth forward in haste, omitting many glo|rious passages, in being crucified under Ponti|ous Pilat, unto the rising again the third day; It is Christ that dyed, saith S. Paul, yea ra|ther, who is risen again, Rom. 8. and verily it is usual, to see his dying, and rising, hand|ed together, they being the cementing mat|ter, whereby God and Man, the Soul and Happinesse, Ioy, and the Consience, perfectly, inseparably, knit and united in one: for, what ever felicity can be concluded from the ver|tue of the latter, depends upon those promi|ses, which evinceth the truth of the former; seeing him dy, that is, perswasions of his Death the knowledge of which death, and the fellowship of his sufferings, that is, being made conformable to his death, being only the proper and effectual mediums of knowing the power of His Resurrection.
HERE the Apostle discovers his desire of knowledge, and next to benefit thereby,

meaning, the righteousnesse of Faith, that is of Christ, in point of doctrine, about his Resurrestion, and his imitation of the other, referring to practise, in being made conform|able to his death, so that we are enforced to speak first, with Peter, and before him with David, of the Resurrection which is not right|ly known, untill the vertue, efficary and e|nergy, of his death be understood; consisting in the expiation of sin, liberation of guilt, ac|quisition of righteousnesse, and the hope of mmortality, the scope and tendency of the Resurrection being perfectly and inwardly, for the applying of these things as from it, towards our selves, he being delivered for our offences and raised again for our justification.
CONCEIVE him dead, sealed, watched,  writ upon his Tombstone, here lyeth Iesus Christ, of Nazareth, who was crucified, An. M. 3982, Aetatis suae 33. yet by pow|er did make a spoil of death, his grave cloathes, those ensigns of mortality, laid by, baffling the envy of the Scribs, the fury of the people, the force of Herod, and in one morning confounded all the adversaries of his life.
HE dyed about the ninth hour, about three in the afternoon, order so requiring, for about that time, (viz.) in the coole of the day Adam

was cast out of Paradise; about which time also, it was congruous, for the second Adam, to make his entry therein; both in the even|ing, enjoyning all, in the Mystery, to dy unto the worlds pleasures, before night, that is, the eleventh hour, which was, to the ma|ster of the Vineyard, the time of payment, not of calling unto work.
BVT least we speak of, (as the woman sought the living among) the dead, see him raised, for he is risen, and tha while it is yet dawning, at break of day, directing us to in|fer, that he was no more to dy; the linnen napkin within the sepulchre, giving caveats to us against the surmise of his after using such apparel: Lazarus indeed came forth, bound hand and foot, with grave cloaths being af|terward to wear the same robes, not so Christ, death having no more dominion over him, Rom. 6. being swallowed up in victory, as Moses rod, swallowed up those of the Magi|cians, as the wide Ocean, doth the smal drop, in which it is to be more seen, as the Sun the dark cloud, which it either scatters, or illu|minats.
THIS Lyon of the tribe of Iudah, over|comeing that devourer of men, even in the grave his deepest den, resolving from first to last, for conquest, in the Manger, in the Hall,

on the Crosse, in the rock, their mocks, their blasphemy, their swords, their guards: for had he been possessed by the tomb, or his holy body seen corruption, after his Viniger and Gal, what benefit had men accrew'd by his death? It was therefore a religious error of Mary Magdalen and the other Mary, to come early to the sepulchre, with oyntments, be|ing grounded upon their thoughts of finding death; whereas he was up before, to take possession of his new purchase, having so pun|ctualy payed the contractedfor sum for sin unto the Father; thereby becomeing Lord of heaven, and heir of the utmost coasts of the earth.
MAKE his Resurrection, a question, and for once put it to probation, Davids seed, in whom the Kingdom was to be established, 2. Sam. 7. Adams sleep, and his awaking out of that, after Eva his spouse had been form|ing, the promise of ransoming from the grave, Hs. 13. Isaac's delivery from being sacri|fic'd, in the old Testament, an Angel from heaven, Christs own prophesy, Peters testi|mony, Thomas believing in the New, doth almost overstock us with sufficient proofs: his eating, drinking, walking, talking, pri|viledging the expression, yea the simplicity of the arguments brought against us by the

Jews, evidenceth it's reality: for if he were stole, why was he not resceu'd? If by his Disciples, why were they not questioned? and if either of these be true, how is it known to them, since the watchers declare they were asleep? what more? the order and neatnesse in disposing of the grave cloaths, the confident declarations of the pious wo|men, and the calamities the Apostles chear|fully underwent, evinceth the Resurrection to be no fallacy.
IT was attended with that power, that the watchers became as dead men, when they came to apprehend him, or to eat up his flesh, they stumbled and fell, amazed at some disco|very of unexpected Majesty; but here, be|holding an Angel, from heaven, preparing to liberat the innocent, it was just on the o|ther hand to strick, as (if not altogether) dead, the guilty, and give check to unbelief, especialy when heaven is at pains to refute impertinencies, as their keeping was, since it flowed from cruelty not piety, earth also la|bouring, by an earth-quake, to invalidat their strength, shaking their greatest confident, that is, their armes causing them unfit to handle the weapon, their ground disableing them to stand, their authority to keep him in the grave being recalled, by a stronger then either was Pilat, or the Councill.
FOR yet once more was the earth to be shaken, and the desire of the Nations then to come, which was the Messiah that is, Christ sent to all Nations: for as at the giving of the Law their were Earthquaks, and shakeings, even in heaven by the thunder, and smoak, shakeings of the Sea, at the makeing way for his people, so once more he will, as in Christs suffering, the sun was darkned, the rocks rent: here at his rising, there was a shakeing of hearts, upon earth, and moveing of Angels of heaven, some being shaken out of their dumps, doubt? fears, and sinful carnal conditi|on: others, not desireing him, being shaken out of their wits, out of their lives, out of their armes, and justly, having refused him whose face was lovely, and society desired, by all Nations, by Angels, and Men unto whom they should run, as the camp to the standar, as the eagles to the carcae, bring|ing as subjects to their Prince all their desire|able things, offering unto him not only of the best of the fruits of the land, as gold, fran|kincense, and Myrbe, but the choisest of their hearts, as love, fear, joy, obedience, which all Nations ow unto him, and the elect have payd, being shaken with the wonder of so great a mystery as his death, and rising a|gain from the dead, which the unbelieving

Iews denying, and mercenary Souldiers, stri|ving to obstruct, he that sitteth in heavens, did laugh at the confederacy, and said in spite of them in the morning of the Resurrection, thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee.
THE mountains skipping like Rams, and the little hills like lambs, to respect him in his exite, from the grave, and prepare his people to admire, believing his heroick at|chiefment, of subduing Hel, and Death, curb|ing by it, and shakeing their insolence, who cry'd, we have no King but Cesar, and said, crucifie him, crucifie him; but on the other hand, comforting his followers, with a fear not ye, for I know that ye seek Iesus, he is not here, for he is risen so that the Church may salute Iesus, as the Angel Gideon, the Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valour. Judg. 12. for hath it ever been heard, since the be|ginning of the world, that any wrought wonders in their death, or that wonderful|ly raised himself again to life, Iesus excepted whose Resurrection is the sine qua non, of the joy, in all believers, the living having no hope, no comfort, save in it, and by it.
IT was refreshing news to the eleven, and unto these two, unto whom he was seen in breaking of bread, and so much the more cor|dial, was his perception, that he was at

first concealed from them, having wrapped up the face of his Humanity, in a skreen by the power of his Divinity, which no sooner drawn aside, then they behold the Lord that bought them, which brought new life, and vigour to the heart-broken, and doubting Disciples, breaking that silence, which for grief had been more then half an hour in the heaven of their society, where sorrow had caused mutenesse, about fourty hours, (for so long it is reckoned he lay dead) Adam after the ejectment from paradise, is never record|ed to have spoak, and after the second had admittance, we can find among the Apostles little mirth, but now all preach, and teach Angels descend, women walk, Peter and Iohn run, the two talk: whence the Church of old, this day sung the Psalms of Invitation, inviting all creatures to praise the Lord, be|cause Iesus who was crucified, is not here, (viz.) in the grave, but risen, come said, the Angel, see the place where the Lord lay; affoording matter for deep contemplation, Iesus, discovering the truth of his being Sa|viour, who was crucified, a holy abridgement and true repetition of his passion, He is not here, discovering the truth of his being dead, and his once being there, come see the place, where the Lord lay; by Lord, acknowledging

the soveraignity of Ies, and by the word lay, enforceing a belief of his rising.
THE Iews craved a sign; and those that mocked, said, come down, and we will be|lieve, but that being the time of suffering, he disdained the motion, the sign of the Pro|phet Ionah, which was of rising up and oppo|sit to their coming down, being appointed, all other signs were rejected; and because that of Ionah was fulfiled, let's believe, and go before him unto Galile, by interpretation, transmigration; or going over, that going from infirmity to vertue, from mortality to eternity, from contumely to glory, we may more fully participat of those sore-expected joys, in being treated, yea feasted in the com|pany of our ever to be adored Saviour.
Worshiping our Lord, begining to pra|ctise, and celebrat our Sabbath, when the Jew rendeth his, acting not only contrary to him; but spiritualizing his superstitious deportment thereon, he will kindle no fire that day, let us blow up that of the spirit, in the hearth of our hearts, for elevating our thoughts, and rais|ing our minds upward, heavenward, to this day they alleadge the destruction of Ierusalem solely to have flowed from the neglect of the Sabbath, in putting no difference, between the holy and prophane, Ez. 22. Let us compute it's

desolation, to spring from he innocent blood shed on the preparation day for the Sabbath, and in hiding their eyes from the Lord of the Sabbath, they will not put so much as their finger, to any serwill, or country work, let us not fear, to exercise our selves about, works of piety, charity, or necessary with both our hands, our Lord giving s example, whose servants I mean the Christians whom they keep, being put by them in this day, to their drudgery, which yet and by the way might be rectified by Christi laws and magistracy, as they will not writ, nor blot out what is written on that day, let the errata's of our soul be reviewed, and weekly  be exactly corrected, that the next weeks impression, of our civil, or spiritual conves may be both more clean, clear, and holy, being emended from our former mistakes, by religious watchfulnesse, and future taking heed, do they knock on the door when calling unto a pre|paring for the Synagogne? it is  to provoke to love, and to good works. They will not on that day, begin a journey, and justly having killed him that was the Way, yet let us walk, and be undefiled in the way of the Law of the Lord, keeping our feet from the filthinesse, that is, our affections, from those lusts, that are in the world through sin;

they crowned our Lord with thorns, let us adorn both his holy Temples, in exalting his two fold nature, by a firm adhering, to the truth thereof, and laying out for him and his, the best of our substance, somewhat of our rich possessions, entering by the gate of the Church, into that of Paradise, from which impenitent Iews as the Reprobated Theif, are for ever excluded.
The sixth Psalm, and the twelth are entitled pro octavo, for the eight in the Vulgar transla|tion, from which some will have many my|steries to emerge, particularly, the change of the Sabbath, for respecting our Lords entry into Jerusalem, in our computation on Palm Sunday the day of his rising will be one of the seventh, but not upon the seventh, the prophesies therefore, and conquests also of our Saviour, to be by us celebrate in the Church the eight day after that account, will be the Lords day, in the new Testament, be|ginning our holy day, when the murtherers of our Lord endeth his Mosaical weakly feast, it is nearer to affirm that as God had Circum|cision, Sabbaths, and other rites, to difference his people from the masse of the world, it is fit to have now, some difference to discrimi|nat his Church, and since there is a change of the Temple, of the Sacrifice, of the Circum|cision,

of the Paschal supper, of the Priest, a necessity may easily be suggested, of an alte|ration of the Sabbath, heightned when we consider that Christ came to work a new creation, Isa. 65. for which, a celebration of an old Sabbath, had been incongruous, and his kingdome beginning from, and his resting da|ted at the Resurrection; how consonant is it, to name this day, the Lords day, and in the proportion all it's followers?
HIS sleeping or resting on the seventh day in the grave typifying that the old Sabbath dyed with him, as all other changeable cere|monies of the law, which none ought to judge us in respect of a Sabbath, or a holy day since Christ hath triumphed on the eight, let us rejoice, beholding as badges of his victo|ry, the scares of his wounds, the print of the nails, the wound in his side, not only as prob|able tokens of his rising, but as jems to a|dorn his royal body, as a testimony of his vic|tory; and as some think, to be seen yet in hea|ven, that as in his Church militant, he hath bread, and wine, continually as visible me|morials of his bloudy agony and death, for his peoples stronger confirmation; so in the triumphant, the scares of his wounds, re|main in his body, before the glorified, for more fervent, and eternal Iubilation
THESE same wounds, when seen and felt, besids his own faithful Testimony, so strengthned the Apostles, that the ghastly frownings of an incensed crew, in this wicked world, was but a whet-stone to edge their zeal, for publishing this truth, this glorious truth of the Resurrection: for though it be said he was stole, yet who durst rouz this young lyn? and a little more money, would have made the Souldiers tell another tale; he quickned in the grave, by receiving in the se|cond time, his soul then rose from out of the grave, astonishing death, amazing the keep|ers, yet so heartning, and heating his Disci|ples, that they spurn and disdain the threats of men; accounting all the worlds wrath, or fawning to that degree of naughtinesse as to comput it dung, in comparison of the excel|lency in the knowledge of the rising from the dead, all created beings in the power of man, being but a cypher to the Resurrection, Christ by it; and in him, themselves conquering and flying above all the pouder Crakers, the ungodly should frame or fire, to disturb the power of it's Doctrine, or the progresse of it's publication, the voice of all the Martyrs be|ing like the call of Helidorus, who refusing to sacrifice to Idols, and being tormented for denyal, cryed out aloud, O Lord Iesus Christ,

assist me, and when the crown of the Chuch is now beheld, to have been but made the pu|er, by the fires of devouring persecutors, and the ancient Stanza or holy Doxology of our Quires, now heard in giving glory to the Father, and thought upon, who so dul as not to anticipate the rehearsal, and suggest the fam'd answer given to the same Martyre, is yet returned to all Saints witnesses, and con|fessors, be not affraid for I am with thee?
FOR s unhurt with torture, how have the heathen and Iews been braved, and out|braved by Christians through the hope of the Resurrection; Paul was thought mad and He|liodorus thought a witch, but he call'd, my Charmes, my Art, my Craft, is Christ; and demanding respite for three days to advise what to do; he repaired to the Idols Temple, and in fervent prayer obtained from heaven, the falling of them all like Dagon; for which being set upon a fresh, he made ample con|fession of the truth of Christ, yea his tongue being cut, he preached heaven-ward with his hand, untill he was slin, rejoyceing in hopes to see God in his flesh; desireing also to depart and to be with Christ.
BY the Resurrection, the Believer hath a privative and a possessive good, the first con|taineth an abolishment of hell, and death, that

they be not the portion of his cup, Christs appearing to be the Son of God by it, have|ing brought life, and immortality to light, is the substance of the other, 2 Tim. 1. open|ing the gates of Death, a typ of the resusci|tation of our mortal bodies, having made out peace, by defraying as a surity, or cautioner what we were endebted to justice, whereby we are accounted just and righteous be|fore God, his egress from the prison of the grave, testifying a discharge, and mas assil|ment: whence still to our being condemd there is oppos'd, his rising: for who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is Christ that dyed, yea rather who is risen again; and in this righteousnesse it is, wherein S. Paul de|sire to be found, makeing it his own by faith: and rejoyceing in his own security thereby, blessing God for that victory which in Chrst he himself obtained, the day book of his sins being crossed and the head of his advrsary bruised, by the substance of the Crosse in the power of the Resurrection, which so far virtuats his life, that as raised in Christ, he accounts not himself any more in this world, haveing his conversation in heaven, not re|garding the knowledge, even of Christ, after the flesh as did not a latter Saint, who seeming to behold his Saviour in bodily shape, visio|nally,

cryed out, Lord keep that sight from me here, but let me behold it in thy own Kingdom in the other world.
RISE therefore from your vain conversa|tion, from your graves of lust, your reward, is slighting Christ, or selling Christ, being no other then what the Patriarchs had, when they sold Ioseph, or what Iudas got, when he betray'd Iesus, viz. shame and fear, which whoso would avoid, must follow him, who is the way to young beginners, the truth to such as affirm, and life to those that persevere, the way, to them that ask the, truth to such is have found, the life to those who passe, the way to them who travel, the truth to them who rest, and the life the righteous do enjoy, all procured by the death Christ under|went.
IT is said the lyons whelps lying as dead, three days after birth, are awakned by the roaring of the Syre: certain it is that after three days this lyon of Iudahs trib, was raised by God the Faher, for thogh his rising be attributed to the Spirit of holinesse, Rom. 1. as also to him|self, having a power to take up, as well as to lay down his life, John 10. yet it is also ex|pressed to originat from the Father, for God said Peter raised up Iesus, Acts 2. scattering the least mist could arise from doubts, temp|tations

or surmise, improving faith against all stumbling blocks, the holy Trinity joining in one for Christs manumission from the grave, all being reconcil'd to man in his Saviours actings upon that particular, the Lord God, who had sentenc'd Adam, raising the Son, who was God, and by the Spirit, who with the Father and the Son, is one, all equally wil|ling, equally appearing for, and equally ap|proveing what by the determinat counsel of the Father, was under agitation, in that affair.
SHEWING withall, that as Christs man|hood, was raised by God, through the Spirit of holinesse, so the quickning of man, against the deadnesse of sin, ignorance, and unbelief is the sole work of Omnipotency, which alone can remand back, the Spirit of sanctified illu|mination, men possessed, in the loins of their Father Adam, and adapt them by a receive the holy Ghost to walk as Sons of God, not of men; yet as nothing quickens except it dy so neither can the sinfulnesse of sin, be taken away, untill man know he is sold under it, and by it betrayd as by a Iudas into the hands of the Devil, who hath the power of death, that is, of execuing, not sentenceing: which con|viction of heart, only maketh man to dy with Christ, and necessarily must preceed a rising with him.
TO some it is true, Christ is not yet born; such are the lofty Spirits, the touring souls, behaving themselves not as Children wean|ed from the mothers breast, but as so many Gyants begotten of some Goliah, and born of some radiant Amazon: which conceit mak|eth them conceive themselves some great body, and being contrary to our Lord, who was born a Child, that is, for humility, and meeknesse debonaire and affable towards all, soar in their carriage, and Pea-cock like, moutting in the sun-shine of their own vain glorious imagination, as if with the Pea-hen, all must then be in love with their mistaken transcendency, and couch to the shadow of their greatnesse, whereas quite contrary, self denyal, religious pensivenesse, for the losse we have had, for the things we want, a rever|sing of the Escutcheon of that excellency, which fortune or parts have bestowed, be|cause ensigns of our mysery, and badges of our poverty, tokens of the infamy because sinfulnesse of our birth, are still in those true Children moraly, and in their own esteem little ones, to whom belongs the Kingdome of heaven.
TO others he is not yet dead, these are the carnal, the fearful, the sensual minds, who desireing to live in the affluence of flshly

pleasures, flye from the Crosse as a bugbear, and sailing in the Pleasure-boat of a bare pro|fession, in the least cloud gets into the coast, snugging under the wind of alluring com|forts, hat's nothing more, then to ride out a storm, with the warelik builded and storm prepared for Christian, knowing he cannot weather out the tempest; and judgeing him|self no further in safety, then that the next step lands him on the shore of ease, delight, and ticklish pleasure: where, loving this pre|sent world, he embraceth it with both arms, saying to tribulation, at a more convenient time, I will hear thee again in this matter; and so with Peter denying (any soul saveing) knowledge of Iesus, chuseth the warmth which the fire of the Mammon of this pre|sent world doth affoord, accounting beloved Paul mad, for (because of the Gospel) endur|ing a storm, or abideing a night and a day in the deep, judging the cargo of a soul not to be valued at so high a rate, that the losse of the vessel of the body (which is but the hll of man) should be suffered, to endure such hardship for it's security.
TO others he is not risen, these are the thunder-struck, the conscience-smitten sin|ners, who with Iosuah, ly all day be|fore the Ark of the Lord, complaining of

flams, kindled in their souls, through wrath foreen being invaded by sudden incomes from above, as by a troup, before te Lord himelf come to pul down, and to destroy, to sentence, to condemn; with Mary Magdaln, they cry, who shall roul us away the stone? of our sadness sloathfulnesse, had-heartednesse, and bitternesse?) wretched mn that we are, who shal roul away the stone from the Sepulchre of our hearts? from the sight of our eyes? and in pithy Harangues deats upon their own misery, because of ransgression, with broken pauses, again feelingly sigh, because of aggra|vated circumstances calling out with that con|vert Thais, who having led a life unchast, and purchas'd great riches, by unlawfull embra|ces loathed her self, and casting away her wealth, not daring to name God, her ordinary prayer was, O thou that made me have mer|cy upon me.
BVT there are to whom he is risen, making them to rejoyce, with exceeding great joy, becomeing rivals, even to Angels in point of exhileration, rising from the dead|nesse of rottennesse, and filthinesse darknesse, and horror, found in the vault or grave of pol|luted Adams ffpring; having the lively co|lour of a sanctified countenance in the face of their conversation, by being conform to the

amiable aspect found in the behaviour of the old Saints; which if denyed, they answer as the blind man did the Pharisees, one thing we know, whereas we were dead, now we live, and behold the things that are above, not bowed down as before, but makeing straight paths for our feet, towards the mysticall Ga|lile, to see our Lord, avoiding the sarch of these Finical Apish, Trivial,  poor things in the valley of this world, to enquire after, 1. what is in that mount to which he hath ascended and 2. whereof he hath told us; for remember, to seek the things, to affect the things that are a|bove, to be dead with Christ, and then to live like him, are the only four scriptural to|kens of a spiritual Resurrection, flowing from the power of our Lords rising from the dead.
OVR elder brethren the Jews, keeped one passeover, and their first at their comeing out of Egypt, Exo. 12. another was observed in their journey through Sinai, Numb. 9. a third at their entry into the holy land: that Christ is our passeover; and that he is the lamb of God, and that this is our Paschal feast in the truth verity and substance of the old rite of eating the passeover, is clear and evident; yea let the Mystery of that lamb be reviewed, and both the Christians duty, and the Christians Saviour, are beautifully deli|neated;

a lamb pourtrays Christs meekness, innocency, and harmlesnesse, that the lamb was to be of the Male kind, respected his courage, activity, and Spirit; it's spotlesness, his undefilednesse with guilt or sin; it's be|ing a year old, the perfectnesse of his age, and ripenesse of understanding, exactly qualify|ing him to preach; it's takeing in the first moneth, shews our duty of consumeing the whole year in Gods service, the first moneth whereof being consecrated unto him, by this formal worship, points out that he is enfeas|sed of the whole; that it was to be in the fourteen day of the moneth, sheweth Christs comeing in the darknesse of the soul; and with full Moon clearnesse, shins for secure|ing it against the darknesse of error, and the evening doth so evidently publish his comeing in the last days, or ages of the world, that it needs no remark. That it was to be eaten with unleavened bread, banisheth ma|lice, and wickednesse, this day from the houses of your hearts; that it's blood was sprinkled upon the door, is but the necessity, we stand under, of haveing our hearts pur|ged from an evil conscience; that it was to be rosted only not boyled, is but the whole|somenesse of the Gospel of peace, and implys it's good nourishment, and that the Doctrine

thereof is not pleasantly to be handled, ac|cording to the soft, or easy tempers of men; that nothing was to be left of it, enjoins nothing of Christ to be reprobated, slighted, or set by and that no bone of it was to be broke disco|vers, that as Christ lost nothing by his passi|on, so by nothing since is he to be overcome, or hereafer to be uperate.
COMMONLY we call this feast Easter, from Eoaster an old Saxon goddesse, whose feast was either in, or about this time cele|brated, but the name Pasch, (i e) a going over, a marching away, is more holy, more divine, more Scripual; and the Resurrecti|on falling upon the Pasch, raher to be used for our instruction, in keeping this feast, which who so would keep with Christ, (who on it passed from the grave) and his holy Church must keep it, with the sour herbs of sorrowful contrition, as nobly resolved to hold fast the profession of our Faith against all difficulties.
LET us with him, eat our passeover standing, and like religious pilgrims, not lean|ing upon the staffe of our own understand|ing. but upon that of the Spirit, which may be obtained, and preserved, by girding our oyns, abstain from fleshly lusts, having the shoes of peace, whereby in holy solidity, and

grave deportment, we only make way and passe towards heaven, in hast, that is, not be|ing tepid, dul, or negligent in heavenly mat|ters, or soul-concerns, leaving the spiritual Egypt, or Pharaoh, of Satans subtilty, and earths gaiety, going through Sinai, or the thorny cares, troubles, vexations, that are in this world, still making progresse toward Iordan, in the walks of sincere devotion, un|till we see the Captain of the Lords host in religious confidence and as Iosua, stood, so let us worship with the Disciples saying what saith my Lord unto his Servant? not fearing but to feel the vertue of that expression, all power is given me in heaven and in earth, but, Mark 16. ye shall cast out Devils, which is done by the Ministry of the Gospel; and when a Soul is converted from the error of his ways, ye shall speak with tongues, (i. e.) the prophane ribbauldry of fleshly communi|cation shal be renounced, the things that ac|company Salvation being the substance of your future discourses, ye shall take up Ser|pents, in driving malice, wrath, rancour, back|bitting, whispering, evil surmising from the ground caverns, and hollow places of the heart, and if you drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt you, in not being drawn away by the enticements of the great deceiver; but ra|ther

in zeal cry out, depart you cursed, or if by guile you transgresse redrosse shal be ob|tained by a vomitting up the sinful potion, in acknowledging thy sin by which you shall not dy, for some shall lay hands on thee, as sick recovering thee by the light of a good example, and provoking hereafter to love, and to good works, to joy and comfort, as Peter was when Mary according to her charge informed him of his Masters rising, and of his place of meeting, to him in particu|lar, giving him the sweet relish of reconcile|ment to his Lord after the sour and bitter herbs of his tears, and undissembled sorrow.
WHICH yet the tydings of the Resur|rction communicats to all who remember, and genuinely confesse, their fearful falls from a fair profession, their frequenting the company of ungodly scorners, biasphemers, without a check o abhorrence of their crime; lastly who by the crowing, or rather sound|ing of the Gospel, minde the errour of their ways and accordingly renounce forbidden pleasues, for if by that the sentence of death be past upon the Soul the Resurrection like the Prophets lump of sigs cureth the boyl, and by signs from heaven, assues the prolonging of his days; his going up unto the Temple of the Lord, dscovering the line of his years,

hereafter shal run pararel to eternity, of which the promise of Canaan was bu a sign, and the certainty, the dying fruitlesse, or child|lesse, mad had, of having seed raised up unto himself, by his brother, or next kins|man, in Israel was a dark representation.
NAMAN was perfectly cured by his washing seven times in Iordan; and likewise was the leper cleansed by being sprinkled se|ven times with blood; by the same number, in appearing unto his Disciples, did Christ cure, heal, and remove, the diseases where|with sin, and his passion being misconstruct|ed had infected their minds, and perplexed their souls about thoughts of him: creating in them, (and by that shewing his purpose tow|ards all converts for the future) such graces by seven times manifesting himself, as must be had of the Spirit, for more fixing of the Soul, in it's doubts and spiritual attendance; as first of the fear of the Lord, in appearing to the woman, for they were affraid; next of the love of himself, for he appeared to Simon whom he knew (as he knew all things) loved him next the Spirit of knowledge, when he opened the Scriptures unto the two going to Emmans; of Might, next, in his opening the door, when he appeared to the eleven; next that of Coun|sel, when he advised to cast the net from the right side of the Ship; and of understand|ing,

while he opened unto them once more the Scriptures: and then of wisdom, when they saw him taken up where he was be|fore.
THOVGH there are, who subdividing some of these again, will have him to repre|sent the mode of that assurance, he yet be|queaths to believers, in the vertue of his Re|surrection, makeing his first appearance to Mary Magdalen to be the comforts he principally intends, to the most noted, if mouthful, and penitent, offender, his being seen of those women returning from the sepul|chre who held him by the feet, mystical|ly to discover his acceptance of the meek and lowly, his beeing seen of Peter, either as he returned from, or entred his grave, or in the place where he did weep, manifests his in|tentions to the willing and obedient: for Si|mon by interpretation is obedience. Again he appeared when they were gathered to|gether for fear of the Jews, shewing the happinesse design'd, for those who unite in one, and his zeal, to be found of them who sought him.
ON different daves and times he appear|ed also a when Thomas was present, hint|ing that the unbeliever at last shal increase in faith, and afterward as they were fishing, ty|pifying,

that abundance of converts should by their ministry be gathered to the Church; yet not by their labours or studies, for they had toyled all night and got nothing but by his blessing, accompanying their pains, through obedience.
HIS Disciples saw him on a munt, it's thought Tabor, where he was transfigured; and how have comforts been multiplied up|on retirednesse for religious contemplation? his upbraiding the eleven as they sat at meat, is but a lesson construing his call to sinners at the eleventh hour, for though such be suffe|red to dwell in sin, they shall in mercy be re|claimed, and their wisest acts not being done in love, and fear to God, shall be by them|selves deemed foolish and unwise.
HIS last appeaance, or being seen on mount Olivet, shadoweth, that the ole of mrcy, given to the merciful, shal as a scale be a means to ascend up, or as lmp light, shew them how to work the work of God burning in, or carried unto them by the con|duits of earthy vessels, that i, earthy enjoy|ments, which as a ladder shal more fit them for easy accesse unto heaven godlinesse have|ing the promise of this life, and that which is to come; and giveth more Grace.
BY the way observe, that Christ, first of

all appeared to women; blameing such, who rant and curse at that sex, as being Mother to sin; whereas had they been in Evah's hap|pinesse their felicity may be, had been sooner forfeted for a cup, then hers was for a bite; but such ought to understand, that God is wiser, then Satan, and stronger too, and hath now made that sex to intimate the world to be redeemed; and that unto men, moving them to tendernesse thereby, our lapsed estate be|ing wholly restored by a woman, by women, out of a garden through the report of an An|gel, Christ and believe acting together, mak|ing our Salvation more sure and better groun|ded, then when it stood either upon Adams, or Evah's behaviour.
MARY Magdalen a notorious sinner saw him first, why then should attrocious crimes in Male or Female deter the affected, from accosting that throne, where mercy sits, and benevolence invits, to crave a remission? in her saying, unto all be not affraid;  not rest|ing there, ordering them to proclaim his rising to their, and to his Brethren, that the womans blot of the fall might eternally be obliterat.
FOR though first in the transgression she is again, and first also, at the Resurrection, the history whereof, when read, we shall find that women as most deserving, were first

comforted and employed; for, when men thought it good to sleep in a whole skin, were they laying out their money, watching from sleep, hazarding their persons, to anoint his body; not fearing, but undervaluing the sword of the keepers; these women saw two Angels, yet it's thought he on the right side, cloathed in a long white garment the same it may be who rolle away the stone, said, be not afraid, I know whom you seek, c. ad the right, is the hand by which the Church is embraced the hand of nimblenesse and action, without which support, the present whitenesse, or seeming comforts of this pe|tishing earth, might fascinat, and bewitch the heart into flaunting purposes, were it not told that the comfort we seek, is not here to be found, or deject it into desponding and fearfull meditations, were it not informed by the power of the Resurrection, where Iesus, a Saviour, might be spoke unto and treated withall.
A Doctine never capable of infirmity, or old age (which is darkly seen, in the Angels appearing as young men) still enlivning with fresh supplys of grace, and ordering a retreat to whatsoever thought, amuseth, or amazeth the inquisitive or self-sarching heart; causing it still to be cloathed in white, by the vivifying

robes of celestial purity, and contrivances of real and forestalled heavenly joy; the pro|spect whereof in these womens diligence, dis|chargeth wallowing in carnal ease, pressing to a speedy rising, even in the dawning of the day, from the soft bed of sensuality, to that more soul comforting exercise of searching after our Lord Iesus; enstating our selves in his fa|vour, by unguenting the body of his poor, crucified, and traduced members, since he himself, now as wel as then, needs neither our Spices, nor oyntments, that is, our alms, cha|rity, and beneficence.
YET let heaven behold us at some cost, in preparing spices and oyntments, at the charge of self denyal, with discretion, zeal and rais'd devotion: for unto those is oyl compared; and if Demosthenes thought men were likest the gods, when they did good; sure we may affirm, they are very unlike Saints, but ex|cedingly resemble the Devil, who will not do good to Gods poor, nor (pardon the expression) to Christ their God; when he seemeth poor as here he did, to the holy wo|men, wise Ioseph, and holy Nicodemus, who teacheth, to rfresh and to preserve in vigour, to keep from decay; and to comfort the soul now of Christ, by the oyntments and em|balming Spices of sins mortification: for as he

dyed, by, so he also dyed for, our sin; and by Ointments of praise, gratulation and thanks|giving, we prepare for him the rather, that he rose again, or was raised, for our justifi|cation; which if not accomplished, you are yet in your sins, the discharge not being pro|cured from God, the true and just creditor then are we under the power of the Devil, and heirs of hel and damnation, being children of wrath; but if Christ be risen, nothing of all these, to discover which, an Angel was sent to roul away the stone from the sepulchre, as the Iudge ordereth the prison doors to be opened, signifying to spectators, to believers heaven to be reconciled, and the work of the Resurrection to be perfectly wrought without the power of Negromancy, which might have been objected, had he, immedi|atly with the witch of Endor's gods, rose from the earth.
HENCE that inference is good, the Spirit shall convince the world of righteousnesse, be|cause I go to the Father, (i. e.) I go to the Fa|ther, therefore I am righteous, for in his face might not I look, having had by him sin im|pured, if I had not compleately satisfied for the same, and done every thing to perfecti|on, which I came into the world for, which was to take away the sins of the world, which

being done, I am righteousnesse in my self and the Spirit shal prove me to be right unto all, because I am gone to the Father; wherefore he rose in the dawning of the day, the clouds and darknesse about himself, the darknesse and clouds about the souls of men being scattered and gone, the Sun of Righteousnesse with heal|ing under his wings (a metaphoick expressi|on from the spreading of his beams, and stretching forth his rays, as wings) covering us, and brooding over, by his warmth, ou young graces, for their strength, and healing our old sores, and festred boils, that we might not be darknesse, but light in the Lord; no as lepers secluded his congregation, but as his symbol had been like that of Maximili|an of Bavaria, he brought visible testimonies of everlasting reconcilment from all in heaven, towards all on earth: that Duke gave in a field, two Turtles, standing on the brim of a cup, on each side of a lance, which was a|dorned with a Crown sumounted by a Cross, illuminated from a glory out of haven, all upheld by two right hands complicated, or joyned together, issuig out of the clouds, with this motto Concordiae aeernae, as if by the support and Union and of the two natures, there were a cup of Salvation offered, now to dove: like innocents, shining from heaven by

the Crosse, offering a crown of glory, in lay|ing a side Hawk-like ferity, and uniting like kind mates one to another, since amnestia, or oblivion like, acts are passed in heaven, tow|ards us all, which is made out beyond demon|stration by our Saviours going to the Father, by his rising from the dead.
DOTH ot the Holy Ghost, presse in divine writ a life Godly, Holy, and prepared always for heaven, in forsakeing the unfruitful works of daknesse, upon and from, the doctrine of the Resurrection? as if those, who looked towards it, should not look behind them, least they be concluded not fit for the Kingdome of God, but loves of this present world and ca|teres for the flesh: seeking to fulfill the lusts thereof, to mortifie which, how incredibly rigid hath been the abstinence, and how strangely fervent hath been the prayers of the Ancients, in their Quadragesimal or Lent-devo|tions? in them  menting their own and their brethren's excesse, in their voluptuous em|braces, studying to live unto piety, not lux|ury; refusing oft to pay Nature her just debt of aiment, and food, for her too oft debaurds, makeing this feast a spiritual Pasch, truly pas|sing from darknesse, and it's works, the deeds of the flesh, to the operations of the Spirit, the renuing of the Spirit, by putting on the

new man after God created in righteousnesse and true holinesse; perswading, by the sancti|mony of heir carriage, others to receive im|presses of the beauty of holinesse; beholders admiring their love which wrought them un|to an imitation of their deportment.
THOSE that rose with Christ appeared un|to many giveing infallible tokens of their leav|ing the Society of the dead, whether Adam, or Iob were among them, as some sa, I know not; yet his is certain, that their Resurrecti|on mystical is to be questioned, whose acts do not quadrat with those rues of blame|less and spolesse behaviour, by law expected, and in concience also resolved upon, by such who really are influenced with, and by the power of the Resurrection animated to things above: We hear of the perverse, surly, morose lives of many, but such as are risen with Christ are doing good, and walk charitab|ly with all men, tha such who are without, (that is, out of the Church) as Pagans, Turks, ew, may be won by their good conversation. We see many puffed up with impudence; and arrogance, but they are cloathed with humility; multitudes say, come let us eat and drink, for to morrow we dy: these are temperate in all things, and not knowing what a day may bring forth, dye dayly, a number grum|bleth

mumueth, repineth, at this and the other Crosse; at this, and the other, fancied calamity; these posesse their souls in patience: too many assemble in Troups, to Harlots houses, are whoremongers, Adulterers, these bstain from the very garments spotted with the flesh, How numberlesse are such, who curse, rail backbite, snarle at their Brethren?  like dogs swear, that is, snarle, grin at passers by, these honour all men, pray for all men love the brethren, giving Religion a lustre, and re|ally beautifying the cause of Christ.
AS the Iews fondly teach, that only the Godly, shall rise at the last day, we may truly pronounce, that the Godlesse, are not this day raised, the communication of those two who went to Emmaus, discovers the truth of this, who though sadned at their Masters Death, yet were not Spiteful at the instruments thereof, speaking how the chief Priests and the Rulers, delivered him to be condemned, without any other epithet, expressing ran|cour, there be who will have these, Luke and Cleophas: Luke, is rising up, and Cleophas hath glory in his name: and surely the rising from darknesse and deadnesse, with the desire of being glorious, is to go to Emmaus which by interpretation is desire of counsel: and how happy were it, if this age would advise with

and about it self, touching the verity of Christ, and Him risen, together with the duties d|pending thereupon; leaving Ierusalem and all its gudinesse, to walk those sixty fur|longs Morally; these two physically trod, it is a number arising from multiplying of ten by six: The Ten Commandments being ap|pointed by IEHOVAH, for the rule of our Actings, and the renouncing this present World, amending our Lives, crucifying Self, voyding Hypocrisie, keeping of the Heart, wtching over the door of our Lips, being the six paces to be observed in our going over the moral Law, We cannot chuse but have Christ with us, and our eyes to see Him with great oy, where now because glorified He shal not only eat bread with us, as in the History, but shall sup with us, and we with him, as in the Revelation; unto which a serious reflecti|on, and deep meditaion upon the Cross, and sufferings of our LORD, this passage exam|plifies to be a fertil-mean.
LAY your ear to the holy Communi|cation these two had, and it's properly a devout imagination, to conceit Luke speaking, Brother Cleophas, can you forget the clamour of the Priests against our Master, when Pi|lat was determined to let Him go; how they cryed, away with Him, crucifie Him, not

this Man, but Barabbas? yea a murtherer; whereas our Master, shed no mans bloud, but went about doing good to every body, and that in such a way by commanding, praying, advising that I should have sworn he had been the Son of God, whereas now I conje|cture his Faher ha smitten them with blind|nesse, as he did he Sodomites, with Hem|roids, as the Philistens, with fire as, did Elisha the Capais o sme other way had been found, as by a vice from heaven, for his sons delivery, but to lay hold on that tattle of his appearance to the women, is to be swallowed up of errour, Luk 24.11. their brains, their early rising, their ea hath certainly dist|urbed them, and made them fancy they saw, God knows what; and as some think, the bells Clk.
Dear Brothe might Clophas say; I should almost be of yur mind: but when I remem|ber of Lazarus (whom you mind me of; for you know we heard a voice from Hea|ven) I sy, when I think upon him How fresh, how well-coloured, he was raised; by a Loud, not Cheping voice, with words we understood, not dark Phrases, as Con|jurers and Charmers  to do, I must con|clude him to b the Son of God, though I confesse, I marvel he wrought no miracle to

save himself from scurging, from dying, and since he said he was King of the Iews he came not down from the Crosse, that they might believe, this I confesse sticks with me, this I am sure of, if he be alive this day, he will be so to morrow and next day also, and we shall see it and know it, his goodnesse, sweetnesse, kindnesse, and merciful disposition towards all in distresse, but especialy to us, makes me con|fident, he will not concal himself long, but will come unto us; and God, who in the sim|plicity of our heart doth know we followed him, not for any lucre we got by it, shal setle us in the truth at last, and reward us accord|ing to the integrity of our hearts: therefore be not affraid, at our return we shal know more, and your bells clink may be retorted unto,  turned by a Crosse Proverb, before the lame post, make much of one, there is few good; a true axiome and holds here, the women being of excellent endowments formeth hope, of future comfort by a certainty of all things.
SVCH communication administrats such grace, that it is no wonder, if the fiery chari|ot of Religious gifts, hasten to come down for conveying the heart aloft, and the Spirit, as at Pentecost to come with full information of all sving truths, takeing the Scalls of doubt|ings, from the eyes of the mind, as Saul did

from those of his body, makeing it to be known for a truth, that Christ is risen indeed; and if he should seem as though he were to depart, in the coldnesse of the heart to those conferences, then be instant with thy Mane obiscum, abide with us, Luk. 24.29. the e|vening of thy dark, and cold surmises, clouds, temptations, and other perplexities, being approaching; and if serious, he shal continue to the end, and make appear, that he is no stranger to thy affairs, but well acquainted with whatso-ever hath, shall, or can, befall thee comforting thy soul in all, and all because of the Resurrection.
IT was a Iwell expression, that fell from the mouth of the golden-mouth'd Father, that at the Sun rising upon the day of the Resur|rection, it was defraying of just debt, to be|gin teaching of brotherly kindness, and charity, applying the power of the Resur|rection, for cementing the hearts of men one towards another: it appearing to unite God and Man, yea gloriously procured it; but how can these things be without a confor|mity to his death? Not such as is fabled in the Legend of that Popish Saint (Francis) who is said to have the print of the nails and spear in his feet, hands and side; or such either as is recorded of the herb Granadille in Ameri|ca,

in which (if we believe report) the in|struments of the Passion, to the whip, the piller, and the thorns, are visibly seen in the flour, nor it may be with St. Paul, to have the wales of the persecutors rod, upon the flesh, the gore blood lying, and not cured in the blewness of the stripe upon the skin: the Fellowship of his suffering, even to his con|demning by Pilat, being to be answered by a severe sentenceing our selves, singling out e|very sin, and processing it before the barr of Conscience, according to the judgement God makes thereof; causing execution to follow, with as much Zeal, and as little delay, as did the Jews, after the Governours sentence, of of which take one Coppy in record.
Take you Iesus of Nazareth a contemner of Cesar, and one who calleth himself the Mes|ih as hath been proved by the Testimony of his own Nation, to the Common place of ex|ecution, and in derision of his Kingly Majesty fasten him to the Cross: but to evidence the uncertainty of this History, ake it as ano|ther Coppy sayes, it was I Pilat President of Ierusalem, adjuageth thee Iesus of Nazareth for making thy self a King, and for calling thy self the Son of God, and for making sedi|tion among the people; Ordereth, according to the Laws of the Roman Empire, thy fastning

to the Cross, and to be lifted vp unill thou die waveg ths, every sin, pretending to have rule and command, hath forced us to de|porable actings, and by usurped Authority, countermanded God, harressing the soul by Sedition, having seduced it, from orderly, and peaceably walking, Pride, Ambition, Lust, or Envy, having been made King by the wills content, ordering obedience to our Maker dishonour, and our own disquiet, Redness of eyes, Deadness of heart, Fury in face, wounds in the side, Death in the fild, moving on uproar, wandring thoughts, as posts runing to and fro, abbetting every lust almost to upardonable transgression; in that sinfull stayedness, as if because of Im|pudence, Corruption had ben of God, for which it is to be adjudgd to the  by man, who is established under God over the Common-wealth of his own Soul, having Common-Laws and rules for discerning of matters, which if not hearkned unto by passi|on, fear or otherwise, may cause deposition, which Pilat feared, who, when called to Rome to answer for tirany, fearing contu|mely, and receiving affronts, slw himself: as Herod also did, who is thought to be aimed at in the parable of the unjust Steward, and like him when layed aside for male-admini|stration,

being banished by Caesar, proved fellon (de se,) a self Murtherer.
AND hark, is it not perspicuous, how that all the persecutors of our Lords body, which is his Church, or the instruments, and abbettors of his Death, as Judas in himself, or the Patriarchs in his Tipe, Ioseph, in selling him, have bought sorrow for twentie pieces of silver in common sickles, the other for thirty of the Sanctuary, they for their Brother had twentie five shillings sterling; he for his Master three pound fifteen shillings, and for a Courtezan, a Draught, a piece of silver, a morsel of Bread, a Madrigall, a Song, how oft is he betrayed into the hands of sinners? men selling their Saviour to hugg their lust.
THEERFORE such as design profit, by the Resurrection, must conclude the ad|ditament of worldly pelf, or carnall pleasure, so basely purchased to be sordid, and unhap|py; studying rather the particulars wherein Christ can be advanced, that estimation may be made according to reall worth, and the account of truth, he being the Truth, the way and the Life, the first of Religious verity, the next of holy Conversation, the third of hap|piness eternall, which are infinitly in true reckoning, preferable above and beyond the deceitfull appearances of temporall possessi|ons,

for appearances they only are, as is to be seen in the agents of our Saviours Passion: First, of the Patriarchs, who sold him in Ioseph for a bond-man, next in Iudas, who delivered him to them, who condemn'd him as a Malefactor.
HE was slain by Cain, in Abel, and for that Cain is to be censured, that is, sin
must be charged with his blood; In Isaac af|ter, but he escaped, and the Ram in the thicket served for a burn'd offering, we, as that Son of Laughter escape the hand of justice, he is the other's seized upon, found in the thorns of his Passion, which were planted by our hands, and made to tear his holy Body by our folly; and since he hath also escaped let his endurance dash the lust of the Eye, the lust f the Flesh, and the Pride of Life; which were the thorns that pricked him, the nails that pierced him, and the Envy that caused him to be persu'd, for which Crown him with Roses; and vailing our face as did Rebecca, being ashamed for former delin|quences, let us as chast Virgins espouse him unto our selves, returning into our houses, dead in sin, and crucified unto the World; which is seemly, Christ having suffered for it, before us, for that end; having promised n the third day to raise us up, we bearing

our Cross in sincere sorrow: not comming down from it, by consuing with Flesh and Blood, or keeping any one sin back through prophane Custome, rive ed in us: but bow down our heads in humility, and give up the Ghost in constancie (slepg) hat is resting in the seenity of a good Conscience, lookig for that hopefull assurance of the Resurrction and blessed hope of the frution of the Spirit of holinesse with Havenly minded|ness; in which, as by Agles, we shall be comforted, assured and solaced Untill we meet the Lord, in the holy Mountain, where he shall be seen as he is, and we know as we ar Known.
WE are said in our Carnal-capacity, to be dead in sin (though alive by nature) as ha|ving neither Life, Breath, nor Motion for things Heavenly; the greatest vants of Hea|ven, though set before us, in Word and Sacraments, or any other nourishing spiritu|all aliment; benefiting us no more then the choicest Bque savour, or relsh of the most delicious or , from the most artificial cook, cud replenish, sais|fie, or fill the empy, because no , entralls of one Deceas'd; Bu tat Spirit of Holiness, which aid up IESVS, shall uicken this mortal body, and giving i a

living breath, cause it become a living soul, hungring, and thirsting after righteous|esse, groaning, that so industriously it should have pulled misery upon it self, which can on|ly be compensed, by being naked (as all Crucified malefactors were) in an Ingenuous|cknowledgment; not putting on the Fig-leaf of an excuse, as Adam, but rather, when re|proved, answer as CHRIST did Herod, in silence; which indeed, may put flesh and blood into a heat, a sweat, pleasure and re|enge, saying, Let this be far from thee, pitty by self and me, who hath been ever with thee, yet it must be endured: For, because of this, thou cam'st into the World, and An|gels shall then comfort and strengthen, in that avishing sentence, the Father hath forgiven thee, thy iniquity is taken away, thou shalt  die.
ONE Thief must be Crucified, that is, thy deceifull Heart: another, must be peni|ent, and beg mercy, that is, thine own Soul, for delinquencie  offending yet let it not be des|perate, as those without Hope; but urging, pressing, as earnest for Salvation, an infallible note of prepared Paradise, and then of all thy sinful courses, cry, they are finished: Hanging still upon the Crosse by outstretched hands, in Obedience securing thy Soul in all ser|vice,

within the Rock of thy Saviours merits, fitting us for a Resurrection upon the third day. First, from the plague of the heart, the boile of putrid Corruption; as from the bed of Hezekia, next from the belly of Hell, in dismal frightnings and starrings of Consci|ence; as from the Whale in Ionah, and from the sentence of death, passed in the breast of the Law; as did Isaac from the Altar of his Father, the third day being figured in that Patriarch, that Saint, that Prophet, and a Day in which there was never one raised from the Dead: HE excepted, the third Day being keeped for him in Honour, and therefore, He is said, to rise the third Day, ac|cording to the Scripture: A Sabbath also in|terveening, in which it is observed, ther was never Man raised, either in Old or New Testament; and CHRIST being the Hea of the RESURRECTION, shewed in this a purpose not to disjoyn Himself from those before risen; but to continue Communion chused another time, which was the third Day; Leaving the Sabbath, I might say Saturday-Sabbath, to rest with His Grave-cloathes, as never more to be used; and (a we learn from the Current of Antiquity, from the Vniversal practice of the Church, in times, in, and so near the Apostles, that the head of

the Institution is not found, (making it the more venerable) though some factiously in our yes rant at the observance,) designed the Day of the RESURRECTION for solemn ppearance before the Throne of GOD, hich was so rever'd, both weekly, and an|nually, that the Precepts, 1. Cor. 5. Let  keep the feast, and that other expression, . I. I was in the Spirit on the Lords day,  by many understood, to belong to the early Feast of the RESURRECTION  observed.
REMAIN not therefore with Lazarus the Grave-cloaths of sinful custome four yes, by thinking upon, likeing of, by doing,  then continuing in the acts of concupisence or, such, no doubt, stinke in the nostirles of , and shall be killed by Death; but rise  third day, that is, this Morning, with ur LORD, and appear unto them that ow you, talking of the Kingdom of GOD;  walking in the Holy City, and be more rious, more sublime, more majestick,  before, as Ioseph was, when he was taken  prison, and as IESVS was, when He  from the Grave; that Christian being Christian, who is not conform to the , suitable to the RESURRECTION CHRIST, which we shall be, if we

rise, and talking, saluing our Brethren with Peace, and again peace be unto you; that they my perceive we intend for Galile, forsakeing terren desirs, there abiding now Faith Hope, and Charity: Faith in the RESURRECTION of the flesh, Hope in the expectation of eternal life, and Cha|rity in the holy catholick Church, expres|sed in our Creed, by the Communion of Saints.
IAMES of Aragon, upon his Conquest of the Mjorca Islands fancied, and created an Order of Knight-hood, called, of Redemp|tion: their service peculiarly respecting  liberation of Prisoners and Captives, thei habit was alwayes to be white: Is not ou IESVS appointed for deliverances? an did He not by entring into the Prison of th Sepulchre, say to each of us detained under ignorance, force, and fraud, what the Ange said to Peter, Arise up quickly, cast thy gar|ment about thee, and follow me? Act 12.18 Abiding no longer with the possessed amon the Tombs of the Dead, Graves of lust no Iayls of sinful custome, let us go forth wit Him who is, so to speak, Soveraigne of tha Order, other Redeemers, in comparison  Him, delivering from a flea-bit, he shielding from a thunder-bolt, a sword, a poyson

 arrow, a burning fire, a aging Sea, a inging Serpent, a roaring Lyon, and a wing heart-worm, assaulting all at once, without hopes of rescue, except from His Almightinesse alone.
BVT how justly doomed are they? who eing once freed will run the second time to  stocks? who being washed and shaved with Ioseph will return to their former ench? polluting themselves afresh with he noysomnesse of dung-like-corruptions; allowing in the myre of ungodly chambering and wantonness, drunkenness and excess; aining thse Vestues they have put on, in embracing Gospel-Truths, Swine-like lying down, in the pond, pool and puddle of fil|hy conversation
WRITE rather after the Coppy of the imitive Christians, who in this Feast of the RESURRECTION, and many dayes after, refused to, or did not kneel in Pray|r; judging that a more sorrowful posture, then was adquat, or fit for so joyful a season, is their frequent Allelujahs expressed this to be, but stood; the LORD being risen, as though their joy, chearfulnesse and zeal had perfectly assured them their next motion should be toward Heaven; It was Christs Pasch, for He left the Dead, they expected

their Pasch, and being ready for the Father, stood as alive, frequenting the Holy Commu|nion, the pledge of Eternal Salvation: Young Converts appearing in Church, cloathed in white Raiment, the badge of that purity ac|quir'd in their Baptisme; of which Sacra|ment we partaking, let us keep this Feast with holy Innocence, bating the Garment that is but spotted with the flesh; our news and tydings, our salutes, and complements being as theirs was, The Lord is risen.
THE Answer in our Lives like theirs al|so in Words; The LORD is risen indeed.



MYSTERIUM PIETATIS, OR THE MYSTERIE OF THE ASCENSION OF THE SON of GOD, Unfolded and applied.

Holy-Thursday, May 20. High-Church. 1669.
Ascension-Thursday, May 20. High-Church. 1669.


JOHN VI.LXII.
What and if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up where He was before?

_IN the History of the holy Gospel that express exactnesse of me|thod and dependence, in an|swering and questioning in other Arts studied, and required, is not alwayes to be found; Our Saviour who knew the

heart, to detect the deceits therein, answering oft according to them, for confutation, and discovering, raher then conforme unto, or observe contexture of words and purposes: Among which, these words are evidently to be seen, where speaking of, and proving Himself to be, the true Bread, which came down from Heaven, inferreth thence a ne|cessity of the Jews eating, that is of be|lieving upon Him, and from Himself percei|ving their murmuring at the impossibility, or absurdity of that matter, demandeth, What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where He was before? Whereas of his ascen|ding up, there was no preceding contro|versie.
YET as there is a secret digested Art by the wisdom of the Spirit, in the compileing of that sacred Record in general; so there may be avowed a hidden connexion, even of these words, to the former: for His assertion of His coming down from Heaven, implieth evidently His being there, and that He was there, He proves by His Descending thence; which words when the Jews were offended at, to enstall their admiration, and heighten their wondering. He proposeth His What and if, c.
A QVESTION which proposeth

ground for, yet expecteth no answer, pro|phesying of, though but supposing His ASCENSION, and both by way of Question, the speech being suspensive and seemingly defective (q. d.) surely ye will wonder much more then, that I whom you see a man like unto your selves, shall ascend up, where He, that is, the Son of God, was before; that is, I, before. I was the Son of man; and this being a greater matter, then my coming down, you will, if you see it, certainly be more offended at me, or believe the other was true: Offering it as conditionall, by put|ting an if to it, yet would have it positively to be understood, and expounded that He shall go up, and it may be some of you may see it, which will creat a greater certainty, or breed a greater indignation.
ASCENSION supposeth Gradation, and generally understands an Act flowing purely from the Power, Vertue, Ability, a|lone of the Ascender; and in Scripture is in|terpreted a motion to a Holy and Honour|able Place, it is a going down to Egypt; but its a going up to Canaan, its a going down to Iericho; but its a going up to Ierusalem, to the house of the Lord, and going up to God, 1. Sam. 10.3. and Ascending here, beareth both this latter, and that former sense of His

own power, CHRIST not being tran|slated, as Enoch, neither was He rapt as Paul, nor carried as Elias, nor ravished in the Spirit as Iohn the Divine; but did Ascend, climbing up the scale of the clouds, untill He got above all Heavens; its true, His Birth is said to be an Ascending, the hu|mane nature being by it advanced, and is called a rideing upon a cloud, Isa. 19.1. His Death is called an Ascending; for He was lifted up upon the Crosse, that Palm-tree whereof the Church is said to speak, Cant. 4.8. but these were Improper and Metapho|rick ascendings, this whereof we are to speak is proper, corporal, bodily and local.
THE Understanding as chief Gover|nour and Regent of the Soul, being first to be informed, least ignorance marre our pre|sent design; and that the Will with more opennesse, be sooner allured to advance to|ward, and chuse the projected good, this day laboured for; wherein our LORD happi|ly, yea gloriously finished and ended all His Travels: We shall shew whence, and then whether He ascended.
YOV must note, He had lived in, and trod upon the Earth, and woe was He for abideing in that Mesech, being hedged, and entangled three and thirty years with the

thorns and nets of calamities and trouble; it being to Him a perpetuall Calvary, a place of suffering, so coupling him to sorrow, that He was a man of sorrows, Isa. 53.3. Once we find Him reading, and once writing, oft raying; yea IESVS weep'd, the shortest entence in the Bible: Yet that IESVS should weep, maketh infathomable com|passion conspicuously discernable, and we know He did it more then once; but that He laughed, we have not one Text that doth so much as smile that way, His life being con|orme to His birth, which was in tears, sigh|ing out His time, and groaning in the Spi|rit, for the falls, follies, and laughings of men.
THAT glory he had with the Father, when he was not the Son of Man: being re|vealed to his Man-hood by his Divinity, brought down the sale, and in his e|steem, the worth of those sights, the world, or the god of this world, offered unto him; the glory and Kingdomes thereof; not a|busing his refined understanding, nor blind|ing his judgement, to the defalcation of that real worth, which was in the solidness of a future expected glory; but left an impress more deep in his Heaven-born Soul, to con|temn those flourishes; the Temple stones, or

a Herod, or a Kingly Office, in all its glory, could represent to his unering fancie, which did frustrate in him: and indeed does in all, believing upon him, the fairest perswasives, or most prolifick enjoments sensuality can, or could offer, He, and They, because of him, accounting all of these in their summe to|tall: what Solomon did in deep knowledge, and Gellimer King of Goths in high grief at|tested; who being presented as Captive before Justinian in his glorious Throne, rent his garments, crying hideously, Vanitie of Vani|ties, all is but Vanitie, the Varnish whereof, he beholding with reluctancy; did endure its flattering promises, and with constancie, its eagerest and most stupifying menaces, this day hasted to the Hils of Frankincense; and calls upon you, as upon His Spouse, To come from Lebanon, the tops of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the Lyons Den from the Mountains of Leopards, Can. 4.8. From Paces and Hills seemingly beautifull, yet Hazardous beyond expression, Syrians, Philistims, as basts, devourin, and destroying men; for with me there is neither Iudas, Iew, Herod, nor Devil; that can attach.
WHICH invitation if lifted unto; by Faith, we may supperad, that of the Church 1

Can. 4. Draw me, we will run after thee; Shew|ing willingness; but withall inability, the imitation of his flight (pardon the expression) being the Period of the Souls desire, detesting the Malignity of this world, and contending against its Dignity; the first embittering its greatest enjoyment, as an iron brusing the bone: the lst founded as upon ice, ready to be dissolved, both to the eternall hazard of all good. The Church wishth and prayeth to be drawn after him in imitation, to him by affection; yea, in him by Vnion and Im|pession.
AS the birds of the Air, though Jesus (by a compounded for, or conseted unto ne|cessity) sometimes touched he Earth for his meat; yet like thm again, his aspiring thoughts frequented the more holy and dur|able objects which were above the Sun: (food for man being not only brought from bread) disdaining the admittance into his breast the dust heaps of earthly trash, which the crafty foxes and wild beasts of avaricious and car|nall oppressors, worldly Muck-worms, feli|citat themselves in; which was expressed in this expression, A little while and ye shall not see me, and again a little while and ye shall see me, because I go to the Father, John 16.16. As if his abode upon Earth in any kind, was

still to be short, by which he gave assurance, Mortality in the image of his flesh, was short|ly to be put off; and the same flesh to be a|gain invested with the robes of Majesty and glory, which being heeded by his Followers, causes support against the ruinous deceits this Mortality endeavours to entangle them in resolving to fight with him, even to suffer|ing of death, concluding to be victors in his Resurrection, and to triumph in the vertue of his Ascension.
OLIVET giving so much light, and Calvary that knowledge to the sanctified head, that all sufferings, and glorious actings, how different so ever they appear, (and how vast seems the discrepancie between Christ on the Cross, and Christ in the Cloud?) when compared to|gether; yet center in this one thing, mans A|scension unto glory, unto which, as weak, yet, though weak, the Good-man shews earnest|nesse, and willingness to possess, in saying Draw me promising not to be sloathfull, in the acquisition of such dignity, subjoyneth we will run after thee; and truly, as mercy be|gan towards man at, or, in Christs birth, and continued in his death published at his Resur|rection, so was it sealed, ratified and confirmed in his Ascension, henceforth no more to be doubted, then whether Christs being there, is to be scrupled, that being the seal by which

all is made sure, which was Written in  word, subscribed by miracles, supescribed by death, directed in rising the third day; but signed as by the Kings own signet, by the seall of glorious verity, this day, wherein, in our flesh heaven was entered, and we being flesh Enfranchis'd or Incor|porat into that Citie, naturaliz'd into that Kingdome, as natives, as Citizens; or if you please, have got seasment of that Land as the Bride, the Lambs wife; for which Praise the Lord all ye nations, praise him all ye people: For his merciefull kindness is great towards us, and the Truth of the Lord endureth for ever, Psal. 117. All things being fulfilled which were fore-prophesied.
IT were not seemly to wave the particu|lar place, whence he took his rise, which was from Mount Olivet, by Interpretation, a Mountain of lights, either from the Suns shining thereon, at its first rising; or the lights of the Temple Splendor thereon at its setting, or, it may be, because the lamps of the Temple were furnished with oyl, from the fruit there|of, or, as others from the shining smoothness which is on the skin of the olive-berrie: But from what part of that Mount he made his exit (is unknown) it may be for the same cause why the grave of Moses is obscure (viz.)

to prevent superstition; which offence, and sin, is evidently seen in those ignorant and scandalous Idolaers, about a rock, in that mount where by Mounks is shewen the the Image of a foot, which they say, was im|pressed in the rock, by that foot which was last on the rock as our Saviour moved there|from to be seen yet in that beautifull structure the Chappel of the Ascension, builded by the Famous Helena, just over the place where our Lord took his rise, reverenced, both by Turks and Christians, as fitted upon that score for Devotion; joyntly performed by both Religions, the last officiating, at the Toleration of the other, the house being in the possession of the Mahometans: Curiosity and Supperstition drains the purses of many, for beholding this, and other supposed Fool|lerys, but that all might not be lost, from this Impresse, Travellers take some quantity of loose sand as a Religous relick: yet the mis|chief is, what quantitie soever be taken there from, it is still supplyed by new, so that the continuance of that miracle, may be one ground to prove it no wonder but a cheat.
AT the foot of this mount Gethsemane was to be seen, where the oyl presses stood for pressing of the olives, and within the com|passe of that mount as far as Bethania, did he

travel towards his ascending, the same way e had rod into the City, about fourty seven yes before; and where his Friends Laza|us, Martha and Mary dwelt, as if he had id, there is but one way unto glory, that is, he way of the Crosse; except in that rode here is no glory, except in that path there s no victory, and unlesse you strive, no en|ring into the strait gate: for as Olive is so ermed from light, so Bethany is termed obedi|nce; of which grace his Ascension is a fruit, nd who can pretend friendship unto him, or is, as did Lazarus, whose soul sets not his  unto Gods verity and truth, in yeelding submission unto that law, given the Church, of avoiding ungodliness and worldly lusts, be|ng sober, righteous, and Godly, in this present world?
ADAM through disobedience forfeited Paradise, and was cast into the valley of death,  darknesse, his Successors, must infer the on|ly mean to review that whereof it was but a pe: nay which is more, to taste of the tree of life, and ascend to the mount of God, is to forsake the way of Cain, and not aid the con|spiracy of Corah, but run that race of obedi|ence, Christ hath run before us, causing eve|ry step that is, every act of our life, tend to the perfecting of us in those graces above

mentioned, whose light endoctrinating; to the splendor, and rayes of beaming good works, made bright by the oyl of the Spirit, conveyed into the soul, by the branches of Sacraments and all other ordinances; are ab|stacted from earth, or earth mindednesse, ascending to the hill of the Lord, and stand|ing in his holy place, foreseeing, and palpably discovering, the direfull issue of abideing in a tumultuous City, and bloody World, where in place of Friends, Marthas or, Marys, ho|ly and friendly treatment, worthies of whom the world is not worthy, flagiiously are assaul|ted with Lanterns, torches, swords and staves, and by fond flattery, villaneously be|trayed into the hands of those who hate them by a Iudas Kisse, a Ioahs fair word, and a Tamars embrace.
BVT behold the order, for that he ascen|ded, what is it but that he also descended first? Eph. 4.9. and in spirituall regiment, he who would leap high, and far must stoup and press his body lower, and lower; He ascen|ded, its true, far above all heavens; but He first descended into the lower parts of the earth, (i. e.) abhorred not the Virgins womb; it being expedient for him, who desiderates heavens joy, the Seat of God blessed for ever, to descend first into the deep places, dark cells

of his vain imagination, the matrix or womb, wherein is conceived all malice, wrath, blas|phemy, and all lasciviousnesse; and then when perfecting the will of God in crucifying the old man, walking with Abraham to the Mount of contemplation; and then as Christ at Bethany, lifted up his hands towards Hea|ven, arguing His affections being there, be|fore his personal aryvall: let us point at the permanency of these Heavenly pleasures, ac|counting them more preferable then such, which this earthly Glob presents to her ad|mirers, which being but in pitchers of her own mould are brittel, though fair, yet will the fascination be uncharmed; for Hell (which is a hole) shal resolve, that all promised en|largements, were but a bewitching, not a refreshing of the Soul: And Canaans way being upward, made Elias to be carried up, and why should I be any longer here cryed Religious Monica? the hopes that I have of things above, making me to delight in nothing that is beneath; why am I here? beholding the flowry mead of this visible world, to be full of stinging and poysoning serpents, noysome weeds, whereby it became despi|able in her eyes, and accounted her self mi|serable untill elevated above it.
A proper work, a significant fruit of

Christs ASCENSION, which as relating to man, hath a four-fold degree, First, to the heart, next, in the heart, next, by the heart, and lastly above the heart; The first provok|ing the fear of God, the second receiving Counsell from him, the third espouses Christ unto it self, and the fourth makes a discovery of God, and beholding him as a fight delectable as a sight beautifull, a disappearance is made of earth, a neglect, yea a hatred, of its pretended only, and seeming delicious enjoyments.
BVT, What means this where he was before? or that other like it, No man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven; even the Son of Man which is in heaven, John 3.13. One He, viz the Son of Man, and another He, viz. the Son of God the pronoun, the same in both, yet making a vast discrepancie in the two: He's He, The Son of Man ascending, where He not the Son of Man; but He the Son of God was before, and that for ever; that is, in heaven: where He the Son of Man had never been. Behold, the pronouns force; He, the Son of Man, on Earth was He who though now talking; yet as God is in heaven: the word (IS,) is urged, for as Man he was at the same instant on Earth, and not yet ascended to that place where He, as God, was before.
THIS ariseth from the union of the two natures in him, (viz) that of Man, and and that of God: where the properties of each other, are attributed to the whole person, which yet in examination must be only re|ferred to one of these natures, as in these words save the Son of Man, which Is in heaven  if then he had been there; which to affirm of his Mn-hood, were erronious, He speaking to them under the Sun: but as God it is greable to Truth, and therefore the Ascend|ng of the Son of Man, must not be under|sood of his Deity, for as God he is uncap|ble of going to any place, being in all places t once, and filling all by the infinity of his nature. His Ascending therefore, is to be ap|plyed, to his humane nature, wherein only he can properly be said to shift places, and change seats; and where he was before: to his God-head, he being with the Father before all Worlds; which Doctrine of Union, puzzel|ing Nichodemus, made him wonder; but re|member he came to Iesus by night; and un|till this Sun rose upon the face of the Church, this Doctrine was hid from the wise and prudent Rabbies, but now unto Babs and Children this light shineth: comparing Scrip|ture with Scripture, words with deeds, with the assistance of the holy Ghost, it is known, that

when Christ was crucified, the blood of God was shed, and when the Son of Man rose, the Son of God rose, when the Son of Man ascend+ed, God also ascended, the Personall Union of the two naturs allowing the expressions. The Word which was made Flesh at this time, havng never seen heaven; the Word then Flesh, was to ascend and sit in heaven, where the flesh, that was the Word had never been.
WHAT St. Paul mentioned of the se|verall members of the body, which though having their own peculiar functions, yet un|ited, make one body, and applyes it, saying, so also is Christ, that is, the Church, 1 Cor. 12.12. May be alluded unto here in these two natures of Christ, of which we say, so also hath the Church, every member thereof be|ing the Son of God as well as the Son of Man and their Ascending into heaven, as Sons of Men, with their flesh and bones, ascends but where they were before, in their Spirits, and desires, Enoch (a typ of Christ ascending and also of the ASCENSON of all the e|lect at the end of the world) was but coached up bodily, into that place, where Religiously he had oft in Soul been; that precept of have|ing our affections above, where Christ is, Col, 3.2. By Faith in love, carries the soul aloft, giving it wings to behold and see, feel, and

joy the joyes, rapturs, sweetness, that is  the Paradise of heaven; the new Ierusalem hich is above, while the flesh, or fleshly part of man, is represented in the Embleme as the ring at a birds feet, in the hand of a boy, or  unto a stone, hindring the full fruition f the Souls Ardency, in ascending to the hea|venly mansions (its clogginess impeding the spirit) through fervent desires, to be upward  that He, as man, in flesh when ascended; but cends unto that place where He when man in pirit was before.
THE Ascension for mans Instruction is everall wayes expressed in holy Writ two whereof are most Celebrious, its called ascend|ing up on high, in the old, and an ascending  the Father in the new Testament, Psal. 68.18. Iohn 20.17 In the first is insinuared the glorious blessednesse and Majesty, he is en|dowed with, and possessd of; all things be|ing in his estimate, as low, as they are in their own site; the other unfolds his exaltation a|bove all Creatures, whether Heaven, Saints, or Angels, hinting at his equality with God; all glorified Spirits shouting at his en|try into the heaven of heavens; called in the Prophesie God's going up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a Trumpet, Psal. 47.5. And by the way, if heaven rejoyce at

the entry of the Son of Man, what Jubilati|ons ought to be on Earth, at the ascending of the Son of God, since he did it only to re|ceive gifts for men, Psal. 68.18. That is, from God the Father, that he being man, might deliver them to men, 4. Ephe. 8. And the Quire of Angels beholding his Kingly gate through the Clouds, and manly steps upon heavens glorious and shining pavement, Answered and questioned each other, who is the King of glory? and warning the port|ers, yea, the gates of heaven themselves (to speak after the manner of men) to be open'd, to be lifted up for the King, strong and mighty, this Lord mighty in battel, Psal. 24. That he had power and authority over Earth was eminently known, in Lazarus come forth, his dominion over the Sea, was demonstrat|ed by his walking on its proud waves, that the Aire was at his controule, was discover'd by his commanding of the winds, that Hell was not exempted from his Soveraignity was made evident in casting out of Devils; that Angels were made subject to him, was not or, in that they ministred unto him, and served him: Now there wanted one thing  but one thing, to shew that he was Lord of all things, which was his ASCENSION up to hea|ven, by which he proved himself Lord of the

Vniverse, and for creating this faih in the hearts of his own, he did ascend in the sight of his Disciples, not of the eleven only, but probably of the hunder and twenty, S. Luke Acts, 1. Having mentioned, both the wo|men and brethren that were with Christ, and in his Gospel having spoken of them, who saw him after the Resrrection, hath so car|ried on the thread of his History that the eleven being expressed, the other seemes not to be excluded; this blessed sight of his As|cending, being so recorded as indifferently to serve all the persons mentioned, that as be|ing by all men seen, all should confess him to be Christ for the glory of God the Father.
THERE is in nature some secret pressure of Spirit, when not vehemently by-assed, with urgency of affairs, vehemency of fear, that maketh a man long for and longingly to labour after a sight of his Native Country; Vlisses is said after ten years travel in and a|bout the Hlespont, to desire a sight but of the smoak of his Country, from the godds, pro|mising thereupon satisfction, though he should dy at the same time; yet was not that Rome, head of an Empire, nor Athens, a Uni|versity of Arts, bu Ithaca, a rocky, poor, fish town, in the Ionian Sa: from heaven did the Son of Man come, that was his Country, his

native soyl, there it was where he had been before, and towards it he had always a mo|neths mind (as earnestnesse is expressed in the Proverb) Lifting oft his eyes towards it, and in parting from earth, spread his hands towards it, saying in that Ceremony O Heaven! Heaven! Heaven! the delight of my soul, the darling of my Affection, the beauty of my choice, the treasure of my wishes, O Heaven! whn shall I possesse thee? O Heaven! how long have I wished for thee? O Heaven! how oft have I looked upon thee? O Heaven! when shall I enter in into thee? O Heavens! I come, I come, open, open, open, ye everlast|ing gates, open, that I may enter and possesse thy joys after my sighing, fleeing, fasting, weep|ing scorning, bleeding, dying, at last em|brace me.
AND who knows not, that water will ascend, as high as its rise? and this water of life flowing from the paradise (I wuld say the bosome) of God, instantly was to recurre and flw back, and in the streams of love to appear where he had been before, to which he pointed, that we might be enflamed for persuit, crying o with him Heaven! O Heaven! for though Man, who is of the Earth, be Earthy yet the Spiritual man, be|ing born of heavenly parents, as begot of hea|venly

seed, nused by heavenly milk partaker of the divine nature, of the ofspring of God, s a stranger and pilgrim in this present world, and because of perils by land, perils by water, malice irritating, and corruptions en|meing, molestations from his own Soul, not yet perfectly made wise, caou, It is not good to be here, Christ, Moses, and Elias, are above perfected, and Holy Saints are above grief and fear: which last seaed upon the Disciples at Christs removea, and because he ent to the Father, sadnesse filled their heart. wherefore because he is with the Father, not with us sorrow shuld fil out harts, prompt|ing to call O it is good! O how good it is, to be there! Our Saviou's stretching abroad his hands, ought to attact our eyes meerly to behold, and desire it's beauy, it's amabili|ty, the glory of the Lord therein.
BVT we befal, us so transcendent is our folly, we heed neither the purpose nor cause of that indicatin loveing the valley, though it were of Sodom, because of it's fatnesse, though as the grasse it be perishing, or ascends the high hill of Ambitious undertakeings by power, force, or knowledge, to be accounted gods, which hath already destroyed both Angels and men, the principles of such vanity engulphing the Soul into Eternity of

despair, themselves consequentialy are to be a|voyded as Damnation, by lifting up our hands together with our hearts unto God in the hea|vens, Lam. 3.41. and by the feet of our de|sires, LOVE and DILIGENCE, run to the mountain of Religious contemplation, the ve|ry reflection and shade thereof creating in|searchable joy, but reaching of it's to, or apex the ultimate tearm of prosperous, durable, and satisfying comforts known to that Solomon of this nation, Robert Surnamed Stward who gave in Plate, the terrestrial Glob, dignified with a Crown embelish'd with thirteen stars cir|cumscribed with Vanitas Vanitatum  omnia Vanitas, Vanity of vanities, as if Universal command, dazling glory, respecting or re|lating to Earth, had been but torture, and were to him vain, and should be to any, vex|ation of Spirit.
TWO things amongst others, are chiefly denyed to Man, as not to dy and not to fly, yet in this Ascension the first is known, and much of the last is seen, much because somewhat more, for what shall we call this motion up|ward? was it walking? sleeping? leaping? or flying? sure we are he went from the Apostles eyes in an advanceing pae, but a cloud en|compassing him, the Fathers Seat, and his throne, fitter to carry up the Son, then a cha|riot,

that having been done for Elijah, a Ser|nt, which cloud enjoins no prying; and cha get questions, as if the heavens yeeld|d? or winds ceased? aided or what other thing riofity can invent, yet presseth the relin|ishing, and treading upon the glory of a gaudy world, and requires a lifting up above our selves, pregnantly exhorting us as strang|rs, to have nothing of our heart effigied there|on, at most only our feet to honour it with a ouch, he mounting over and above Olivet, seeming to say rise up my fair one and come away, Cant. 2 10. fom the muddy floe of this lower and common hall, and ascend the stairs of prayer and meditation, (more comforting then that Sancta Scala at Rome id to be, and resorted unto as the airs of Pi|lats house being the 28 steps whereon our Saviour went, and returned in his passion) and leap, or walk, run, acend, or fly to the upper rooms of the heavenly pallaces; where ighing, filth, death, or sorrow, thorns, or spears, have no possibility to enter, even in their remotest causes.
THE Songs of Angels, Quire of the Prophets joy of the Spirits, the light of God, and the glory of Christ eternally revealing, e|verlasting causeing, ravishing, never cloy|ing Hallelujahs: for auditing whereof, and

directing to which, earths pagentry, the hearts carnality, is to be rejected, crucifi'd, and cut off, these being heavy, will incom|modate us in our jurney and retad us in our ascending heaven-ward, after our Lord, whose drawing the Disciples from Jerusa|lem, is not without a mystery, operating upon our overcoming this present world, or then it shall be ill with us, for as the men of Galilee, we may know that the same Iesus shall come down again in like manner, that is, as some conjecture from Zach. 14.14 upon Olivet stretching abroad his hands, blessing the righ|teous, because obdient, and pure, cursing the prophane, because stubborn, and idola|tors, umbraged by the valley of the Son of Hinnon, a pat of which he journeyed through in his passing, but leaving it behind him in his ascending the mount of his ASCENSION, a fuful munt abounding with Palms, Olives, Figs, Gaessum, Pine-trees, typifying the Church; and the Godly, who are, and which is fruful, in god works, serving as me|diums or the souls easceding unto God, and are as steps appointed for that end and purpose
OVR Creed stands not at his ascending into heaven, but registrars also, his sitting at the right hand of God, at which place, S. Mark

chap. 18.19. seats him, ending at once his History; and our Saviours travel; which rest is far above all principalities, and pow|s he sits, whereas the Angels stood, and are expressed so to do, because servants, much more honour being his due because of His Sonship: not that he properly sits for so there is no chair for him to sit upon, nor right hand in GOD to sit by, but tropically it signifieth that equality, dignity, honour and espect, height, rverence and power, which equaly with God, He hath obtained, in His humane nature, the heavens being high above the earth, and the heaven of heavens he seat of God above them, the Angels about the seat of God,, and our Lord on the right hand of him, that as the earth is far distant from the heaven the upper invisible heaven, above , the pavement of the seat of God above them, the Angels again above that, who though glorious, yet are under Christ to the dignifying our nature; and us being men, who being but dust and ashes at best, and worse, when sinners, at the highest yet where sin abounded, grace much more abounding, the Father receiving him into favour, as our first fruits from the earth, which obtained a bles|sing for the whole Harvest of Adams off|spring; God saying to such in him sit at my

right hand, which sitting cleareth his merits to trascnd those workings, or purchaseings, of Cherubims and Seraphins, who stand before the throne Luk. 1.19. for sit thou is to be expounded, be thou my Fellow, according to thy word shall all my People be ruled, as Pha|raoh said, so heareth this Ioseph, I am al|mighty God without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot, Gen. 41.44.
WHICH honour being given to Man, who once heard, dust thou art, and to dust shalt thou return, who was sent to the Ant ac|counted wose then the Ox, or the Ass, not only sent to the birds of the Air to learn in|struction but called the sons of the Devil, dis|covers, infinit love, which should cause man perue that passage of sit thou i his soul, un|till Gods love heat the hart, Christs merits cool the conscience, and God's sit at my right hand Nobilitat the mind, and Christs sitting secure the whole man, he no only resting for himself, but preparing a place of rest for others.
MOREOVER the right hand is the high blessednesse, peace and joy, with satisfacti|on, which God hath in Christs holy society, upon the account of his obedience as Man in doing always his will, for the left in the Pa|rable, denots enmity, dissatisfaction and con|trariety,

and in ordinary gestures inferiority: t represents also three great properties therewith Christ is endowed, the glory and onour of his Divinity; this Sun of righteous|nesse rising at his birth, clouded by death, did , so to speak, in his Fathers throne, ending the day of his earthly appearance, and world|ly troubles, in this felicity, perfecting and finishing the work, which he came to do: ext the Authority of his Man-hood, we will ay, such a one sat fourty, twenty, or Fifteen ar, in the chair, meaning government and are, so also doth Christ, his sitting not being  naked quiescence but expressing his vigi|ance, and thoughts, for, and about the Church; for as again Iames the third of this Kingdome, gave in a Medal, a Hen brooding over the Chickens shadowed with a Crown, with this device Non dormit qui custodit, he sleeps not who governs, though they may rest, yet in that rest, there is life, and comfort be|neathed to others: Our Lord by his word, Sacraments, and Miracles, doth unweariedly uphold his Church, and all her begotten by the mediatory office: lastly there is in his sitting, his power of judgeing; Advocats, and Counse|lours stand, while Judges, and Justices sit, especially when they give sentence; so he, when executing the ungodly, and sentence|ing

them for hateing mercy, he haveing judge|ment on his left hand, fire to burn, consume, and tear the fiery bloody Spirit, and sits in sentenceing, to evince the deliberatnesse of the judgement.
IT'S true, once Stephan saw him stand, yet reflect that he is a Counsellour, an Ad|vocate for the Church, and the gesture is not to be wondred at: for still understand a Metaphor, by which figure ye may finde, he sits as a Judge, stands as a pleader; by the sentencing bloody Jewes, and by the other intercedeing for patient Christians; and a|gain, by standing, he vows revege to the enemies of his servants; by sitting, he absolv|eth the enormity of his Disciples, sitting not denoting circumscription of place, but the glory of the Deity, wherein before al worlds, the SON was, being from Eter|nity consubstantial to the Father; and in latter dayes, when Incarnate, the glory of His flesh being exalted, because in the God head, to be adored above every creature; He coming down by his birth, enter'd into the field o Warre, fought against all his adversaries in strugling with death, conquering that King of terrours; in the power of his Resurrection and entring his Royal Citty; He triumphe in his Ascension, as the Roman triumphe

haveing his prisoners in bonds, and scatte|ring medals and presents among the people; in the Scripture phrase, giving gifts unto en, ending his troublesome journey to Earth in Heaven, as he began, having the  of the Angels to Eccho him to the World, the gratulations of the Quire at his ingresse into Heaven; the Selah of all the Glorious Prophets, the Euge of the goodly company of Martyrs, together with the Religious Hymns of the Chuch, both East, and Wet, in all ages untill this day; believing that he is gone to prepare a place for them; if it were not so, he would have told us, Ioh. 14 2.
HE was once thought a stranger in Ieru|salem, and was before that, so obscure, that his brethren did not believe on him, (which the Jewes yet presse as one great ground for their unbelief,) He acting as a Painter, who drawing his most excellent draughts in the dark; when finished, exposeth his Tables to publick veiw: so until now he carried him|self strangly, as to the Syrophenician woman, and confineing his Discples to the lost sheep of Israel; but now it is, Go, teach all nati|ons, suffering the Jewes to deride his Mi|racles, to lye against his Resurrection; but as he said, it shall be, and all the world must acknowledge Him the everlasting Son of the Father.
IN order to which the song of the Elect is, HE that is God HATH raised up a horn of Salvation for us, in the house of his servant David Luk. 1.69 an Horn indeed, growing out of flesh; yet more solid, more firm then flesh, yea exceeding all flshly horns, being borne of the Virgin; behold flesh, but con|ceived by the Holy Ghost; behold his excel|lency above flesh, yet when we perceive him at the right hand of God; behold that horn raised, and as the horn of the Unicorn, causeth sweetnesse to all the imbitter'd wa|ters of our Iericho, even by the touch; so doth the applying of his ASCENSION, unto all our perplexities, becomeing to all a horn of salvation: Let the Iewes therefore blasphem if they will; He is now made the Head of the Corner, exalted, raised above all the buildings, either of Church or Syna|gogue, virtuating them for beauty, strength and lustre, that as in the dayes of Elias, the heavens were shut up, so in the dayes of Iesus, after a barrennesse of faith, love and hope; there was a cloud, like the hand, I might say, like the footstep of a Man, arising out of that Sea of Christs Passion suffering, and a sound from thence of abundance of precious good things, of Gods promising, and Mans needing, not to say, asking in his ASCENSION; the

Church being now as a field which the Lord hath blessed, by having Faith in Divinity, expectation of bless in the hope of what he hath promised, and Charity in the love and tendernesse he hath kindled for us: so that the expression of Arethuse in his Martyrdome, is adequate, and fitted to the Christians subli|mated Spirit; for he, when hung up in Air, exposed to Bes, Waspes and Flies, being annointed (not to say daubea) with honey, yeing his persecutors with a kind of con|umely, said, How am I advanced, despising  that are below me on earth? the Soul, life, the designs, acts of the Believer, being but a Comment upon Evangelick Precepts, and Christs like graces, I might say Ascendings.
ADAM is known to be put from Pa|radise, in the cool of the day, that is, about the evening, admit it to be the ninh hour, or three in the afternoon- Then it followeth, that the second Adam enter'd the Heavenly Paradise, when the first Adam was exil'd the Earthy: And about that time too, did the Dove bring the Olive Branch to Noah; It cannot therefore be blame worthy to conje|cture, that the fourtieth day after the Re|surrection about the same time; our LORD both in Soul and Body enter'd in a manly pace, and majestick walk upon Heavens street, and

passing through the throng of Angels, took that place at the right hand of the Father, resting there as in an Ark, haveing got no rest for the sole of his foot since his comeing thence, I mean about the ninth hour; for it is said, He appeared to the eleventh as they sate at meat, yeild that to be the sixth hour, or high noon; after which he talked, and went before them unto Bethania, Luk. 24.50. or to Olivet (upon which Mount Bethania stood) from Ierusalem a Sabbath days journey; the distance of the peoples march from the Tabernacle in the wildernesse, that is two thousand Cubits, or above half a mile from the City, a convenient walk for the Citizens contemplation in fair weather, and for plea|sure; after which journey, discoursing and blessing. He ascended to his Father, the Olive-branch of Reconciliation in his mouth, saying, I have finished the work thou gav'st me to do. Father glorifie thy Name, and ME with that glory which I had before the be|ginning of the world; For of them whom thou hast given me, have I lost none, but the Son of perdition, that the Scripture might be ful|filled.
AS on the ninth hour of the day, some will have his Ascension, there wants not them who affirm it was on the fifth of May,

he fifth day from the Sabbath, even Thurs|ay, the day in which he was presented in he Temple, the fourtieth day after his Birth, s holy to the Lord, being the first-born: So the fourtieth day after his appearing from the belly of the grave, about the same time or hour, He presented himself in the Temple of the Ierusalem above, as holy, harmlesse, and the first-born from the dead, having af|ter his Resurrection, never enter'd into the Temple below, that Type being dissannull'd; nd haveing cnsumate all Temple-service, Heaven he made his Throne, Angels recea|ving thereby the product of their wishes, the Archangels the ultimate of their desire; Man being restored, and enstated in the person of the Son of God (whose Tutors and Ministers they had been for that end) into that pistin glory, which by a Saanicall trick, had been cheated from them, even from Union with God, and dominion over the Creature, which now in Christ he hath made sure unto him in heaven; and though the wicked may reckon this security poor, because distant, and invisible, being in a far Countrey; yet let them not send the messengers of Lust, Am|bition, or Rebellion after him, discovering a dislike, as if tha man should not reign over them: for there He is, and there He will sit,

untill such and all other his enemies be made his footstool, and thence shall he come to judge in the clouds, both the obedient and refra|ctory, whether Angels or men; the fear of which ought to beget in us that reverentiall awe, it did in one Elias (not the Prophet) who is said to have been most timerous, al|wayes dreading the approach of death, the comeing of the Iudge, the pronouncing of that sentence, Go ye cursed.
BE rather induced to ascend after him, to be with him, by going up in such duties, as are thought to be enjoyned in the Psalms, cal|led of degrees, being humble in prayer, as Psal. 120. delineats; next stedfast in hope, then ardent in desire, then fervent in medita|tion; and because of many remora's and diffi|culties we meet withall in these, be invin|cible in patience then strong in confidence, holy in chearfulnesse, observers of providence, fearfull of offences, thankfull for victories se|rious in supplications, meeke in converse, particular in pleadings, charitable in fami|lies, and encouragers unto all good: the per|formance whereof, in a holy sense, will make each of you Adam hamahalah, or a man of degrees; for as these Psalms were of old sung by the Levits, upon the steps in their ascent unto the Court of the Women, at the

feast of Tabernacles, for their excellency, form, shortnesse and sweetnesse of the mat|ter; by these vertues as by stairs, we shall ascend, being men in this (for it is a reason|able service) into Heavens great Court, re|joycing with exceeding great joy, in tasting those pleasures which are at Gods right hand therein, for ever.
THE Priest under the Law was to bless the people at dismissing, or finishing of the Temple-service; one form whereof is to be found, Numb. 6.23. and others were institute by the authority of Rulers, it was pronounced standing, with hands stretch'd abroad, and with a raised voice, as if he would have forced into, or put upon the peo|ple, the mercies in those formes expressed which is promised in these words, And I will blesse them; Grace ratifying the Priestly be|nediction, when bottom'd upon Divin law, for the Congregaions obtainment of the de|sired good, which ordinarily in Religious-zeal was tarried for by the people, who are said to wait for Zacharias, Luk. 1.21. the Lords Priest, which with that of the pa|rent, poor and dying Christian, are known to be signally efficacious, which made our Lord the Priest of the New Testament when lea|ving his little flock to put his blessing upon

them, and with stretched out hands also, Luke 24.50. evincing the removeal of the curse of the Law, in his bearing of the curse for them in his own body upon the tree; and that he was going to pray for them, and for their sin, that security might be purchas'd knowledge of the truth obtained, and eternall life, the summe of all mans salvation, assured unto them, and alwayes to be intreated for by him; which being done, while he was with them in the world, should likewise be done at his abode with the Father; before whom as with open armes He was continual|ly to interceed for mercy to the Elect in ge|neral, and to his Disciples in particular as Friends, who could not, who did not part with this their Master, no more then Elisha would from Elijah: and though with that Servant, they had not the spirit of their Ma|ster duplicated, or doubled upon them; yet greater works then he did, they do, because He is gone to the Father.
CERTAINE it is, that Peter did convert, and the other Disciples together, at the feast of Penticost, more hundreds in one day, then for ought we find, Iesus in all his life-time to have done: to omitt that passage of Peters shaddow, Acts 5.15. (since it is not told us, who did it, or that ever any

was cured by it, or whether it was done for a good or bad end, whether in fond supper|stition by Christians, or malignity from Jews who might desire to receive benefit thereby, yet not own the Faith of him, whom Peter taught, I say, to passe this, we find all the Disciples endowed with a double portion of knowledge and heavenly joy; He being seen of them go up, who had been with him from the beginning when such hot spurs as were offended at his Person and Doctrine, enjoyed not that blessed sight, nor partaked of his fruiful blessing; from whom such post|ers are not many degrees distant, as declines the hearing of his Gospel now; or if they do, their impatience suffers them not to reach the end of our Divine service, that the blessing from the mouth, or hands of the preacher, cannot be raught unto them, their head and ears, being equaly remote from him: as their Kitchin is from his Pulpit, as if the blessing of the Sanctuarie were to be undervalued, in respect of their trivial, I might say, sensuall conveniency
CHRIST is said to be the Rose of Sha|ron and the Lilly of the valleys: Shaon was a pleasant field near to mount Libanus, in the Country of Bashan, where Davids flocks and herds were fed, near unto which, was a valley

fruitfull both of Lillys and Roses, growing, without mans care, or hands industry; having earth for Mother, and heaven for a Father, which Christ also had, who as a Rose is en|compass'd by prickly thorns of cares, troubles and persecutions, yet fragrant to such who placeth him as beautifull in their breast, heart and bosome; He was white in casting away his grave-cloaths, and winding sheet and napkin, the badges and colour of infirmity and darkness, so great was his humility that he became as a Lilly and of the vallie too bending down-ward, to bear upon his should|ers what the Father was pleased to imposs, even unto death; but now the darkness of Mortality, being evanished, he became rud|dy, cloathed with the purple robs of Majesty and Grandor; stedfasty eyeing heaven, yet still like the Rose piercing and galling, yea, tearing, as by thorns, or pricks, the hearts, the consciences, the Souls of such who ap|proach not to handle him in reverence, and religious deportment, in all parts of worship, as prayer, praise, Sacraments, vows, or any other ordinance of the Church; He carrying up to heaven, as may be conjectured, the very scarrs and wounds he received on the Cross; that beholding them, the ungodly nations may the more despairingly mourn, and

more convincingly bevail their (it may be) forgotten injuries toward the Son of Man.
BVT to such, who as Roses delight in the shade, or as Lillys, root themselves in the vally of humility, that is, rejoyceth, or affect|eth a Conformity in his excellent communi|cative properties, he shall become as an or|nament to their breast, or a pearl of great price in their hand; causing and procuring, the Fathers acceptance to such works, as tha breast shall conceive, wherein he is fixed, as David about building the Temple, or the Angel of Philadelphia about his Ministry, Revel. 3.8. God purposing never to exalt any, but in the manner he magnified his Son, who first drank of the brook of the way afterward he lifted up his head.
SAINT John is the Apostle that speak|eth most propheticaly, of our Saviour going to the Father; yet hath not one word that Hi|storically he did it so that the Question here, What and if you see the Son of Man ascend up where he was before? is not answered by him: for except in the Gospels of S. Mark, and Luke, the manner, and term of his ASCEN|CION is not to be found, and not without reason is it in them, and ommitted here; for S. Luke, having in his Gospel drawn his Ge|nealogy from Mary, of the house and linege

of David, making him thence to be owned for a King, it was needfull to commemorate his entrance into heaven, as into his Kingly palace; and Mark beginning with his Priest|ly Office. (viz.) of his preaching the King|dom of God, it was sutable thereunto, to beare in record, that he enter'd heaven as into his holy Temple to interced for the tribs of the world. But Mathew and John speaking of him as the Son of God, and as one that came from God, (besids that each Evangelist as he writ observed what the other had omitted, or largely handled, and accordingly as one abridg|eth, or enlargeth his own history,) Leaves the Faithfull to infer the necessity of his return into heaven, as to his native Countrey and of being in heaven, as the proper seat of God the holy Gospel throughout radicating the truth of this, and abundantly making good, the in|ference, all which S. John saw, he writting his Gospel after his three holy Coleagues had finished, ended, and published their severall Evangels.
BVT if any would have a sight of him ascending, as there are many who doth not; yet eats with us, drinks with us, goeth to the Mountain, and Olivet of our Temple, yet wants that beautifull Spectacle, as did the carnall Iewes in the text, who understanding

all things Nichodemicaly, that is carnally, de|rided this supposition; but if you would an|swer this, what and if, with an O that I might see the Son of Man ascend where he was before, then pursue the acquisition of such Gifts the Apostles were endued with, before it came to pass, which were Magnanimity and Courage, Longanimity and Patience, Vnity Concord The first made them keep together, though their Master and Shepherd had been smitten, separating but in fits, and starts, as men in distemper, the second hush'd all disturbances, strife and discord; none cheked Peter for his fall, he blam'd none for cowardice, whence flowed Unity and Love; their Masters last appearance being at their dinner, so to speak, when they were at meat: And ought not the memory of the ASCENSION to be attended with a religious banquet? since its last service was usher'd in with a Table ready furnished) a little after wh^c^h they see him again no more: and truly if our eating and drinking be for the glory of God, which shall be, when strength only is expected from them, his service in our generall and particular calling, we need not scruple, but if two, or three, or one, be in holy discourse, meditation, in soberness, (I mean not poor dishes, for there may be pro|digality in wooden platters, and gluttony o|ver

the coursest bread) thankfulness, fruga|lity, piety, and unity, it is impossible to misse the company or want the presence, of Jesus neither ought there to be a despondency, for the truth of the ASCENSION shall, and will, be evidenc'd unto those, with whom these accomplishments are at board.
LET the Zealous, discover faith in his con|version, preserve hope untill the consumation, and a manifest love in his conversation; Betha|ny, his obedience, shall so clear the eyes, that this flight from Olivet shall be known in all its spirituall effects and steps, for the hearts more ravishing, because refined joy, delight, and satisfaction, making the tongue to cry after him Set me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thy Arm, Cant, 8.6. that is, Lord remember me now thou art going to thy Kingdom.
IN the year of grace 1608, three Ships called the Ascension, Vnion, and Good hope, sailing neere the Cape of good hope, had the fate all to perish; the Vnion first perished, next Good-hope, last of all the Ascension; that aspiring minds having great hope, and dan|gerous ploddings, have perished in their hope when almost arrived at their wished-for-port, and Cape of their contrived design, i notor, to those who are not strangers in

our Coast, yea to our shame; Strangers best know it; Vnion we have already lost; in our dangerous discords, miserably increasing, and candalously spreading: Yet we pretend to Hope, and makes a lively-hood from it, for Faction and variance; but having so oft been under water, and it it self dashed and broken to pieces, might be justly called Conceit, and we Phrygian-like ought to be wise behind hand, and weather it out no longer, but take harbour, least we lose, that is, forfeit the be|nefit of the ASCENSION, having only a fan|cied presumption, of felicity to come.
GOD avert the ominous application of his instance, and unit us again, by the Spirit to an holy Vnion, in which only we can have rue hope secured and then our ASCENSI|ON will be ascertian'd; by which we shall e ever with the Lord, in the Lord, and af|er a troublesome sea  deluge of a tumultuous urly-burly, the Ark of our Soul, will rest o that Arrarat, those mountains of Spices above, saving the Cargo of a good con|science, by Anchoring in the Indian shoar, of heavens rich and glorious enjoyment.
THE Emperour Sigismund having pro|ed succesfull in severall battels against the arks, dignified many of his martiall Wor|hies with the Knight-hood of the Dragon,

their Device being a Dragon falling head|long.
RESEMBLE a Saints progress to|ward Ierusalem to a land-journey, through a vast, wast, and howling Wildernesse: compara|tively th whole Earth being no other, yet no Misprision from within, no false Information from without, no Hellish Combination en|compassing, need cause a retreat: for all of those in the Dagon already cast from Heaven are overcome, Revel. 12. Their attempts against the Woman and the Remnant of her seed that is, the Church her Sons and Daughters, are but wrigglings of that old Serpents tail, since his head was wounded: be not precipi|tate, be not afraid, O ye of little Faith, you shall tread upon the Lyon nd Adder, the young Lyon and the Dragon shall you trampl under feet as speaks the old Testament, Psal, 91. That is, shortly bruise Satan under your feet, as prophesieth the new, Rom 16. For Christ must sit that is, he must Reign till he hath put all enemies under his feet. A worthy saying of that great Apostle of the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 15.



MYSTERIUM PIETATIS, OR THE MYSTERIE OF THE DESCENDING OF THE HOLY GHOST, Unfolded and applied.

Pentecost-day-May 22. Tolbooth Church 1670.
Whitsun-May 22. Tolbooth Church 1670.


JOHN XX.XXII.
And when he had said this, he breathed on them and saith unto them, Receive ye the HOLY GHOST.

_AMONG other promises given by our LORD unto his Disciples, for their support in the tydings of his departure, that of the Father is aid to be one, which was their being bapti|zed





with the Holy Ghost, Acts 1.4 5. and that from heaven which had been revealed to Ioel, Chap. 2.28. by the Father, and also to the the world by the Son, who had given the Spiit to his Followers; but the Father having promised a more ample manifestati|on, it is peculiarly fixed to him by the Son who as a preparative thereunto from above, breaths here upon them beneath, the Spirit being the Soul of the Church, without it, you must imagine it to be only a Carcase, that Article of the holy Catholick Church being a depending one, the holinesse thereof relying upon her Relation in, and towards that of the Holy Ghost.
THOVGH as a bride she be betrothed to the Son, yet it's the Spirit maketh her the Lambs wife, as believing she is Baptized unto Christ, yet wanting the confirmation, unction, or blessing of the Spirit, there is no inward sanctity, which being ordained to be gradualy given, it is recorded in one place to be lesse plentifully, and in another, to be more miraculously infused, as before, and af|ter, our Lords Ascension, is evident in many places, and particularly in this: wherefore it is expedient to behold, how the Apostles received here the Spirit, and how afterward, and how we may be said as Sanctified to receive

the Spirit now, that we may passe from the infancy, and weak condition of meerly in|ant Baptism, and to become adult, in pos|sessing the thing thereby signified; even the sprinkling by, or baptisms of the, Holy-Ghost, as by fire; that as washed and heated, we may become so enliven'd, as the Lord may have pleasure in our beauty, and delight to dwel in our very bodies, as Temples for himself; His altar our mind spiritualiz'd, his Sacrifice our good works, the fire devouring that Sacri|fice, being that of Compunction for sin, and zeal for his glory.
THESE two words, Holy Ghost, ex|presse the holy Spirit, the third Person of the Trinity, when together; for if separa|ted, the Father, and the Son, are holy, and the Father and angels are Spirits, but when united, they respect, a duplicated operation and double office of the third person, perfor|med upon them who are chosen vessels unto Glory; in makeing them holy, and in give|ing them life, breath, or spirit: by which they become living souls, Ghost, or Guest, be|ing a name synonymous to all Spirits; but elly, or holy, to him by way of excellency, who proceeding from the Father and the Son, as breathed forth, and being every wy holy fitteth his name to his nature, the sutablenesse

whereof being eminent, he is denominat in our new style, thought more refined then the old, the Holy Ghost, receiving other Names, from other properties, as wind, fire, the finger of God, the comforter, the spirit of Truth the holy spirit, which the Apostles are commanded to receive, not as though they had formerly wanted, him, for they preached, wrought wonders cast out Devils, a power that flowed from his In-being, and during Christs abode, but he being upon his ascending, qualifieth them now this second time, for the work of the Ministry, in re|mitting of sin, in binding the obstinat for sin, in intepreting the Scripture, for their grea|ter assurance and fuller consolation, because of his absence about Prophesies and typ, as the election of Mathias, in the place of Iudas from the mouth of David doth famously make evident.
YET it is no great cause of offence to af|firm, that here they are breathed upon to dispose their minds already sanctified for the Spirits reception, in a more solemn man|ner in the dayes of Pentecost.
MOREOVER a religious melancholy, seazing on the vitals of their Spirits and be|lief of their Masters proceeding from, or a|scending to the Father, in, and for, their

behalf, the Spirit being a pledge of Salvati|on, the strength and life of the Soul, is here given by an apt similitude of a breath (fo as the visile body of Christ was not God, so neither is the breath here felt, to be estimate the spirit) to confirm them, that as the breath came from him, so should, or so did the Spi|rit proceed from him likewise: which the Greek Church to this day denys, affirming his procedure from the Father only, which is seen, say some, in their punishment, in looing their Imperiable Citty Constantinople, their Emperour, Crown and Kingdome, being ta|ken by the Turk upon this day in the Calen|dar, An. Dom. 1237. wherein the nature, gifts, and proceeding of the Holy Ghost, are taught, explained, and truly commemorat, in the Orthodox, and Latine Church.
MANY good things our Saviour had taught, especialy about his Death, and Resur|rection, which the Spirit was appointed to bring to their Remembrance; the brain of man in it self being naturally dull hereby is cleared, and as his birth purifieth ours, as his life instructeth ours, as his death destroyeth ours, as his Resurrection preceedeth ours, and as his Ascension prepareth ours, so his send|ing down of the Holy Ghost, helpeth us mightily, in the reflecting upon these things

against all infirmity whatso-ever; oyling the wheels of the Soul, makeing that lift up it self, being otherwise bowed down, and by this is said Woman or man thou art loosed from thy infirmity, causing them still look forward, o like a religious pulley, stil hale|ing, or pulling the soul heaven-ward to a loveing of spiritual things, contrary to the carnal mind spiritually: hence the Sunday betwixt his Ascension and the Spirits de|scension, is called from the entrance of the twenty eight Psalm, Dominica exaudi, as if from that time the Church of old, and yet now, had been still calling, praying for, and expecting a fuller portion of the Spirit, this breath being but the first fruits, untill the harvest, a taste only of Canaeans grapes, a warm breath, a refreshing gale, untill the mightier and rushing wind should blow, when Iesus had been glorified.
THERE are two principal parts of the body (viz.) head and heart, to which in the soul corresponds, the understanding and the will, it being led and moved by these as greater wheels, and God in his Church hath to both of these in resemblance, Christ and the Spirit, the head and heart of his Congre|gation, for understanding of, and being guid|ed unto the things concerning life, and by

these we know he loveth us and by that knowledge procureth in us Love and Ioy by divine illumination toward himself, the Spi|rit being that Regius, or great Divinity Professor, teaching from within, the mysteries of God: for what ever David the Psalmist Amos the Prophet, Daniel the Prince, Pe|er the fisher, Samuel the Ser, or any other Priest, Prophet, or Patriarch, taught, were but lecturs of his composing, words of his frameing, sentences of his drawing up, di|recting how to believe, how to live how to walk, and how to talk, how to love, and how to adore, how to weep, and how to pray, all with admireable wisdom, holy zeal and fer|vent charity.
THE Spirit was here given, about the Resurrection, before the Ascension, after which the spce of ten dayes, reckoning from the fortieh, that is, from the Passeover, for he was given again so that we are to observe the feast of Pentecost, when the HOLY GHOST came from heaven, whereby they, as all good men are, made to look up, before which we must meet and assemble, so re|ceiveing it in the Word, breathed upon us on Earth, this doubling of the Spirit, being like the two-fold Commandement, of loveing God who is in heaven, and loving man who a|bideth





upon Earth, yet it's but one command, acting on different objects; so its also one Spi|rit, given, and acting, for differnt things, or, for discovery of that one great thing the Trinity.
FOR the Son having been visibly known among men, the Father also revealed by the things that are seen, there remained one thing to enforce the certainty, and existance of three Persons, that was the appearance of the HOLY GHOST who had once come, as unto Noahs ark, like a dove in the evening of the world upon Christ the Lord, expressing the meek|nesse, peaceablnesse, harmlesnesse, of them who are as houses inhabited by him, this was at his baptisme: the next, as is thought, was in a cloud, strengthning his constancy glori|fying his purity, and heating his fervency, this was at his transfiguration; A third was by a breath for animating a perplexed, little flock about the removeal of himself from them, a few dayes before his Ascension; A fourth was in fire, in tongues, and this was after his glorious Session at the right hand of the Majesty on high, giving them a noon-day knowledge, to understand all Scripture, power over all Devils, wisdom against all Philoso|phers, Eloquence against all Orators, Pati|ence against all Torments, Gifts to convert

all Nations, Confidence in the love of God, for subduing of unruly lusts, Grace for persever|ing in all good works; Lastly, Ioy, in the peace of a good conscience, through Christ and him crucified, whence it is sayd, they were al filled with the HOLY-GHOST, in con|tradistinction, to those portions, or draughts, they had received before, so diminute that its said, the HOLY-GHOST was not yet given, (q. d.) in that ample and miracu|lous measure, because Iesus was not glorified, John 7.19.
WHICH when done, they are quasi over|charged, and Speaking, were thought drunk, that is, intoxicated: which in a trope they were, but not as the Jews uppos'd with wine, but with the new-wine of the Spirit; where|with the old bottles of corruped self, could not be brimmed, the Vine, whence it flowed, being above, the liquor whereof stupfied not the braine, but transmented the Soul, no causing staggering, but confiming in faith, and joy, as in the Citty, by that River which maketh glad the Citty of God, which they renewed, by wind, fire, and tongues, were capacitate to drink of, the one blowing away the chaff, the other heating the Spirit, giv|ing light also to the dark chamber of vain I|magination, the last promoting to speak re|finedly,

perswadingly, being cleansed from carnall sordidness, and earthly selfishness, delighting in no talk, but of the wonderfull works of God.
IT is usuall with Expositors, to shew the analogy between things themselves and that which is represented by those things: In how many wayes the Paschall Lamb and Christ doth agree, the Red-Sea and baptisme, the Cross and the braze Serpent, Iesus and Aaron, David and Ioseph, is not of our province but how aptly doth wind represent the operation of the HOLY GHOST in those upon whom he cometh, if you weigh those particular workings, in the conscience, by proportionating them according to it's quar|terly effects.
DOTH the South wind ordinarly bring warm showers and rain, by vapours drawn from the Midle-Sea, heated by the Suns fer|vency in the Equator for fructifying the earth? It is as evident that the Spirit shall no soon|er convince of sin, and say to the sinner; Thou art the Man, then rivers of waters will run down my eyes, said David, because they, that is, my eyes keep not thy Law, Psal, 119. 136. Mary Magdelen was wet further then the skin, and Peter is said to make furrows in his cheeks. O thou that made me, have mercy

pon me; was a form of prayer, appointed a luxurious wanton, but then a penitent Tha s, for procuring mercy, as not daring to pro|nounce God; What fruitfull showers hath the Spirit made in the valley of an humble and depressed Saint, Making the rain to fill the pools, causing Grace, even when stocked, to grow as the grass, and seed in prayer, supplicati|on, intercession, for all Saints the most obur'd weeping so loud, that the house of Pharoah, that is, the Court of heaven hears, and are admitted into that favour, as to be assured of the best fruits of the Land
THE North wind drives away rain, Pro. 25.23. And when clouds of fears and doubts, threaten a spirituall tempest, dark thoughts gathering and the glory of the Lord (the light, peace, and comfort of the Soul) preparing to remove, the conscience lying as the ashes of the Sacrifice, on the North side of the altar, in solitary sadness, digesting its own perplexities, to nourish heart-biting anguish; How hath the Spirit becam'd the Air? in his seren breathings, scattering the portentuous clouds, that had a sound of abundance of rain, keeping the Soul within the Pale or inclosure of eternall Election, whereby the chilling blasts of terren disasters, or spiritual desertions, do but cause it die the deeper, procur|ing

greater evidence, and from vocation con|cluding, that neither Death nor life, nor An|gels nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height nor depth nor any other Creature, were it my self (who at this time is made unwilling to be parted) shall be able to separat from the love of God, Rom, 8.39. Who saith unto Evil, come not nigh this mans dwelling; David encouraged himself in the Lord his God. Sam. 30.6. And Iob at last, was re-installed, and enjoyed more then Halcyon-like tranquility, in the feild and bosome of his own conscience.
OBSERVE the west-wind, and to herbs and flower it is so good, that one of its name is Favonious, for rendering so many favours, being not so moist as the South, nor so cor|roding as the Est; so is the Spirit influenc|ing the soul, for exciting to the delectable|ness of handsomly contrived purposes, caus|ing God delight in man, and again man to de|light in God, the grand scope of its enlarged acts, that as the Heliotropis to the Sun, so it turneth to the spirits motion; Imprinting upon the mans observer, and Surveyer of his paths, positions proving his growth in grace; All which emergeth, purely from the vertue of the Sun of righteousness, not from the ul|lenness of rigid opinion, which is to be hated,

qualy to the sordidness of the profligat sinner, both being Spots and blemishes, in the Church of God, uniting to infester the commendable tract of vertue; and religious complacency, the one giving it an ill name, the other con|triving its finall overthrow.
MARKE the strength of the East wind, and you shall find it imployed in eminent services, as in dividing of the Red-Sea Exod. 14.21. For bringing the Locusts upon Egypt, Exod. 10.13. For breaking the ships of Tar|shis, Psal. 48 7. And blastin of the seven ars of Corn in Pharaohs dream, Gen. 41.6. Yet all this is but the mightiness of a creature: but when men imperiously are advancing with full sails of prophane intentions for executing villanous undertakings, this Spirit (the Creator of all things) will convince them, arrest them, and cause them become a Magor missabib, a terrour to themselves, because of terrour round about, and blast them in their greatest rankness, empting them also in their greatest fullnesse, and coaling them in their most passionat heas: as Laban, when charg|ed not to do ill, not to speak ill, Gen. 31.29. It shaketh the roots of the stffst, and blow|eth away the sails and cables of the fleshes highest confidence, making some, to cry out with Saul, Lord, what wilt thou have me to

do  others with David? It is good for me that I was afflicted, and may be with Ruben, to roar out, and I, whether shall I go? Gen, 37.30.
HOW again from the intestins of a se|cure and becalmed conscience, it hath raised Hyrricans of feares; and terrible out-cryes, came from the jaylor, What shall I do to be sa|ved? Acts, 16.30. And here blew upon the Apostles, that all stratagems before feared of the Iewish malice, were hush'd and gone, for by this did their throats, as from a Trumpet; give an allarum to all the world, to seperate from an untoward generation, and added so to the Church, that three thousand were either by beleiving as Adult, or by bap|tizing as in infants, in one day, made members of his body, who is all in all; and these a|bounded so in good works, that they had all things common, (i. e.) for use, not in pro|perty, Acts 2. coaling their otherwise angry, and feavorish souls, enflamed against the doctrine of Christ crucifid, they opening their hearts, giving their bodys to be wash|ed in holy baptisme, by both being exceeding|ly refreshed, eating their bread with gladness and joy of heart.
THE Prophet got a charge to cry, Come from the four winds: O breath! and breath upon those slain that they may live, and according|ly

 their was a oice, a shaking and a re-enliv|ing, Sin hath made a Charnel house of each tructure, a slaughter house of each Familie, having slain all in them, with the weapon of unbeleif, and O! that the spirit in purifying by grace, in gracious prayer, in full assurance of faith, were given to each one for them|selves and for the good of all others, to stand in this valley of Earth, which is but a valley of bones and those dry: and who can tell if they can live? Though hey may cry: Come,  Spirit and breath of God, from the East, that we may see and know our selves to be sinners: renewing and sanctifying by hope from the west to understand, that our iniquities have caused a setting of our Sun of consolation, hav|ing lost the beams and rayes of Fatherly love, and dwelling in darkness. From the South that showers of tears, from our eyes through bitterness of sorrow, for the grosness of our misbehaviour and from the North, that we may behold the ruddy countenace of an Angry God, and the bow which he threatens; In|verted, its true, and unstringed, yet long shal not be so, if his patience be not answer'd in our amendement, and fear cause penitencie, for a voiding so dreadfull an arrow, as sen|tence to eternall flames, or formidable mis|chief from so omnipotent n arm, who can

even cloathed in flesh, make us feel the sting of his displeasure; in first blowing, and then kindling the very first streams of hell within us, as he did in desparing Iudas, and vaga|bonding Cain.
IT is true, we pretend much to the Spi|rit, and braves out reproof, yea censure upon that score; anticipating in conceit Heavens joy, by the assurances we brag already to have possessed from especiall evidence above, as if the mighty wind had already blown upon us: whereas we are yet carnal, and sold under sin, having not that noted nimblenesse, to perform all Religious exercise, clearly ob|served to be in them, who answer the Spi|rits call: for though with the Publican, we may come down from the tree of some con|ceited excellencies, possibly our due and birth-right; by washing the Saints feet, visiting the sick, feeding the hungry, binding up the wounded; yet really we sadly behold, that through some opinion, or nice punctilio: we adjourn attendance upon God in expresse du|ty, either altogether, or approach with re|luctancy untill with him in the Gospel, We first bury our father Matth. 8.21. which equally with him maketh us unfit for the Kingdome of God for no sooner did the wind blow, then the Apostles were inspired imme|diately;

not about the restoring of the King|dome to Israel, but of Israels enjoyment of the Kingome; the promise (vz.) of Heaven, not of the Earth, being to them and to their children, the Spirit hateing dull delay, wherefore it was also a sudden sound from Heaven, making them straight heavenly; the sound being before the spirit, for gathering in of their Spirits, causing intense attendance upon that which was to be revealed; the sound from Heaven, making them heavenly minded; the sound from Heaven, coming suddenly, confirmes the Doctrine of the spi|rits aversnesse from sloath; the sound from Heaven that came suddenly, was of a rushing mighty wind: the wind rushing causing spiri|tuall awe,  mighty, to excit their depressed; and it may be desponding souls, and wind to purge their hearts from filth, and blow away what in them was lurking, to detard from that employment, which by the Spirit they were intended for; and for which, like full vessels they were filled so as no earthly thing could enter, there wanting room; no temp|tation make them rail, sound, or roar as empty they being filled.
WHICH deliberatly consider'd, deplo|rable inferences must be inferred, touching the sad mistake of too oo many; whose opi|nion

only, is the alone significant thing before others, causing them to be accounted Saints, or some conceit in themselves, which ground only to themselves, the certainty of their fu|ture glory; which errour shall be to it's pos|sessors, I might say Admirers; what the vo|luptuous life of the Sophist Isaeus was to him, which how delightful soever at first; yet at last bmoned his being Tantaliz'd, that is, supposed to find good, and rejoyced in its pro|ximity; yet still went without and was at last frustrate of all hopes thereby being, but dreams and shadows; for as all is not gold that gsters, so neither is every thing that ravishes, by and by, to be termed Divine: Nor wha affects, yea comforts the heart, to be presently surnamed types of Heaven; yet where Dexterity, Agility in the things of God, are accompanied with Purity, Peace, Ioy, and Heavenly mindednesse, as in the Apostles here its a pgnant proof of the in-being of the Spirit, and coming down of the HOLY-GHOST, whence comforts truly, origi|nat and flw, c.
TWO thousand and odd years, had mans Ambition exposed him to infamy, Lewdnesse, and Idolatry; by Gods confounding langua|ges at Babel, stopping then from perfect|ing that joyntly intended Tower, by dividing

their speech, which at this day again, was transferred by plurality of tongues; unto a blessing, the Spirit diverssifying the Apo|stles tongues, not to disturb the world, bt advance the Church, in propagating Faith the readier; that there needed no Interpre|ter, every Preacher being furnished with the gift of every tongue, to speak to the multi|tude of the devout, that Iesus was the Christ: Uniting them again to be of one mind, and one accord, for edifying themselves in love, and one another in the holy Faith, which is a strong Tower of defence, as the Name of the LORD, Prov. 18.10. and whose top in|deed reacheth up to Heaven; each Convert being as a stone to the building, and united by the Cement of the Blood of the Eternall Covenant, laid on by the hand of the Spirit, who can as here, turn ill to good, by drawing good from it, whether for mans profit, or his Makers honour, as Levi's curse, in being scattered; occasionally through grace, made the Lord to be his portion, and be sanctified for Priest unto the Tribes, Numb. 3.12.
CONFOVNDING of Languages made the whole Earth to be peopled, each compa|ny flocking, planting, building, together ac|cording to that understanding they had of their neighbours speach, which now brought

great things to passe for the Almighties praise; all Nations beholding these unletter'd men, from Heaven in an instant, promptly uttering the good things of Peace and Reconci|liation, with Him who first confounded them, and of Reconciliation and Peace, with all who were confounded with them; all tongues expressing this one thing, Love the Brethren, 1 Pet 3.8. As Christ hath loved you, and gi|ven himself for you.
THE tongue, is a purifying, mundifying member, it can lick out viscuous matter, can suck out putrid and infections corruption from the body, as did that of the Lady Ellenor, wife to that Prince of Chivalry Edward Prince, afterward Edward the first, of England, her Lord being enggd, and fortunate in the Holy war, was almost assassinate by a Turk, being wounded with a poysoned kniffe, with which the Prince slew the Attemper, but Physicians despairing of his own recovery, the noble Lady (her Lord sleeping) is said, to suck and draw the venome forth, recovering her Husband, she her self not being endan|gered thereby. The tongue, is a tasting mem|ber, by i we know the white of an egg, to be unsavory, it is a speaking member, the Hie|rogliphick of a word among the Egyptians, was a tongue and by it we blesse God, at this

day, and alasse, by it also we curse men, set+ting it on fire as from hell, to reform which and virtuate the doctrine of the Gospel for drawing forth of the Soul, the deadly poyson of Atheism and Prophannesse by pravity, and exemple thrust upon us, and put in us, by those watchful lusts, and vigilant adversaries, of our Lord, and of our souls, because, we would regain that Ierusalem, that Royal City of pure and Holy peace with God, which hath been wrested out of our hands by Turk-like force Tyrrany and Cunning:
FOR draining us of such putrid filthiness, and the whole world, is the Spirit represent|ed in that shape, the first fruits whereof, ap|peared in that first, and Famous Sermon of S. Peter, whose tongue had been but a few weeks before, so glib for lying and cursing, now fluently detects the monstruous defor|mity, of the Jews bloody Zeal, and bridles their passion, yea, from convinced guilt, oblidgeth them so fare to renounce there for|mer impietys, against Christ, honoured and blessed of his brethren, as to rejoyce in the knowledge of him Crucified, craving remis|sion of sin thereupon, to the Churches in|effable glory, the accession of Multitudes to her banner, upon that score dispiriting her opposers, and creating fear upon every soul,

beholding the stupendious wonders, wrought by the Power, Hands, and Tongues, of such, whom the wise of the world, though not worthy of veneration.
BEFORE Christ dyed his Apostles feet were washed, John 1.5. For exact, circumspect, and clean walking, and after he ascended, he cleanseth their tongue, for Prudent, Holy, and Pure talking, consulting in all their converse, with truth, verity, and love; That as it is naturaly placed between the heart, and head, so its motion should be regular by there consent, being seasoned with salt Colos. 4.6. That is, gracefullness, and discretion, flowing from mature delibe|ration, and wise for-thinking, not hurried to the violation of precepts, by the winds of passion, but consult, and compleat what from duty, and charity, upon holy and sober inspection, we shall find incumbent for our place and calling; Not swelling in rancor, but alwayes, remembring the proverb of the A|rabs, being wary, least our tongues cut our throats: For can it be questioned, but that Dives, was the more tormented in his tongue, that he had scandelously offended in that mem|ber, which walking in uvo, (i. e.) lying in moy|sture, is the more prone to glid,  glib fiery in colour, edged, as a sword, therefore by na|ture

sheathed in lips and teeth, quenched with water, God seting more guards, and closer Centurys, about it, then other parts of the body, arguing its ferity, and unrulyness;
TONGVES resting upon the first preachers of the Gospel, and probably upon others also, the contexture of the History, Acts, 1.15. being grounded from the hundreth and twenty, and not reading how Stephen, Philip, and the other Deacons received the HOLY GHOST, a more conjecturall time is hardly to be found, then the Pentecost, I say tongues resting at first upon those Holy Teachers, indicats how the Spirit tryeth and designeth, their willing condiscending, to those generous rules of refined language, and what he sayes to them, he sayes unto all, Take heed unto your wayes that ye sin not with your tongue, Psal, 39.1. The image whereof, as it were growing from, because rooted, in a serpents tail, with the inscription quo tendis? whether goest thou? was of old, an Embleme, of those unhappy issues, men were brought into, whose tongues were not poysed, with premeditation, and wise government, which yet must not be thought identical, with car|nall subtilty, or that selfish principle of fawneing flattering, and caressing any, in unjust practises, for sensuall, and proper ad|vantages,

there being a time of, and for speak|ing, as well as a time of silence, and restrain|ing of the tongue which cannot be more pertinently said, (though more properly) to be set on fire of hell, then when it is employed, by the Divel or brib'd, by his emissarys, to stand mute, and not defend, the truth under pres|sure, or to utter words of slander, Calumny, Atheism, and Blasphemy, lyingly, or wick|edly engaging men into Hellish broyls, dange|rous garboyls, glorying in the bravery, and finness of Satanical Rhetorick, boasting because we have outrail'd, and it may be silenced, our Brother, not convinced, not converted but heated by our words, as by coals of Iuniper, (which kindled once, burneth even some months after) Devil like, leaves off speak|ing in not answering again, for a season, pur|poseing afterward in fiery rage, to work re|venge even unto blood.
IF the tongue be the glory of a man, how shamefully do some abuse their glory, and tread there honour in the dust? Let thy talk Reader hereafter, and thy silence also, be such, as is fit for Saints, and worthy of God, symbolizing with Crucigerious of the Last age, who spake oft to his Friends, about Christian Doctrine of the wounderfull preser|vation of the Church, of immortality, and the

ope of glory, which and the like thereto, shall evidence the Spirit to have sat upon thy head (as the tongues rested on the Apostles,) ignorance evanishing, and the Mutinees that so oft hath risen in Societies, formerly about questions of honour and preferment, of sitting at the right hand; and who should be the greatest (one great cause of our late calamity) shall be dashed, quieted, and repented for; all agreeing to talk of the wonderfull works of God! following Iesus our Captain and our Master, whom we have oft mistook, and mis|interpreted, but now having a true light, and purchas'd a perfect Idea of things Mystical, by ou zealous yet sober behaviour, by our holy yet peaceable deportment, clear to the Multi|tude, that in truth we have been with Iesus, and received the earnest Spirit.
THE tongues are said to be cloven Acts, 2.3. Not divided, for that were Babel, but dimidiated as it were, double pointed; since there was Heresies to confute, sin, to detect, Exhortations to be given; reproofs to be made, reason would have them to be gifted for this work, and needfull it wa, to shew there invisible endowments, different gifts, inwardly possessed, by this outward and visible appearance; the multiplicated number where|of, discovering the variety of those languages

which, by the spirit they were to instruct in, whether to Iew or Gentile, implyed in the Mystery, from the dimidiatness of the same tongues, forkednesse, or clift in them, these two nations, thereby to be united, and Law, and Gospel, though seemingly different, to be joyned into one root, as proceeding from one cause (viz.) our Lord Iesus Christ.
THIS was known to the multitude of believers out of all nations dwelling at Ieru|salem, much about the time, Christ was ex|pected by the studious Jews themselves, and by those, now truly gifted brethren, who having the true sence, or marrow of the law, which is nothing but the pith of the Gospel, could work the hearts of the observers of either, to know, and imbrace both; yea pro|perly to inferr each others duty, and there own requisit practise from what they heard imposed upon the one, or known for|merly revealed to the other, as Davids se|pulchre with Peters Exposition doth excel|lently make offer, and convinceingly prove.
YET not in this only, but in the circum|stance of time, did the Law, and Gospel har|moniously unit, for these things happned in the dayes of Pentecost, one of the three solemn feasts of the Jews, so called, as being the fiftieth day from the Passeover, in which

day, the law was given from Mount Sina; in fire, God speaking out of the cloud; But that law being broke fiftieth dayes after the rising of our Saviour, at the Passeover, who then as a Lamb did take away the sins of the world, God the HOLY-GHOST came down in fire; that is, in fiery tongues, to imprint a new education of his law in the hearts of the true Israelite, yet with this excellent, and comfortable difference that as Moses yeelds to Christ, so must Sinai, to Sion, here was fire only, their fire and smoak, there was clouds, darknesse, and earth-quakes, accompan'd with fear and trembling, Sinai it self quaking; But in Sion only a sound, as of a mighty wind, to prepare the receivers, and cloven tongues, uniting Iew and Gentile, the boundiary of the wilderness, being pulled up, and variety of tongues perswaded the scattered abroad, that God had given the Kingdoms of this world, to his dear Son, that in a spirituall sence, not Israel only, but the Earth might become the Lords, and the fullnesse thereof, typified, by that multitude gathered, and converted by the heat, fireynesse yet harmlesnesse, of the Saints, charity and ardor, having received the re|mission of sin, and that from heaven, the self same day their Fathers received the law, a|gainst which they had transgressed; for both

was at the time o Pentecost, as may be de|monstrated in computing the time thus;
THE people came from Egypt on the 14 day of the month, there, therefore remain|ed 16 dayes for travell (the Hebrews always reckoning 30 dayes for a month) the first day of the third month, they came to Sinai, 30 dayes of the second month being accoun|ted, there will with this be found 47 dayes, then the Peoples encamping, Moses goeing up to God, his returning again to the people, for clear calculation, is called one day, which is 48, in which going up again to the Mount, he is ordered by God, to order the peoples being ready against the third day, which will make the 50. n which God appeared, for reckonig from the peoples want of bread or fall of Mannah, is uncertain and may be er|ronious, this is more clear and evidenceth the Anology better, betwixt that fire from God by the Ministry of Angels: and writting his law on tables of stone, and that by fire in the descending of the Spirit, that came one the 50 day after the slaying of the Passover Christ Iesus, writting his law upon the tables of the hearts of men, in a fuller, fairer, larger, and more clear Character, typ, or impression, but note this reckoning is inclusive, the other not.
THE Persians and some other nations, adored the fire for a god, because of its exces|sive power, and force, in resolving matters combustible how great so-ever, into it's own substance, and being; and usually it's ac|counted the most noble among elements, be|ing as the heavens among bodies, the sun a|mong planets, yea it's purgeing operation made it of old to be the heirogliphick of puri|ty, as if they had known, the world it self, was to be cleansed thereby: but how hath the fire of the Spirit from Ierusalem enlarg|ed it self? making the frosted heart of the unbelieving world, even to glow while it talks, of the Cross from heaven, which is one of the three things, by wise men admired in the earth, looking upon the Resurrection, and Ascension, far short in comparison of that con|quest the Holy Ghost hath made of the Gran|dees of the Nations, in their honourable re|ceiving of that doctrine, from the mouths of plain men, so contrary to the hair of natural inclination; and mark it, where ever the Spi|rit cometh, it comes ordinarly by the sound of the Gospel, and by it's heat, we are assured of his reception, a heart touched, a heart prick|ed, is but a heart heated, a heart open'd; when a man crys what shall I do? with Pe|ters converts Acts 2.37. or take away the

iniquity of thy Servant, with David 2 Sam. 24.10. surtiship may be offered that the Spirit hat spoken in a saveing way, but if it be a complaint of the punishment with Cain, or a remove the rgs with Pharaoh, be not rash in Cautory, this being a Legal, not a Gospel expression, far from that request of creating a clean heart, which the Iews com|pareth to the Holy of Holies, to Solomon throne, to Moses ables, and truly displays, that the wickednesse is done away, by the Spi|ris inhabiting, his resting therein, and writ|ting thereupon, the doctrine of pardon and remission; provyding the man seperate him|self from an untoward generation Acts 2.40.
IT'S said the Spirit sat upon each of them, in which it differs, from that unclean Spirit, that goeth about, compassing the earth to and fro, seeking rest, but findeth none, whereas holinesse is pacifique serene, tran|quilling, consolidating, the heart in which he dwels, makeing it calm in it self, and causing quietnesse towards all others, condemning Ambition, Covetousnesse, Hatred, Envy, Vanity, and what ever els, tends to the Churches disturbance; in which the Spirit rests, sitting in it, as upon a Throne purpo|sing to reign, as on a Tribunal, resolving to judge, as on a Chair purposing to instruct, for

all which, in all ages to come, he represent|ed his undertakeing, on this day, establishing himself upon the Apostles heads, as by fire, clearing them from the rust of Errour, the filth of Corruption, that as Patterns, as well as Preachers, they might be exmples of San|ctity to their own generation, and give in|fallible rules for obtaining happinesse unto all posterity for ever.
COMPVNCTION of heart and re|mission of sin, are both from the Spirit of God, and is that new wine which shall only be put in the new bottles of a regenerated soul, whereby they shal do, and speak, as the Spi|rit shall prompt them, I had almost said, as the Spirit give them utterance, as here the Apostles: for we find, the whole house was filled with the rushing wind, the Majesty of the Holy Ghost, excluding all in-maets, and though each Apostle, had the sanctifyed o|peration of the Spirit, filling every angle and corner of the soul, as the understanding with Faith, the will with Love; and that sin or Devil might be exiled, the hands with Promptitude, the feet with Solicitude, the eyes with Modesty, the tongue with Eloquence, the whole man with Prudence, the Faculty Concupiscible being filled with good, the Iras|cible with courage, the Rational with verity,

though they had all gifts and were all filled, yet they spake as the spirit gave them utte|rance, some had five, others had two talents and S. Paul abounded, and spake with tongues more then they all: whereby he who expects the gifts bestowed unto all, ought not to caresse himself, or hug, and embrace himself in the deceiving hopes of a rich, ample, and perfect possession of the Spirit here, but rest satisfied with his gift, and with being one of the eleven, not envying Peters singularity, (for he is particularly spoken of) and e|minency, since a pinnace, a small yaught, shall land as wel as a great ship, with full sail, under the conduct and flag of the Admiral.
VPON the coast of the Whit-sea, there is a cap called Pentecost; and somewhat east of that, there is another called Bonae Fortunae (q d.) good-luck, let this day be any mans Pentecost, a time of gathering in, that is, of heeding the law, offering the first fruits of strength unto the Lord (as the Jews did this day of their corn) it shall, as Godlinesse, (hath the promise) enrich both for heaven, and earth, doing good to him, and not evill all the days of his life, by (pardon the altera|tion of the coast and similitude) giving him a trade wind for the port of his desired rest.
IN this last age, we are not to look for

miracles, by a sensible feeling of the rite, or significant ceremony here used, yet still Christ breaths on the Elect, enlargeing to that degree their bowels of Love, that they hew him always their faces, being averse neither to his Doctrine, nor to his Crosse, yet forget not, that he ascended before the mighty strong wind blew in upon them; and that there may be no mistake, there are some pon whom the Spirit comes never, being eft in the ignorance of nature, coldnesse of the Earth, rawnesse of the flesh; there are o|hers upon whom he comes, but abides not, lowing only upon them, and no more, heats hem indeed, but as warm water, they are older soon after: he washeth them, yet after|ward they go to the puddle, and are offensive s before; to others he cometh, and abideth itteth upon them, liveth in them, fills them outwardly, with heavenly ardor, celestial eat, and by fire from above, causes them seem peaking Seraphims, and inwardly with wis|ome, understanding, knowledge in the eepnesse whereof, they may be stiled Che|ubims, yea gods in the liknesse of men, and hose fiery ones too, this was for the Apostles.
BVT alas we see not those signs to passe he fiery tongues of too many in this age at|nded with smoak and brimstone, the known

fewel of Hel flames, it is but one of a Citty and two of a Trib, in whom we see the love of God (an evidence of the Spirit) which is known chiefly by the loveing of man, who being ready for good works to both, and pa|tient in suffering and enduring evill from both, and makeing progresse from one degree of vertue to another, not falling back into perdition, in the sight of either, this is for us unto whom the Disciples are as lights, after they received the promise of the Father, as a gift from Iesus in his triumphant chariot, the right hand of the Father, the Captain of our Salvation haveing led Captivity captive, give|ing gifts to men, to those then, to us now, more dureable treasures, then those offered by the Roman conquerors of old, as Sanctity in fire, Purity in wind, Eloqution in tongues that a Hebrew man might in Roman Oratory, and with Attick Eloquence, publish Salvati|on to the respective people, and even per|swade and reason them by the Spirit into e|verlasting blesse.
I say by the Spirit, for unlesse he signifie unto the heart, the preaching in the Air wil little avail, neither shal ever he be Oraly instruct|ed, for laying aside the weight that so easely besets, whose mind by the Spirit is not per|fectly anointed, for discovering the reward

designed for observers of the Law, he being the principale Master, Clearing the memory, Refining the Reason, Inclining the will: by the first, alwayes minding us of God; by the second, directing how to apply him for our good,  because to him that knoweth his Masters will, and doth it not, there are ap|pointed double strips: by the third he sweetly, willingly, and powerfully, draws us to the practise of the good we know, for our souls sake, and by the mercy of Iesus, and by the fellowship of the Spirit, and this alwayes, for tongues being the organ of expressing words, manifests the perpetuity of the things heard, which as by fire, are to be engraven, and melted into their head and heart, for their subsistance in them who are sanctified, as is published, in the Multitude of converts; their joy, their union, their increase, though un|der persecution.
AFTER the Disciples return from Olivet we find them enter into an upper roome, con|tinuing in prayer, by some learned, thought to be the place where our Saviour instituted the blessed Sacrament of his body, confirmed Thomas in the faith of the Resurrection, and where the HOLY GHOST came down in fire upon this day; And was (as antiquity records) the Church and Synod-house of the Apostles,

in Ierusalem, called Coenaculum Sion, being first hallowed by our Lords supper, and con|secrate by other appearances for holy use, and service, a Church being builded thereupon, called the Church of Sion, on the top of the mount whereof, there yet remaineth some reli|ques, confirming the History and Tradition. In this place, the multitude of believers, about an hundreth and twentie; some of them possi|bly of our Saviours own kinred, converts, and acquaintance in Jerusalem, mett  prayed for the Election of Mathias: at which time surely God loved the gates of Sion more then all the dwellings in Ierusalem, his foundation being in this Holy mount, 87. Psal. 1.2. Here was Mary the Mother of Jesus,  it may be Mar|tha, Mary Lazarus; who ever they were they continued in one accord, in prayer, Acts, 1.14. for if men give bread when their Chil|dren importunatly ask from them, and a|fectionatly being at peace among themselves; How much more shall our heavenly Father, give the Spirit to such who call for him? e|specially if in sound faith, upright heart, chast bosoms, holy groanings, innocent thinkings, with unwearied solicitings? Which unwearied|ness, is intimated in the words they continu|ed, the fire of the Spirit, burning up the sting|ing, wither'd Nettles of contention, the Thorns

of worldly cares, the Heath or Heather of ars and dejectments, opening the ground of soul and Spirit, for the seed of the good hus|band man, that they might be inriched with, nd bring forth fruit meet for repentance and mendment of life; blowing away, as with wind, the sandy vanty of self-conceit and o|pinion, hindring growth in grace and know|ledge, and all triviall trash, sordidness, be|ing either burned, or scattered, while the world is Sataniz'd by lust, continuing in Gluttony, Drunkenness, Excess, Wantoness and Pride, these continue in prayer, peace, and expecting the promise, in high and ervent love; for the Spirit came down, and filled the house where they were sitting, that is, in qui|etness together, iniquity, passionatness, talk|ativenesse, itch of disputing about words, which gender strif, contention and debate, the HOLY GHOST purposeng eternaly to be estranged from.
THAT being known to them, and of us to be heeded, the Spirit expresseth more then once, after the Ascension, that the multitude met together in one accord, sueing for the a|complishment of the promise, which in few dayes, that is ten, they received, haveing ask|ed with the mouth, for they prayed; with the heart, for being heavenly endowed, they wen

no more a fishing, but about the fullfilling of the Scripture, Judas being gone to his own place.
THEY were in Ierusalem likewise, which is by interpretation a City of Peace, being commanded not to depart thence untill they received the promise of the Father, Acts 1.4. Christ purposing to glorifie his Ascension, yea all his actings, with the greater splendour; for there was his greatest humiliation, the greatest powring forth of his blood, the low|est bowing down of his Head, there at the Pas|over, in sight of the Nations, did his Soul fly upward into Paradise, leaving a naked body in the hands of the Souldiers: and there again was his greatest exaltation, pouring forth his Spirit at the Feast of Pentecost, upon his despised Associats, the firstlings of whose conversion by his power, whom the Rulers had slain, but fifty days before in that same City, not only reviveing his memory, prove|ing his innocency, but convincing their Au|ditors, the inhabitants of bloodinesse and sin|fulnesse; they thereby becomming adorers of the Cross, manageing the vertue and me|rits thereof, in gratifying the Father, that is, glorifying and pleasing God, by rejoycing because of, and in, the same, and of its exten|sion unto all the world, the Iew rejoycing

in his own pardon, for crucifying the Lord of glory; the Gentile being glad, in partaking of that Salvation which was from the Iews, Ioh. 4.22. both now understanding the Pro|phet in his Out of Zion shall go forth the Law, Isa. 2.3. and whence can it come fitter? since its a Law making peace, then from Ierusa|lem, a vision of peace, where Christ the Prince of peace, said once, peace be unto you, and again, peace be unto you, Joh. 20.21. that is, as I have found you in peace, I leave you in peace; and abiding in peace, the spirit of peace shall abide with you: for which, receive ye the HOLY GHOST.
THE Trumpets of the Temple sounded every morning at the opening of the Gates, for assembling the devout unto Divine ser|vice; the Spirit being breathed upon the Apostles here, keep'd them together, untill the sound of a mighty winde alarm'd them, and prepared them for more ample manife|station of his appearance; And surely what the Trumpet did, our Bells doth now, each ting and toll, saying, Gather your selves toge|ther, Joel 2.2. and though gathering by many be not regarded, and by severall reasoned and printed against; yet our falling from the shadow of Religious deportment, in shut|ting our ears against such solemne invitations

to our Churches, hath not had among us, such alluring mercies, such beamings of heavens ac|ceptance, such self-denying, and sin-subduing characters, such warme breathings of Ghostly consolations, nor such examples, impulses, to purity and good works; but that yet we should go up to the house of the Lord, and call upon his Name with the remnant that are left.
OVR Fiery tongues against Assemblies, and the Masters thereof, being indeed such, that is, fiery, rather then like as fire; God by them being dishonoured, and the multi|tude of the Nations enforced to conclude there from, that mystically we be drunk with the wine of astonishment and spirit of giddi|nesse, having a knack of cursing, what ever we see contrary to our intentions, though urgently sought by us, or wishedly endea|voured; for what ever Providence doth with us, though, it may be, in the main conform to our prayers and fasts yet in the end we pray and fast, yea curse and ly against it, since it is so well known, the Gall which now im|bitters our lives, even to separation; is no other then that same Gall that hath disrelish|ed our former enjoyments: Our disquiet pro|ceeding not so much from this or that object, as from our heeding the devil, who is come down, yea invited down amongst us, having

great wrath; so that in some meetings, there is, it may be, a mighty rushing wind, and the sound of that throughout the land; but our sitting, that is, our abideing in that harmo|nious concord, peace, and love, attested as a badge of the Spirits future coming, not be|ing seen its fallacious to inferre the posses|sion of Holinesse, though they should speak with Tongues and prophesie.
OFT did the HOLY GHOST appear but never in the shape of a ravening beast, or bird of prey; Oyle is soft, a Dove is not invective, and the fire that came down at Pentecost, was without smoak; for that hurts the eyes, and likewise without natural heat, for it sindged not a hair of the head, neither did the smell of fire passe on the Apostles; it being but like fire, an Element in which God had oft appeared, as to Moses, to Elias; the nature of it being adapt to signifie the opera|tion of the Spirit within these men for their own good, and benefiteing of others: which ardently they pursued, prudently instruct|ing, and by Grace infusing in others, their own acqui'd, and infused perfections, as by fire, melting the hard heart, inlightning the ignorant, cleansing as from rust the idle and sluggish Soul, heating all through the love of ascending towards Heaven; which love

as oyle, keepeth always aloft, and without mix|ing it self with the affecting of things here below, they being cast out, as by a sink and not to be heeded, that is, beloved, for nau|seating the Soul, which by the pledge, or troth here received as by a Ring, hath be|trothed it self purely unto God.
HENCE, we may pronounce their piety, but formality, and shall be more confound|ing, then flat Atheisme, who obtruds upon the world, their rough hands, enflamed cheeks, tearing nailes, their pilfring hu|mour, their slandering tongue to be consti|tuent parts of those multiplicated gifts, effused and shed abroad upon their heart by that Spi|rit which descended in these dayes; the per|nicity whereof to discover, would long de|tain us from our Port; but that of our Saviour, detects the insolence, by their fruits ye shall know them, Matth. .16. Rapaciousness, and blood-thirstinesse, being equally remote from the soul of Him in whom the HOLY GHOST dwells, as are the contentions and blasphe|mies of Hell, and the joyes, concord and peace in the highest Heavens.
SVCH who expect visits from great men, fits their houses for reception, possi|bly by perfuming pots; the Disciples prepared for the Spirit by Vnion, Prayer and Love: em|brace

the Pattern, imitate the Coppy with repeated acts of incense-like mortification of lust, prejudice, animositie, or whatsoever savours of such nastinesse; Using in opposi|tion to these, the strowings with the sweet herbs of Brotherly kindnesse, meeknesse, pa|tience, charity, and love to God: the house (I should say the Soul) thus scented, is dis|posed for his admission; he loving purity, and religious cleanlinesse, being the only dele|ctable property, he pursueth and expect|eth.
THE Church is said to have Doves eyes, Cant. 4.1. and the Dove is both a sociable and harmlesse creature, refusing to nest in that cote where rottennesse, or stench, breeds an|noyance; being delighted with that house most which is furnished with glasses, the bird de|lighting in her own shadow, and rejoycing to behold it, even in water: The Doves eyes indeed, properly unsolds the chastity of the Church, looking only upon her belov|ed as a true Turtle, and her not following strange lovers; but the other known proper|ties of that fowle, countercharms the witch|craft-like enchantments that are in this age, men caressing, that is, hugging themselves in a whimsical solitude; not desiring to have a dis|covery of themselves, unto themselves, least they

should relinquish their imbib'd opinions, falsely called a principle, and say, O! who shall deliver us? flying from contrived-for-disturbance, or tenets of separation, as from filth and or|dure, in which alone the unclean spirit keep|eth, because there only he findeth rest.
WHEN the World was soued, or (so to speak) under the pickle of the deluge; the Dove alone gave intelligence of the waters abatement, not by a Bramble, but by an Olive branch: So untill the waters of Con|trition flow for our former defilements, un|christian-like temperaments, (which as raw blood putrifies yet the body of our King|doms,) it is not to be expected, the Com|forter from the FAHER and the SON shall intimate unto us, that our sins are for|given, or that in Christ we have got the Victory: testifying the truth thereof, by the Olive branch of refreshing comforts, ante|dateing heavens felicity in the infallibility and certainty of its possession, peace with God, being certainly deduceible therefrom: Where|as contrairily by our tearing and devouring one another, its easie to prognosticate what the result of our lives shall be, and whereun|to the issues of our Death shall tend, if we persevere in discord, the Horoscope of the litigious, discovering his being born in Sa|tan;

the scheme manifests his rest (pardon the irony,) shall be with him; which even his spirit attests in the pangs of a tortured, and disturbed breast, so that within us, we have either way a witnesse of our blesse or mi|sery, whereby our condemnation is the more intollerable; if we do not our own businesse and study to be quiet, living in love and peace, that the God and Spirit of peace and love may be with us.
HOW oft in the History of the Ascension and of the HOLY GHOSTS descension, (to harp once more upon this string) have we these words, they met with one accord? and no where besides; shewing, that in opposi|tion to that quarrelsome life, to those fre|quent disputeings among the Apostles and Disciples and censurings one of another, they formerly had offended in; Now they un|animously agree in a Brotherly harmony, be|ing united though numerous, as one body by the Cement of the Spirit through the Go|spel; there being no intimation in the sacred History of any reflection of the Disciples to the Converts, or of the Converts to them, or of any one towards another, about any miscarriage, whereof aforetime they might be, or had really been guilty of, their life an|swering the Law; for it was the Pentecost in

ordinary fiftie days from the Pasch, that these things were done, and the fiftieth year also; and so the year of Jubilee, a time of releas|ment for servants, lands, debts, of rest, and proclaimed with great joy, Levit. 25. figu|ring that delight Christianity hath obtained under the full deliverance Christ hath purchas|ed for his people; freeing them not only from the pedantry of the Law, and burthensome rites thereof, but restored them to their for|mer priviledges with God; the exceedingness whereof is figured in this, that there passed twenty nine Jubilees betwixt Ioshua and Christ, the Gospel abridging the Laws au|thority, and hastning the acceptable time, the year of great deliverance, Luk. 4.18.
THE Pasch by Christs death is antiqua|ted and outdated, it was expedient also, to abolish both Pentecost and Jubilee; for ha|ving procured a plenary remission from sin, we as freed from its bondage, are now to re|joyce in the LORD alway, the Jubilee being proclaimed upon the day of Expiation which was a day of sadnesse, grief and sor|row for the offences of the whole year, that in the midst of trouble they might remember joy; and we having liberty by the Resurre|ction, who before were sold; and gifts by his Ascention, who before were poor, pre|senting

himself as the first fruits, (being first born from the dead) before the Father, for obtaining a blessing on the crop, or race of mankind (which the Jews did at Pentecost) therefore let us pray, for fulfilling of the Pentecost feast, in having sin remitted, the curse from the Earth removed, and the Iu|bilee rite also, in having the liberty of the Sons of God, the legal ceremonies evanish|ing, a clearer manifestation of things, and mysteries are under Evangelical dispensation, sprinkling with water, being now repent|ance; washing with water, baptizeing with the HOLY GHOST, and sacrificing of bullocks, goats, and lambs; for expiating sin is that sup|erlative sacrifice of Iesus death, an offering for the sins of the whole world; He being that Lamb of God which taketh them away, by whose strips it is healed, and by whose blood it is made white; which the very garments of the Neophti, or new Converts of old, upon this day worn, emblematically dis|cover'd, being cloathed in whit, insinua|ting sanctity, purity, harmlesnesse and pece|ablenesse: whence the day is called Whit-sunday, or with the Saxon, wied (i. e.) that is sacred, or holy Sunday.
LET this Generation pretend to what

degree of Sanctity it please, to fear God, to eschew evil, to honour all men, to do violence to no man, to do good; and in all these to persevere, is the alone mean to be cloathed in White, the proper habit of that Citizen, which is of Ierusalem above: unto which all his acts must quadrat of what kind soe|ever, least the Spirit be blasphemed through his impertinencies.
FOLLOWING that Heroe, Peter King of Aragon, who gave a Glob, representing the Earth, a Crown surmounting that, signi|fying Soveraignity, that overlaid by a Scepter, typifying the application of Law according to merit, over all a Dove in a glory emble|mating the HOLY GHOST, circumscribed with this device, TE GUBERNA|TORE,, (i e.) by thy Direction: all things being done within the Empire of the Christi|ans jurisdiction thus; Religion shall not be used as Talque (shining over glasse cases,) to hide the rottennesse, worm-eating, and mo|thinesse in the frame of many mens conversa|tion; neither shall their talk so amuse the Vulgar and undescerning, as to cause a sigh, a long prayer, the nameing of God, and con|science, cover the ickednesse of practises, as to let it passe without abhorrence of their

Hypocrisies, or censuring their (ick-nam'd holy) profession, as too frequently they do to the defaming of that which our devout Ancestors, called Zeal, Piety and Religion; accounting honesty in the second Table, one genuine Character, clearing mens observance of the first, wanting the brazen-fore head, now boasted of in some Professors, where holinesse is divorced from peace; no sacrifice Sermons, or Prayer so pure as those which are mingled with the blood of men, who gain|say the principles of a few; by blood, is not barely to be understood, that physical thing so called; but the curses, lyes, untrue reports, slanders, calumnies, with which the services of Formalists, and Pretenders, are maliciously, sinfully, scandalously, and madly inter|woven.
THAT French King, Henry the third, having been upon this day, by the Diet of Poland elected their King, did in memory hereof institute an Order, called Knights f the HOLY GHOST, their Habit ha|ing many black and white ornaments therein; nd in a golden Collar, within the center of  Cross was the effigies of a Dove, umbrage|ng that blessed Spirit: It is lawful to attempt, ea honourable to design high Atcheifmens,

if within the verge of our Capacity, power, or calling: and to whet my weapon at this Philistines forge, how strenuously hath the Ancient Saints endeavoured to cause the days, and places, whereon and wherein they have been honoured with mercies, blessings or visi|ons to be remarked, as Abraham in Beershe|ba, Gen. 21.33. or Iacob in Bethel, and Mordecai at Purim? This hath been a day of glad tydings, wherein by Tongues, the or|gan of Eloquence, utterance and acclamation, GOD hath testified mans endowment with the gifts of holynesse, and given instances of gracious acceptance for humble Penitents, pos|sitively deduced without much scruple, from the Apostles teaching, and the Murtherers re|penting, sorrowing, believing, rejoycing: Whence it is consequential, that if we reflect upon the blacknesse of our tongues, in our cla|mours, bawlings against Christ, his Word, his Instituts, his Servants as if they were not worthy to be, or fit to live; walking in God|like or Dove-like innocence, invested with the white Robe of love and meeknesse, adequat and cut out for the Elect of GOD, Col. 3.12. We shall have the honour of all GODS Saints, being elected Kings, to reigne over lusts, hell and Death, by being from this day for|ward

filled as was Stephen with the holy Spi|rit, filled with all knowledge, evidenced when with the Romans we are full of all good|ness, Rom. 15.14.
Glory be to the FATHER, and to the SON, and to the HOLY GHOST.
FINIS.





Errata ie Corrige.
The China Printers having by their Art, Exim'd themselves only from Possibility of Errour; the best in Europe, yet pleads guilty of mistakes: Here are some Capitall ones marked, others being Remitted to the Read|ers Charity and Correction.
Page 6. l. 7. Read holding, p. 37. l. 6. r. be in time p. 40. l. 12. r. Enflame to p. 64. l. 25. r. That, by that, p. 69. l. 22. r. not gratified p. 70. l. 22. r. Quadrat. p. 86. l. 24. r. lean|ing. p. 89. l. 12. is not, p. 204. l. 20. r. end|eth, p. 213. l. 12. r. moulting, p. 240. l. 19. r. viants.



M^r. VVill. Annand His Mysterium Pietatis.






