



Charles R.
CHarles the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith c. To all Our loving Subjects, of what degree, condition, or quality soever, within Our Kingdoms and Dominions, Greeting: Whereas it hath been manifested unto Vs, that Our trusty and well-beloved Elias Ashmole Esq Windesor Herald at Arms, hath for fifteen years past applyed himself to the search and study of things, relating to the Honor of Our most Noble Order of the Garter, and hath at his great charge, and expence of time, now compleated a Book, Entituled, The Institution, Laws, and Ceremonies of the said most Noble Order; collected and digested into one Body, and adorned with variety of Sculpture; whose pains therein, as it is greatly to Our satisfaction, so can We no less, for his past industry and future incouragement, in his further progress of these Studies, but express Our good liking and approbation thereof: Know ye therefore, That it is Our Royal Pleasure, and We do by these pre|sents, upon the humble request of the said Elias Ashmole, not only give him leave and license to Print the said Book, but strictly charge, prohibit, and forbid all our Subjects, to reprint within this Our Kingdom, the said Book in any Volume, or any part thereof, or any Abridgment of the Laws or Ceremonies therein contain|ed, or to copy or counterfeit any the Sculptures or Ingravements belonging thereunto, or to import, buy, vend, utter, or distribute any Copies or Exemplaries of the same, reprinted beyond the Seas, within the term of fifteen years, next ensuing the publishing thereof, without the consent and approbation of the said Elias Ashmole, his Heirs, Executors, or Assigns, as they and every of them so offend|ing, will answer the contrary at their utmost perils: Whereof, as|well the Wardens and Company of Stationers of our City of London, the Farmers, Commissioners, and Officers of Our Cu|stoms, as all other Our Officers and Ministers whom it may con|cern, are to take particular notice, that due obedience be given to this Our Royal Command, herein declared.
Given under Our Sig|net and Sign Manual, at Our Court at Whitehall,the 31. day of March, in the 22. Year of Our Reign, 1670.
By his Majesty's Command Arlington.



The most High most Excellent and most Mighty Monarch
Charles the Second by the Grace of God King of Greate
Britaine France and Ireland Defender of the Faith and
Soveraigne of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
 Sherwin sculpsit




THE INSTITUTION. Laws  Ceremonies Of the most NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER.
Collected and digested into one Body BY ELIAS ASHMOLE of the Middle-Temple Esq WINDESOR Herald at Arms.
A Work furnished with variety of matter, relating to HONOR and NOBLESSE.
LONDON, Printed by I. Macock, for Nathanael Brooke at the Angel in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange, MDCLXXII.




AUGUSTISSIMO POTENTISSIMOQUE MONARCHAE CAROLO II D. G. MAGNAE BRITANNIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIAE REGI FIDEI DEFENSORI ET SUPREMO NOBILISSIMI MILITARIS ORDINIS GARTERII
HOS ORDINIS COMMENTARIOS HUMILLIME D. D. ELIAS ASHMOLE FECIALIS WINDESOR.




PREFACE.
IT is not to be attributed only to Custom, but sometimes it's necessary, in order to the Readers greater convenience, that Books are commonly recommended to their perusal, by somewhat prefatory, as Epistles, c. the use of them being chiefly, to render an account of what they contain, and by a short Antipast, to represent to them, what they are likely to find in the Entertainment of the whole Work. This consideration hath obliged me to a compliance with others, and to acquaint my Reader, what occasioned my engaging upon this Subject, and what I have done therein.
As I ever had a great veneration for the most Noble Order of the Garter, so must it needs be imagined, that I was accordingly much concerned, in the late unhappy times, to see the honor of it trampled on, and it self sunk into a very low esteem among us. That relection put me upon thoughts, not only of doing something, that might inform the world of the Nobleness of its Institution, and the Glory which in process of time it acquired, both at home and abroad; but also of drawing up, in the nature of a Formulary, both the Legal and Ceremonial part thereof, for the bet|ter conduct of such as might be therein afterwards concerned, in case the Eclipse, it then waded under in our Horizon, should prove of so long continuance, as that many occurrences, worthy of knowledge, might come to be in a manner forgotten.
Vpon the first communication of my design, to the late Reverend Doctor Christo|pher Wren, Register of the said Order, it received not only his full approbation, but also his ready assistance in the use of the Annals thereof, then in his custody: From those, and other authentick Manuscripts and Autographs, particularly relating to the Order, and a painful and chargeable search of our publick Records, I had collected the greatest part of my Materials, before the happy Restauration of his now Majesty the present Soveraign of this most Noble Order; who, being afterwards ac|quainted with what I had done, was most graciously pleased to countenance it, and encourage me in the prosecution thereof.
The Work in general contains an Historical account of the Laws and Ceremonies of the said most Noble Order; but more particularly, its Institution, the manner and order observed in Elections, Investitures, and Installations of Knights, the Holding of Chapters, Celebration of Festivals, the Formality of Proceedings, the Magnificence of Embassies sent with the Habit, to Stranger Kings and Princes; in sum, all other things relative to the Order. In the illustration whereof, I have inserted (where they properly occur'd) the most eminent and considerable Cases, which have re|quired and received discusion in Chapters, the determinations thereupon becoming Rules and Laws; Whence it may be observed, that the Foundation and Superstru|ctures of the Order, were laid and raised upon the exactest Rules of Honor. And to supply the failer and defects of the Annals, I have been forced to make use of Me|morials and Relations, yet such as were taken notice of, and committed to wri|ting, either by some of the Officers of the Order, or those of Arms, during the times of their attendance on the Service of the Order, and consequently of sufficient au|thority for me to relye on.
To usher in those, I have given a Prospect of Knighthood in General, of the se|veral Orders of Knighthood, as also of the Antiquity of the Castle and Colledge of Windesor; and closed all, with the Honors, Martial Employments, and famous Actions, the Matches and Issues of the Founder, and first Knights-Companions, as also a perfect Catalogue of their Successors to this very present. All which are adorned with variety of Sculptures, properly relating to the several parts of the Work: But the following Synopsis of its whole Contexture, and the Heads of the Chapters will excuse a further enlargement here.
I shall with submision add, That this noble Subject, having not been (at some

times) heedfully looked into, some irregularities have happened, on which I have made the less adnimadversion, in regard it was my desire, by proceeding upon what is purely derived from the Root, to shew wherein the right Rule, either Legal or Ceremonial, hath been observed (that it may still be pursued, till thought it to be altered) and as little as may be, where broken: to the end also, that a careful distinction may be made between matter of Law, and matter of Fact; lest otherwise, an Error may hereafter come to be vouched for a Precedent.
And whereas some passages may seem of little importance, it is to be considered, That the ensuing Discourse, is limited to an account only of certain peculiar Laws and Ceremonies of Honor, wherein sundry minute things (occasionally falling in) are not only pardoned, but also allowable, yea very necessary to be mentioned; in re|gard they promote their satisfaction, who are more particularly concerned therein. And this will be yet the rather excusable, if another thing, which hath occasioned no small inconvenience, be reflected on: to wit, The omission or negligence of many Writers in setting down Occurrences, meerly upon the score of their being then fresh in most mens memories; by which means, Posterity hath not only been deprived of many passages, whereof it would gladly have been informed, but the elaborate disqui|sitions of both Criticks and Antiquaries have proved fruitless, and of little advan|tage, and the things themselves lye yet buried in obscurity.
Lastly, to explicate some few Abbreviations in the Margent, it is to be observed, that where I cite the Annals of the Order, they are thus noted. Lib. N. to be read Liber Niger, Lib. C. Liber Caeruleus, R. Rubeus, and Carol. Carolinus. So also the Collections or Manuscripts of some that have been, or now are Officers of Arms (whose frequent quotations would otherwise have too much swell'd the Margent) be|ing thus abbreviated. E. W. G. signifie Edwardus Walker Garter, R. C. Cl. Robertus Cook Clarenceux, W. le N. Cl. Willielmus le Neve Clarenceux, W. D. N. Williel|mus Dugdale Norroy, A. V. W. Augustinus Vincent Windesor, and G. O. Y. Geor|gius Owen York. The rest may be easily understood.
E. A.



THE CONTENTS Of the CHAPTERS.

CHAP. I. Of Knighthood in general.
Sect.

I. Of Vertue and Honor.
Page 1.
II. The Antiquity of Knighthood.
5.
III. Of the Foundation of the Equestrian Or|der among the Romans.
6.
IV. Of the Modern Dgrees of Knighthood.
12.
V. The Etymology of Eques, Miles, Chevalier, Ritter, and Sir.
17.
VI. The Ensigns of the Equestrian Order among the Romans.
21.
VII. The Ensigns and Ornaments of Knight|hood among other Nations.
27.
VIII. Qualifications for Knighthood.
31.
IX. The various Ceremonies used at the con|ferring of Knighthood.
36.
X. Of the Dignity, Honor, and Renown of Knighthood.
43.


CHAP. II. Of the Religious Orders of Knight|hood in Christndom.
Sect.

I. Of ancient Societies, analogous to the Orders of Knighthood.
Page 47.
II. The Christian Institution of Knightly Or|ders.
48.
III. The Division of Knightly Orders into Re|ligious and Military.
49.
IV. Of Ecclesiastical Foundations dependan up|on Military Orders.
50.
V. A brief account of the Religious Orders of Knighthood.
51.


CHAP. III. An Account of the Orders abso|lutely Military.
Sect.

I. The Order of Knights of the Round Table. c.
Page 94.
II. Of Knights in the West-Indies.
124.
III. The Feminine Cavaliers of the Torch in Tortosa.
125.


CHAP. IV. Of the Castle, Chappel, and Col|ledge of Windesor.
Sect.

I. Of the Castle of Windesor.
Page 127.
II. Of the Chappel of St. George.
135.
III. The Foundation of the Colledge within the Chappel.
152.
IV. Of the Dean, Canons, Petty-Canons, Clerks and Choristers.
153.
V. Of the Alms-Knights.
158.
VI. Of other Officers of the Colledge.
166.
VII. Of the Endowment of the Colledge.
167.
VIII. Of the Priviledges of the Chappel and Colledge.
174.


CHAP. V. The Institution of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
Sect.

I. The several Opinions touching the Occasion of its Institution.
Page 178.
II. The true Cause asserted.
181.
III. The Time when the Order was Instituted.
185.
IV. Of the Patrons of the Order.
187.
V. The Honor and Reputation thereof.
189.


CHAP. VI. The Statutes and Annals of the Order.
Sect.

I. Of the Statutes of Institution.
Page 190.
II. Of thse other Bodies of Statutes since esta|blished.
191.
III. Several Endeavours for Reforming the Statutes, since the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.
194.
IV. Of the Annals of the Order.
198.


CHAP. VII. The Habit and Ensigns of the Order.
Sect.

I. Of the Garter.
Page 202.
II. Of the Mantle.
208.
III. Of the Surcoat.
211.
IV. Of the Hood and Cap.
214.
V. The Robes anciently assigned to the Queen and great Ladies.
217.
VI. Of Collars in general.
218.
VII. The Collar of the Order.
220.
VIII. Collars of SS.
224.
IX. The lesser George.
226.
X. When the Habit, or part of it, ought to be worn.
231.


CHAP. VIII. The Officers appointed for the Service of the Order.
Sect.

I. The Prelate's Institution, his Oath, Robe, and Priviledges.
Page 234.
II. The Institution of the Chancellor's Office, his Oath, Robe, Badge, and Pension.
237.
III. The Register's Institution, Oath, Mantle, Badge, Priviledges, and Pension.
248.
IV. Garter's Institution, Oath, Mantle, En|sign, Badge, Priviledges, and Pension.
252.
V. Institution of the Black Rod's Office, his Oath, Habit, Ensign, Badge, Priviledges, and Pension.
256.
VI. The Payment of the Officers Pensions upon the new Establishment.
258.
VII. The Execution of these Offices by Deputies.
260.


CHAP. IX. The Election of a Knight into the Order.
Sect.

I. Of Summons to the Election.
Page 262.
II. The Place of Assembly.
264.
III. The Number of Knights that constitute a Chapter.
265.
IV. Dispensation for want of a full Number.
266.
V. Of Opening the Chapter.
268.
VI. That Knights only present in Chapter ought to nominate.
269.
VII. Of the Number, Qualifications, and De|grees of the Persons to be nominated.
271.
VIII. Of the Scruteny, and by whom it ought to be taken.
276.
IX. The Time when.
278.
X. The Manner and Order of it.
279.
XI. The Presentation of it to the Soveraign.
283.
XII. His Considerations thereupon referring to the Qualification of each Person to be Ele|cted.
284.
XIII. Of other Inducements for Election.
290.
XIV. That the Soveraign only doth Elect.
291.
XV. The Scruteny ought to be entred among the Annals.
292.
XVI. The Scruteny ought not to be viewed until it be entred.
293.
XVII. Of Scrutenies taken, yet no Election made.
294.
XVIII. The Penalties inflicted on Knights-Companions, who appear not at an Ele|ction.
295.


CHAP. X. The Investiture of a Knight-Subject with the Garter and George.
Sect.

I. The Notice given to a Knight Subject of his Election.
296.
II. His Reception into the Chapter-house.
298.
III. The Ceremonies of Investiture with the Garter and George.
299.
IV. Of sending the Garter and George to an Elect Knight-Subject.
302.
V. The Manner of a Knights Investiture.
308.
VI. Allowances and Rewards given to Garter for his Service in this Employment.
311.


CHAP. XI. Of Preparations for the Personal In|stallation of a Knight.
Sect.

I. That Installation gives the Title of Founder.
Page 312.
II. Of the Time and Place appointed for Instal|lation.
313.
III. Of Commissions for Installation.
314.
IV. Letters of Summons.
315.
V. Warrants for the Livery of the Order.
316.
VI. The Removal of Atchievements and Plates.
ibid.
VII. Preparations made by the Knight Elect.
334.


CHAP. XII. The Personal Installation of a Knight-Subject.
I. Of the Cavalcade to Windesor.
Page 338.
II. The Offering in the Chappel, on the Eve of the Installation.
342.
III. The Supper on the Eve.
344.
IV. The Order in Proceeding to the Chapter-house.
ibid.
V. The Ceremonies performed in the Chapter-house.
350.
VI. The Proceeding into the Choire.
352.
VII. The Ceremonies of Installation.
354.
VIII. The Order observed when two or more Knights are Installed in one day.
360.
IX. The Offering of Gold and Silver.
364.
X. Of the Grand Dinner at the Installation.
ib.
XI. Of setting up the Knights Atchievements.
367.



CHAP. XIII. The Installation of a Knight Subject by Proxie.
Sect.

I. The Original Cause of making Proxies.
372.
II. Letters of Procuration.
Page 373.
III. Qualifications of a Proxie.
375.
IV. Preparations for Installation.
ibid.
V. Proceeding to the Chapter-house.
377.
VI. Transactions in it.
ibid.
VII. Proceeding to the Choire.
378.
VIII. Ceremonies performed there.
ibid.
IX. The Grand Dinner.
380.


CHAP. XIV. The Signification of Election to Strangers.
Sect.

I. Within what time, and in what manner Cer|tificate is made of their Election.
381.
II. Of Notice given of an Election, before send|ing the Habit.
384.
III. Notice of Election sent with the Habit.
ibid.
IV. Certificate of Acceptation.
386.
V. Of an Election not accepted of.
387.


CHAP. XV. The Investiture of Strangers with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order.
Sect.

I. The Time for sending the Habit and En|signs unlimited.
Page 389.
II. Preparations made for the Legation.
390.
III. The Ceremonies of Investiture.
399.
IV. Certificates of having received the Habit and Ensigns of the Order.
432.


CHAP. XVI. The Installation of a Stranger by Proxie.
Sect.

I. Touching the Choice and Nomination of a Proxie.
Page 434.
II. The Proctor's Qualifications.
437.
III. His Letters of Procuration.
439.
IV. Of the Proctor's Reception.
ibid.
V. The Preparations for Installation.
440.
VI. The Proctor's Cavalcade to Windesor.
441.
VII. Supper after his Arrival there.
442.
VIII. Of the Proceeding to the Chapter-house.
443.
IX. The Ceremonies performed therein.
444.
X. Of the Proceeding to the Choire.
447.
XI. The Ceremonies of Installation.
448.
XII. The Proctor's Offering.
452.
XIII. The Dinner.
454.


CHAP. XVII. The Duties and Fees Payable by the Knights-Companrons at their In|stallations.
Sect.

I. Touching the Fees due to the Colledge of Windesor.
Page 455.
II. Fees due to the Register, Garter, Black-Rod and Officers of Arms.
458.
III. Fees belonging to other of the Soveraign's Servants.
462.
IV. Fees payable for Strangers.
463.


CHAP. XVIII. Of the Grand Feast of the Order.
Sect.

I. The Grand Feast appointed to be annually ce|lebrated on St. George's day.
Page 467.
II. The Anniversary of St. George fixed by the Church unto the 23. of April.
468.
III. St. George's day made Festum duplex.
469.
IV. The Place for celebrating the Grand Feast, assigned to Windesor-Castle.
471.
V. St. George's day kept apart from the Grand Feast, and how then observed.
Ibid.
VI. The Grand Feast neglected by King Edward the Sixth.
473.
VII. Removed from Windesor by Queen Eliza|beth.
474.
VIII. Of Prorogation of the Grand Feast.
475.
IX. Of Commissions for Prorogation.
480.
X. That the Grand Feast ought to be celebrated once every year.
482.


CHAP. XIX. Of Preparations for the Grand Feast of the Order.
Sect.

I. Of Letters giving notice of the Time and Place.
Page 484.
II. Of Dispensations for not attending at the Grand Feast.
485.
III. Of Commissions of Lieutenancy and Assi|stance.
487.
IV. Warrants for the Removal of Atchieve|ments.
Ibid.
V. Scutcheons of Arms and Stiles.
Ibid.
VI. Of adorning the Chappel.
490.
VII. The furnishing of St. George's Hall.
500.
VIII. Officers and Servants appointed to attend at the Grand Feast.
502.



CHAP. XX. The Order of the Ceremonies on the Eve of the Grand Feast.
Sect.

I. Of the beginning of the Grand Feast.
Page 504.
II. Of setting the Proceeding in order.
509.
III. Of Proceeding to the Chapter-house.
516.
IV. Of the Opening of the Chapter.
519.
V. Transactions in the Chapter held before the first Vespers.
520.
VI. The Ceremonies relating to the first Vespers.
538.
VII. The Supper on the Eve.
544.


CHAP. XXI. The Order of the Ceremonies on the Feast Day.
Sect.

I. The Proceeding to the Chappel in the Mor|ning.
Page 547.
II. The Proceeding to the second Service.
550.
III. Of the Grand Procession.
551.
IV. The Order of the second Service.
576.
V. The Offering of Gold and Silver.
580.
VI. The Return to the Presence.
587.
VII. Of the Dinner on the Feast Day.
588.
VIII. The Ceremonies belonging to the second Vespers.
597.
IX. Of the Supper on the Evening of the Feast Day.
598.


CHAP. XXII. The Ceremonies observed on the last Day of the Feast.
Sect.

I. Of Proceeding to the Chapter-house in the Morning.
Page 599.
II. Of the Elect Knights Proceeding into the Choire.
600.
III. Of the Ceremonies performed at Divine Service.
601.
IV. The Diets at some of the Grand Feasts.
602.


CHAP. XXIII. The Observation of the Grand Feast by Absent Knights.
Sect.

I. Absent Knights enjoyned to observe the Grand Feast.
Page 613.
II. More particular Directions for their Obser|vation of it.
614.
III. How to be observed in case of Sickness.
616.
IV. In what manner the Feast hath been observed by Absent Knights.
ibid.
V. Dispensation for Absence granted during life.
619.


CHAP. XXIV. The Degradation of a Knight-Com|panion.
Sect.

I. Of the Degradation of a Knight-Batchellor.
Page 620.
II. The manner of Degrading a Knight-Com|panion of the Garter
621.
III. Of Restauration into the Order after De|gradation.
622.


CHAP. XXV. Honors paid to Deceased Knights-Companions.
Sect.

I. Of the Celebration heretofore of Masses, for defunct Knights-Companions.
Page 623.
II. Of fixing on the Stalls, Plates of their Arms, and Stiles.
627.
III. The Offering of Atchievements.
629.
IV. Of depositing the deceased Knights Man|tles in the Chapter-house.
636.


CHAP. XXVI. Of the Founder, the first Knights-Companions and their Successors.
Sect.

I. Of what Number they consisted.
Page 642.
II. A short view of the Founder's Wars.
643.
III. Some account of the first 25 Knights-Com|panions.
670.
IV. A Catalogue of their Successors.
708.







HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
blazon or coat of arms

CHAP. I. OF Knighthood in general.

SECT. I. Of Vertue and Honor.
_IT hath been the Practice of all well-govern'd Kingdoms and States,Vertue is en|couraged by Reward. to encourage Merit by Reward. Merit consists in the perfor|mance of some vertuous Action, directed to the Publick good. As Vertue is either Military or Civil; so Reward is differently distributed, either by Honor or Profit: to the end, each sort of Vertue may have its proper and suitable Reward.
And though in a moral and strict sence, Vertue is to be accounted its own Reward; yet in regard there are very many, who not so much from a vertuous Principle, as to ob|tain Wealth or Honor, are drawn oft|times to act meritoriously; therefore it was provided, by the wisest Founders of Empires, and Common-wealths, to take special care, no less for the encou|ragement of well-doing (by setting up Reward as a Prize, for brave endea|vours to aim at, prosecute and carry; and consequently to exalt men ac|cording to their merit) then for the punishment of vitious and ignoble actions: insomuch that Socrates justly concluded that City to be best governed, where|in, Brs. in Platem, l.  c. . the good are cherisht, and the bad chastis'd.
Nor doth it a little concern the interest of a Nation, that noble incitements to Vertue be proposed to valiant minds, wherewith being inflamed, they may al|ways shine forth, in some action, worthy themselves: since Rewards are powerful (even to wonder) to excite and stir up the force and vigour of gallant Spirits, to very high degrees of performance; and from the example of our Ancestors, every one is apt to perswade himself, that there is nothing which may not be attempted, and effected by endeavour and manly courage.
As touching civil Vertues or Faculties (to wit, Iustice, Gravity, knowledge in the Laws, and the like) they being Qualifications in order to Magistracy, and Offices of Trust and Credit, and rewardable by the advantages, estimation, and authority accruing thereby; come not directly within the limits of our present discourse.
Honor the re|ward of mill|tary Vertue.Vertue (in the opinion of Epist. 120. Phaleris,) is alone excellent, and all other things but meerly Fortune. Its reward and end (saith Ethic. l. 1. Aristotle) is something excellently good, divine and blessed, according to that of De situ Orbis. Dionysus Aser, Vertue immortal honor ever gains. But the proper Reward of military Vertue (which com|prehends both Fortitude and Conduct, and of which we only treat) is Honor: Arist. Ethi|ca. l. 4. Honor is the greatest of exterior goods, and being the object of a nobler ambition, than Wealth or Profit, is therefore the aim of that Vertue, to wit Valour, which springs from a more generous Spirit. For all men of Courage (nay even the Pusillanimous themselves) are in some sort, toucht with a sense and desire of Glory and Fame.
So that (as is already intimated) of all vertuous Acts, military Prowess, and va|liant Atchievements, have rendred men capable of the highest Honors and Ad|vancements: they being principally invited, by the allurements of such Re|wards, to make the greater discoveries of their Vertue and Fortitude, in the per|formance of noble Exploits.
But that Fame might not lose it self, in a general and unbounded Notion, therefore at length it was thought fit, to reduce Honor into Form and Order, by investing the Person meriting with some particular term, title, or appellation of Excellence; and this is the very source and original of all Nobility, and of all those Dignities and honourable Titles, which being transmitted from the first Atchievers to their Successors, through several Ages, remain at this day in their posterity, as lasting Monuments of the glory of their Ancestors. Among which, Knighthood, as it hath been esteemed the Reward most suitable to worthy and great Vertue, so hath it been accounted the chief and primary Honor among many Nations.
Vertue and Honor deified by the Ro|mans, who built them Temples.The Romans had so great an esteem of Honor and Vertue, that they deified them, and dedicated Temples to their Worship; the chief and principal was that which Liv. l. 27. c. 27. edit. Prancof. ad Moen. 1628. Vide etiam Plutarch. in vita ipsius Marcelli. Marcellus vowed to erect, when he was at Clastidium, in the Gaulick War: (and afterwards built, with the Idem Plutarch. in vita praef. Marcei. spoils he got in the Wars of Sicilie) but the Dedication thereof was hindered by the Priests, who affirmed that one Temple could not be rightly dedicated unto two Dei|ties; and thereupon there was another Chapel built for Vertue, and joyned to the fore-end thereof: and albeit Marcellus hastned the erection, yet he lived not to de|dicate the same, nevertheless that was afterwards done by his Gui|do Panciroll. de 14 Reg. Vrbis Romae. Son.
This Temple stood neer to the Gate To|pograph. Romae, ex Maliano. c. 73.  133. Vide prr Ioh. Rosin. Antiq. Rom. cap. 18. Capena, upon the Appian way, and was rather according to Vides Virtutis Templum, vides Honoris,  Marco Marcello renovatum, quod multi ante annis erat bello Ligstico  Quinto Maximo dedicatum. De Nat. Deor. l. 2. p. 192. edit. Basil. 1534. Cicero, but renewed or re-edified by Marcellus (as his was by the Emperour Pinu  Actius Priscus, qui Honoris  Virtutis aedes Imperatori Vespa|siano Augusto restituenti pinxerunt. Plin. l. 35. c. 10. sub fine. Vespasian) for that many years before, it had been dedicated by Q. Maximus.
In this structure, the Temple of Vertue was contiguous to that of Honor, and so situate, that there was no other passage thereunto, but through the Temple of Vertue; thereby mystically shewing and admonishing, That Honor was not to be attained by any other ways then by Vertue; That Vertue was as the Guardian

of Honor; and those that undertook any notable Action, Neminem ho|norius Temlum ingredi , nisi pri Virtu|tis esset ngres|sus. Agust. de civit. Dei. unless they carried themselves valiantly, and squared their actions by the Rule of Vertue, could make no entrance into future Honor.
And because the Structure of this Temple, and the order of the Buildings may be beheld, we shall here exhibit a Prospect thereof, as it is set forth by Antiq. Vibi Splendor. Iacobus Laurus.


There was another Temple built to Honor, without the Gate Cic. l. . de Legib. p. 288. Collina (which according to Tp. Rom. Marlian cap. 130.  Alex. Donat. de Vrb Roma, lib. 3. p. 67. some was called also Salaria) and the reason of its Dedication there, was (as Cicero tells us) the finding of a Plate of Metall in that place, bearing this Inscription,
DOMINA HONORIS.
About an hundred years after the death of Marcellus, C. Marius consecrated a little Chappel to Honor and Vertue, as appears by this following Inscription,
Videsis In|script. 3 apud Ian. Grut. p. 436.
C. MARIVS C. F. COS. VII.
PR. TR. PL. Q AVGVR, c.
DE MANVBIEIS CIMBRICEIS ET TEVTONICEIS AEDEM
HONORI ET VIRTVTI VICTOR FECIT VESTE
TRIVMPHALI CALCEIS PVNICIEIS........
The Symmetry and Proportion of the Columes, and what they supported, were perfected by C. Mucius, as Lib. 7. Vitruvius informs us, and that according to the exact Rules of Architecture; Moreover it was adorned within and without with Images, most artificial for Sculpture, and beautiful for Painting; Alex. Donat. de Vrbe Roma, l. 3. p. 256. but the place where this Chappel was erected, is not now certainly known.
How Honor and Vertue were represented by the Romans,Their Images variously re|presented. and after what manner their Images (set up in their Temples) were designed and fashioned, may be seen in some of their Coyns, the Ectyps of a few we have placed here, from that large and choice Collection, now in the Cabinet of His Majesty, the present Soveraign of the most noble Order of the Garter: the first represents the heads of Honor and Ver|tue:

where Honor is set forth with a youthful face, crowned with Laurel, having long and curled hair: Vertue, wearing an Helmet, but without any attire, or other ornament.


The Face of Honor so shadoweth that of Vertue, that but a little of it appears; and this is observed to have been, not without good reason so designed, inasmuch as Ant. August. Antiq. Roman. Dialog. 11. p. 36. Edit. Ant|uerp. anno 1653. Honor is the more illustrious of the two, and where we behold any person outward|ly adorned with Honor, we are to judge him inwardly indued with Vertue: forasmuch as Honor is his due, and justly bestowed upon him.
Such another representation of the heads of these Deities, may be found in Tom. 1. p. 221. num. 3. Hubertus Goltzius; and not unlike, but it was upon this account, that Postumus, [II] one of the Tyrants in Gallienus his Reign, placed her head behind his own.
In the Reverse of the first of these, we see the figures of Italy and Rome drawn at full length; that which represents Italy, seems to deliver a Coopiae (the Emblem of her Wealth) into the hands of Rome, in acknowledgment of the Peace she thence enjoyed; and Rome, setting her right foot on the Globe of the World, which she had, or hoped to overcome.
In a Coyn, relating to the Emperour Galba, [III] Honor is exhibited with an Hasta pura (which was a Teste Servio ad  Aeneid. Spear-staff not armed with Iron) in one hand, and in the other a Cornucopiae; and is in the same manner set forth by the Emperour Tab. 45. Nummi Ducis Croyiai  Arschot, num. 14. edit. Ant|uerp. anno 1654. Aurelius Antoninus.
But because the Romans placed their chiefest glory in military Vertue; Vertue is designed in the Reverse like an Amazon, wearing an Virtus forti|tudinem ro|bor designet. Helmet, and her Vest Solet virtu|is simulacrum depingi succin|ctum Lucat. ad 10 The baid. gird|ed about her; having an Hasta pura in her left hand, a Parazone, or short Sword in her right, and booted according to the military manner; in which posture and habit, she is likewise represented in some Coyns of Croiac. Nu|mis. Tab. 37. num. 22. Hadrianus, Antoninus Pius, and Severus.
In a Coyn referring to Idem Tab 28. num. 5. Titus, Honor is set forth after the manner in that of Galba; yet not with a youthful, but a bearded face. How at other times repre|sented, appears among the Coyns of Antoninus Pius [IV] being there vested, both in a Toga and Tunica, and holding a Laurel-branch: but in those ofCroyiaca Nu|mis. Tab. 45. num. 13.  14. Aurelius Antoninus, exhibited sometimes with an Hasta pura, at other times with a Laurel.
Galba, we see, joyned Honor and Vertue together in one Reverse; to shew that by Comment su|per Tab. Num. Duc.-Croyiaci. p. 38. Vertue he gained his Honors and Imperial Command; the like didAe. Vic. in  Vitell. 11. Vitel|lius.

So Croyiaca Nu|mis. Tab. 64. num. 20. Galerius Maximianus seems to express the attaining of his greatness, by a compact and agreement (as it were) with Vertue, which he signified by joyn|ing his hands with hers.
Some other difference hath been now and then put in the representation of Vertue, as may be observed in the Ectyps above; for in one of Galba's Coyns [V] she is found standing, holding a Parazone, and a little Victory. The same is done in a Coyn of Videsi Hi|stor. August. i|lstr. per Fr. Angelon. p. 243. Severus, where she is only differenced by a sitting posture.
But Commodus [VI] thought fit to arm her compleatly, bearing a little Victory in her right hand, and holding a Spear and Shield in her left; the like did Severus, Caracalla, and Valerianus. Yet sometimes the Shield was omitted [VII] and the little Victory changed for a Laurel-branch: for so she appears in the Coyns of Gordianus tertius [IX] Philippus Arabs, Trajanus Decius, Tetricus, and Claudius Go|thicus.
In the last place, Vertue is now and then seen armed, as before, holding only a Spear and a Shield; as in the Coyns of Alexander Severus, [VIII] and many others. And all of them by these Symbolical devices, pointing at the military Vertue, not only of that most accomplisht and famous Roman Nation, but of the Emperours themselves.


SECT. II. Of the Antiquity of Knighthood.
IN tracing out the beginning and original of Knighthood,Knighthood among the Greeks. though we are not so vain, as to offer at the deriving this degree or order from before the Crea|tion, and say, that Saint Michael the Archangel is primier Chevalier, being so styled in the Preamble to the Statutes of the Order of Monsieur Saint Michael; or Primier Chevalier de l'ordre de Paradis, as he is called in the Penes Came|rar. Scacca. Instrument of Election of our King Henry the Eighth, into the said Order of Saint Michael, by the French King Francis the first: Yet may we very well affirm, Knighthood to be neer as an|cient as Valour and Heroick Vertue; albeit the Ceremonies and Circumstances thereof, have been much varied and transformed in several Ages, and among the several Nations, where this Dignity hath at any time flourished. And therefore with much probability, and some justice, may we derive the Original of military Honor, whence most of our Europeans account it their greatest honor to derive their Original, namely, from Troy.
For of how great renown its Knights were of old, namely, Hector, Troilus, Aeneas, Antenor, with many others, for their Knightly deeds; and how great glory they acquired by their military Vertue, may be sufficiently learnt from those things, which are recorded in the Histories of them.
So among the Greeks, Agamemnon, Menelaus, Peleus, Hercules, Diomedes, Tela|mon, Vlysses, Patroclus, and several others, were such, as left behind them, an ever|lasting Memorial of their Knightly actions; to inflame the young Nobility that was growing up, by the examples of Achilles, and themselves, to the imitation and pursuit of their vertues and valiant enterprises.
But lest this may be thought too much to be granted, we shall endeavour to strengthen our conjecture, with some observations out of Homer, by whom we often find the word , used in the same sense, as Fques was afterwards among the Latins, as will appear in these following Verses of his,
Iliad. B. Ca|tal. 336. .
'Mong whom thus Nestor spake, that honor'd Knight.
And in many other places of the Iliads (almost all, where he speaks of Nestor) he mentions him by the same Title; which is as much as if he had said, Chevalier Nestor, as in the 108. Verse of the Catalogue of the second Book of the Iliads, and Iliad  ver. 170.181.  112.151.  52.163.  128.157. c.
And that this Title of Knight seems to be of more ancient date among the Grecians, then the Trojan War, may be collected from the same Homer, who be|stows it on other brave Heroes, that lived some time before these Wars began: For in the 135. Verse of the aforesaid Catalogue, Phyleus, among the rest of the Greek Commanders (whom he there reckons up) is thus mentioned,
.
Phylides Son of Phyleus, Heav'n-lov'd Knight.
Likewise to the famous Tydeus, King of AEtolia, Father of Diomedes, he attri|butes the same Title.

.
Thy Father Tydeus, that stout Knight, his fire
Into thy manly heart I will inspire.
In after-times the Grecians had among them this Degree and Title, considera|ble both for reputation and dignity.
In Gen. Dier. l. 2. c. 29. The Knightly Honor (saith Alexander ab Alexandro) always excelled among the Achaians, as being the chiefest charge. Those of Ibid. Crete also had it in great esteem, as the most principal among them, for its antiquity and dignity. Herod. in Terpsichore. Herodotus tells us, that among the Chalcedonians (as after among the Romans) Wealth was so much regarded, that those who were rich, bore the title of , i.e. Equites. And as a testimony, that the ambition of the Equestrian Name was very ancient, De Milit. E|questri, lib. 5. c. 1. in princi|pio. Hermannus Hugo saith, the Lacedemonians constituted a second Order of Knights, and that the same Lacedemonians had an Ex Strabone, lib. 10. Order of Knights, who had no Horses. Not much unlike some of the Equestrian Order, in succeeding times, among the Ro|mans, who were only honor'd with gold Rings, but not with a publick Horse, until they actually entred into military Service.


SECT. III. Of the Foundation of the Equestrian Order among the Romans.
Institution of the Celeres, whence sprung the Equestrian Order.BUt to raise the Structure of Knighthood upon a more substantial Foundation, we shall with greater certainty descend to the Romans; among whom we find, there was from the very infancy of their military glory, an instituted Body and Society of Knights, consisting of a select number; and this is recorded by Lib. 1. edit. Franc. ad Maenum. 1628. Livy, who (speaking of the time immediately after the Romans and Sabins were united under one Common-wealth) saith, that then there were inrolled Centuriae tres Equitum, three Centuries of Knights.
This inrollment was ordained by Romulus, and did follow soon after his divi|sion of the City into three Tribes; and the Institution consisted of three hundred in number; for each Tribe was divided into Claud Sal|mas. de re mi|lit Rom. c. 20. p. 230. Videsis Rosin. Antiq. Rom. l. 10. c. . ten parts, which were called Curiae, and every Decuria set forth ten Knights; so that in every Tribe there were ten De|curiae, or one hundred Knights. Moreover, each of these Centuries were particu|larly distinguished by several Titles; one being called Livy loco ci|cato. Ramnenses, another Ta|tienses, and the third Luceres.
A little after, Livy (speaking of Romulus) tells us, Idem, lib. 1. c. 15. that he appointed these three hundred to attend him as a Life-guard, both in Peace and War, and called them Ce|leres;

and so called (as some write) Pltarch. in vita Romuli. Videsis Dion. Halicarnass. l. 2. p. 86. Edit. Frances. ann 1586.  celeritate, from their active and dextrous dispatch in martial affairs. But Claudius Salmasius derives Celeres from the Greek word , which (saith he) among the Aeolians signifies a Horse; and from a Horse, did the ancient Romans derive the Title of Eques; of which more anon. Hereupon not only those of Romulus his institution are by Livy called Equites (as is before noted) but when he speaks of the addition which Tarquinius Prisns made to those three Centuries, he again calls them Livy l. 1. c. 36 Centuriae Equitum; and to the twelve Centuries, listed afterwards by Servins Tullus, doth he afford the Ibid. c. 44. same Title, making frequent use of it, in divers other places, as their common appellation.
And because the Celeres or Equites were at first appointed Halicarnass. eod. lib.  lo|co cit. to attend Romulus through the City (in the quality aforesaid) armed with Javelins and Spears, are therefore (in the esteem of Th. Godwin, Romanae Histo|riae Anthologia, p. 28. some) placed within the degree of service, and con|sequently thought inferiour to the Equestrian Order; we shall here (to remove this mistake) note, That in their Election, not only Courage and personal Va|lour was required, but Nobleness of Extraction no less regarded; they being also such as were descended from the best Families in Rome: and this is fully te|stified by Dionysius Halicarnasseus. Lib. 2 p. 86. Romulus (saith he) chose three hundred stout and personable men out of the chiefest Families, or (in the words of Lib. 1. c. 43. Livy) ex pri|moribus Civitatis.
Within a short time after the Institution of the Celere, Servius Tullus ordain|ed, that those who did succeed in that Body, should be elected ex Censu; to wit, from a considerable and certain valuation of their Estates, entred in the Censors Book, called the Equestrian Cense.
This is confirmed by Dionysius (ex Pisone in primo Annalium) Lib. 4. p. 222. Servius (saith he) chose the number of Knights out of the Citizens who had the greatest Cense, and were of the most noble Families.
Wherefore it cannot be denied, that Eques was at this time (which was even in the infancy of the City) a Title, not only of Dignity, but also that the Equites were then chosen from among those Romans, eminent both for Nobleness of Ex|traction and Estate; Neither were more considerable Qualifications required of any, who were admitted into the Equestrian Order, in the following times.
The Roman State was at first constituted (as at this day is the Venetian) of Rosin. Antiq. Roin. l. 1. c. 17. two degrees only, namely, Patritians and Plebians: For neither the three Centuries, instituted by Romulus, nor their increased number, appointed by Tarquinius ris|cus, nor those chosen by Servius Tullus from the Cense, and added to the former, were moulded into a peculiar degree, while Rome was governed by Kings; but soon after the Equestrian Order began to be formed, and constituted one of the three Orders in the Common-wealth: the Celeres then in being, were the very per|sons of whom was composed and made up the Body of that Society, which then,  thenceforward, was called Ordo Equester or Equestris, (for both words are found to be indifferently used among the Ancients) from whence it appears, that the Ori|ginal and Foundation of the Equestrian Order, is plainly deducible from (if not the same with) the Celeres, since all the alteration lay, not in dissolving and taking away, but in making them known by a new Title. Nay so little, or no difference, is put by Salmasius between those of Romulus his Institution, and the Equestrian Order, that speaking of the Celeres, he faith, De Re Mil. Rom. c. 20. p. 236.The whole Equestrian Order did then consist in them: and Rosinus having shewn, that the Ordo Equestris was ranked in the second of the three degrees, positively affirms, Antiq. Rom. l. 1. c. 17. That in this division those three hundred are to be understood, who had been elected by Romulus, and whom he called Celeres.
And now, to the end the Reader may take a short prospect into the Glory of this Equestrian Order, (indeed the flower of the Roman Chivalry) together with some other Dignities annexed unto that Degree, we shall first observe,
That the Roman Citizens,The Equestri|an Order was the middle Degree. being thus distributed into three degrees, are ranked by Lib. 26. c. 36. Livy in this Order, Senatus, Equester Ordo,  Plebs: Alexander ab Alexandro (from Lib 2. Bell. Civil. Appianus) placeth also the Equites in the Gen. Dier. l. 2. c. 2. middle, between the Senators and

Plebeians: and this is further confirmed by that most noted Elogie, Rsinus, l. 1. c. 17. Consensu Se|nats,  Equestris Ordinis, Populi Romani, which among the Roman literal Notes by De Interpret. Rm. Literis. Valerius Probus, is set down after this manner, CON. SEN. E. ORD. P. Q. R. Agreeable hereunto is that of Cicero, Pr Cluent. The Knights are next in dignity to the Sena|torian Order: The same is affirmed by Lib. 33. c. 1. in sine. Pliny, and divers Tiraquel de Nobilit. c. 37. num. 16. Sal|muth. noth Guid. Panci|rol. l 1. p. 271. others.
And forasmuch as this degree was placed between the Patritians or Senators, and the Plebeians or Common-people, therein it is resembled by the Knightly degree at this day with us, which is ranked between the Nobility and Commonalty.
But though the Equestrian Order (ranked as before) was somewhat inferiour to that of the Senate, Alex ab Alex. Gen. Dier. l. 2. c. 29. yet had it the esteem of great authority and power, forasmuch as it was invested with most ample Honors, and almost equal to the Senatorian de|gree. And Salms. de Re mil. Rom. c. 20 p. 227. from this Order to the height of Nobility (which resided in the Senators) was the way prepared: Hence, being the usual removal, to the Ordo Senatorius, (Livy l. 2. c. 1. Iunius Brutus being the first who supplied the Senate from the Equestrian Order) and upon this ground, the Emperour Alexander Severus (as In vita ipsius Severi, c. 20 Lampridius reports) did call this Degree, The Seminary or Nursery of Senators, so did Equites enim illis Principes Iuventutis, E|quiter Semina|rium Senatum, inde lecto in Patrum nume|rum Consule, inde Imperato|res creant, Liv. l. 42. c. 61. Perseus King of Macedon long before; and for the very same reason, may we further parallel it with that of Knighthood among us in England, which is the next in dignity to the Baronage, and generally persons of their rank and quality are made choice of to ascend unto that Honor.
It was a Constitution as ancient as the Reign of Tiberius the Emperour, that no man should be admitted into the Equestrian Order, nor have given unto him the right of a Gold Ring, Alex. ab Alex|andro loc. cit. Plin. lib. 33. c. 2. in princ. unless he was free-born, or a Gentleman, and his Father and Grandfather had been so: and indeed for a long time none were elected Knights, but the best sort of Gentlemen, and Persons of noble, nay sometimes Kingly Ex|traction, as was the illustrious Mecaenas at avis regibus ortus Eques, Matt. lib. 12. Epgr. 4. Mecaenas, concerning whom Lib. 2. c. 88. Vell. Paterculus gives this Character; That he aspired no higher than the Equestrian Order, not out of an incapacity of attaining greater matters, but that he desired them not.
Yet at length, through the corruption of times, Plebeians and Freed-men were too frequently received into this De|gree; the Equestrian Cense alone,Mecaenas Equ Hetrusco de sanguine Regum, Propert. lib. 3. Eleg. 8. to wit, their attaining to such a degree of Wealth, as reached the valuation of a Knight, was that which gained them this Honor, which Salmaius thus affirms (in his Exposition of a piece of Polybius) De Re Mil. Rom c. 21. p. 240. Whomsoever the Censor did elect into the Equestrian Order, he considered nothing in him but the Equestrian Cense; which for the general, will likewise find but too near a parallel among the Knights of this Age.
The Knights were Judges at Rome, and Presidents a|broad.To add to the lustre of the Equestrian Order, let us next consider, that the civil affairs of the Roman Common-wealth were sometimes put under their management, and the chiefest of the Knights made Iudges: which Cicero thus confirms: Secund de Oratore. Before the Knights, Judges at Rome, the Causes were pleaded and debated. And what esteem was generally set upon their uprightness and justice, Turnebus sets forth, who explicating some Pieces of Cicero (wherein several of their excellent Judg|ments are reported) saith, Turneb. in Comment. in Oatinem Ci|cer. pro Caio Rabirio, p. 11. There was then a great opinion of the Vertue of the Ro|man Knights, from the integrity of their Iudgments. Nor was there any other cause (as Budaeus notes) wherefore they were called Iudges, Ad L. ult. F. de Setoribus. Then that the Decu|riae of the Iudges were chosen from amongst those of the Equestrian Order.
And though (by assuming this additional dignity) they bore the Title of Iudges, and not of Knights; (for in those times, Plin. lib. 33. . 1. sub finem. The Title of Knights continued appropriate to the Troops of those who served with Publick Horses) yet nevertheless, without all doubt (saith Alexander ab Alexandro) Gen. Dier. l. 2. c. 29. The Iudges continued still of the Equestrian Order, and were reckoned among the Knights: for that they used the Gold Ring as Knights, and had the same Ensigns of Honor, and executed the said Offices: Though it was otherwise, where a Knight was elected into the Senate, Ambr. Cale|pin. verbo E|ques. for then (having assumed the Name of the more noble Order) the Title of his former degree was extinguished, albeit he still retained the Ensigns thereof.
Flr. Epitom. Gracchus, (Brother to Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus) being Tribune of the Commons, and studying how to curry favour with the People, concluded it

would best be brought about, by abating or clipping the authority of the Snate: He thereupon preferred (amongst others) a Law that   shuld be chosen out of the Equestrian Order, into the Senate (which then  but o three hundred)  out of design to make the otes of the Knights double to thos of the Senators; by which means, he  took away from the Senate their authority of it|ting in judgment, and appropriated it to the Equestrian Order. But In Cap. .  notes withal, that this proved a means to corrupt the Knights; between who and the Senate, there was at that time a good correspondence.
For it seems, those who were hereupon chosen into the Senate, did so misbe|have themselves in the execution of their powers, at least, so kept under the Senators authority, that they gave very great distast unto them; insomuch as not long after by the Flor.  l. 70. assistance of M. Lucius Drusus, then Tribune of the Popl their former prerogative was again translated, from the questrian Order, to them|selves; for he made Legem Iudiciariam, whereby not only an Godin. An|thol p. 237. ex Cceo. de Oat. 71. equal number of Judges should be elected, out of both Orders, but that Flor. Epit. lib. 71. all Judgments, should pass, indifferently and equally, by the Senate and Equestrian Order. Hereupon the power of the Knights grew less and less, until it shrunk to nothing; so that at length, the Iudges places which they before had executed, became conferrable upon the Publicans.
But half a Century of years pass'd not, e're Plin. l 33. c. 2. M. Cicero when Consul (which was Anno ab Vrbe Condit . Rom. l . 690) re-established the Equestrian Order, and recon|ciled the Senate to it. And  from hence Idem Plin. the Knights were (a second time) est|blished the third degree in Rome, and all Acts pssed in the nme of the Senate,  People of Rome, and the Equestrian Order; the same Pliny giving the reason why the Knights were then so placed after the People, in all publick instruments, . be|cause they were last of all incorporated into the body of the Common-wealth.
As to the Dignities and Honors the Ordo quesiris enjoyed abroad, we find, that many Provinces were governed Alex. ab A|lex Gen. Die l 2. c. 29. by some of the Equestrian Order lone, in|stad of Presidents; for in Cappadocia, Egypt, and other Countries, those of the Eque|strians Order did for a long time rule; among whom Egypt had this peculiar, and proper to it self, that none of the Senators were admitted to be her Presidents, Ibid. but only those of the Equestrian Order. Whose Decrees Augustus commanded to be had in like esteem, Ib. as if the Magistrates of Rome, or Kings, or Consuls, or Praetors, had pronounced them.
As a note of Eminence,They were cal|led  and . to their Names and Honors, they had the Titles of Splendidi and Illustres, bestowed upon them; both which are equivalent to that of Nobiles. For De Bell Ci|vil Oppius calls them Splendidi,  Illustres. Tacitus describing the affairs of Claudius, stiles them also Illustres. Pliny gives them the Title of Lib. Episol. . Epist. 1.  1. Epist. 6. Epist. 25. Splendi|di, and so doth L. 2. D Fini|bus. Cicero. There is an inscription neer Praeneste which puts it in the superlative, for so Scaligr reads it, in his Index to Ianus Gruterus Insriptions.
Vid  440. num. 1.
A. MUNIO. A. F.
MIN. EVARISTO.
SPL. E Q. R. PAT. COL.
OMNIBUS. HONOR.
NITIDE. FUNCTO. c.
And in the Oration of Caius Claudius the Consul, touching a Sedition raised by Caeso Quintius, they are called Dion. Halica. nas. l 10 p. 63 And had sea in the Theatr most sacred Knights.
But besides other priviledges belonging to the Equestrian Orer, whereby it was advanced above the lebeian, there is yet this one to be here remembred, to wit, that of their Sets in the Theatre.
Of this priviledge, the chiefest Author is thought to be Iulius Caesar, or Auu|stus; that Law being called Iulia. But it is more probably affirmed by others, that long before them, Flo. Epit. l. 99. L. Roseius, being Tribune of the People, brought in a law, that the fourteen next seats (i. e. next to those of the Senators) should be assigned to the Roman Knights; which is further confirmed by Philipp. 2. Cicero who calls it Roscian Law. And yet far more ancient is it (even in the reign of Tarquinius Prseus) that L. 1 c. 35. Livy assigns them Seats with the Senators, in the Circus Mximus, and

for the very same use and end; namely, to sit and view the Plays and Shews there exhibited.
They had a Colledge.As an Honor to their Society, the Roman Knights had a Colledge belonging to them, called Collegium Equitum; as it appears by an Altar of Stone at Coloigne in Germany, which one of their Order, who bore the title of Moderator of that Colledge (as Scaliger reads it) had dedicated to Hercules, and thus inscribed.
Ian. Gruter. Inscr. Rom. p. 44. num. 1.
HERCULI
IANVARINIVS
MODERAT. COL.
EQVITVM. D. D.
And Temples dedicated to the Equestrian Fortune.We find that in several places there were Temples dedicated to the Goddess Fortune, under the Title of this Order, viz. Equestri Fortunae.
That anciently at Rome, was erected Alex. ab Alex. Gen. Dier. l. 1. c. 13. neer the Marble Theatre: but it seems to have been decayed, or at least not visited, in Tiberius his days: for Tacitus ta|king notice of a Present, which the Roman Knights had vowed to the Equestrian Fortune, for the health of the Empress, saith, Annal. l. 3. sub finem. Although there were many Temples dedicated to that Goddess in Rome, nevertheless there was none which bore that Name; but there was one found at Antium so called, where she was worshipped under that Title.
Lib. 42. c. 3. Anno V. c. 578. Livy also makes mention of another Temple, consecrated to the Equestrian For|tune by Fulvius Flaccus, Proconsul in Spain: because through the extraordinary Valor of some of the Equestrian Order, under his command, he had obtain'd a memorable Victory over the Celtiberians.
Their Title preserved by Inscriptions and Coins.In the last place let us observe, that as it was the great ambition of the Romans to make use of all means they could invent, to eternize the glory of their Re|nown: so in particular did the Equites among them, account the Honor of their Order worthy remembrance in their publick Marbles; as is most apparent from sundry Inscriptions thereupon, to the end that the Honor of their Dignity might not only spread, but happily be transmitted and revived to future Ages, when themselves should be forgotten, or all other Writings perish.
One of which Marbles (though defective in the name of the Person to whom it related, yet compleat enough in the memorial of his Dignities) remaineth in a private House at Picenum, or in modern language Sinigaglia, in la Marca dell'Ancona, bearing this Inscription.
Videsis Num: 9. apud Gruter. Inscrip. p. 493.
P.F.A. PRIMOPILO.
SPECTATAE. VIRTVTIS.
EQVESTRIS. ORDINIS. V.
PATRIBVS ET PLEBI GRATO.
OB GRATAM ADOLESCENTIS INDOLEM.
BENE MERITAM SAXVM DEDIT.
By this Inscription it further appears, that this Noble Person was not only of the Equestrian Order, but also an Officer of principal credit, namely the Primopi|lus, or Vide Rosin. Antiq. Rom. l. 10. c. 7. first Centurion or Captain of the ten Ensigns among the Triarii (who were the chiefest of the four divisions that composed a Legion) and indeed, the very last reserve, and refuge of the whole Army; and consequently, that this Person was the chief Captain of the whole Legion.
To this Officers charge was committed the principal Ensign called the Eagle: and that we may understand the greatness of his trust, he was of the Generals Council, and, as may be collected from a passage out of P. Salonius alternis prope annis  Tri|bunu militum,  primus Cen|turio erat, quem nunc Primopili appellant. l. 7. c. 41. Livy, equal, if not of higher Dignity, than the Tribune, though otherwise the Centurion or Captain was subordinate to him.
Another Inscription, we conceive, may not improperly be inserted here, which is to be seen at Rome, in the Flaminian way, and is as followeth.

Iscri. Gr. p. 47.
M. VALERIO. M. F. PAL.
AMERIMNIANO.
VIXIT ANNIS XVII. MENSIB.
VIII. DIEBVS DVOBVS. HOR. X
M. VALERIVS. M. F.
AMERIMNVS.
PATER INFELICISSIMVS.
FILIO SANCTISSIMO ET PIENTISSIMO FECIT.
NATVS EQVES ROMANVS IN VICO IVGARIO.
What is herein observable to our purpose, is only out of the words Natus Eques Romanus, which tells us, that this young M. Valerius, for whom the Inscription was made, was born a Roman Knight.
And to give light to this phrase, give us leave to borrow the assistance of Verbo Eq. Ca|lepine (being next at hand) who notes, that the Romans did call those, who were advanced to the Equestrian Dignity, or were descended from some of the Eque|strian Order, Knights. And lest this be not cleer enough spoken by him, or that the words need further explication, he (in the same place) tells us, that the Latine Writers, in relation to the Knightly Dignity, used three kinds of speech, viz. (1.) Eques [for a Knight.] (2.) Equestris Ordo [for one of the Equestrian Or|der.] (3.) Equestri loco natus [for one born or descended from an Equestrian Fa|mily.] which, whether they do signifie the same, or whether they differ, and how far, we (saith he) must consider.
For the first, whosoever is called a Knight, the same is, and is called one of the Equestrian Order; and contrariwise, whosoever is, and is said to be of the Equestrian Order,Idem habet Manutius inter Comment. Salustii, his verbis Differunt Eques, Eque|stris Ordinis,  Equestri loco natur. Eques  Equest Ordinis, idem sunt, quod si Equ pae na est qui nunquam Senator suit, E|qust loco natus est; sin natus est Senatore; Equestri loco non recte natus dicitur. is, and is said to be a Knight. But if a Knight is born from a Father, being a Knight, and who never was a Senator, such a one is said to be of Equestrian extraction: but if the same Knight be born of a Father that is a Senator, he is a Knight indeed, but not extracted from an Equestrian Family.
And hence it is evident, that M. Valerius the Father (who caused this pitaph to be inscribed) was then no Senator, but a Knight, and of the Equestrian Order, though not noted with that Title in the Inscription; and consequently, that his Son Valerius might therefore justly be said to be Natus Eques Romanus. For when once a man was admitted into the Equestrian Dignity, the appelltion of Eques be|longed, and was accustomably given to all his male issue, who kept that Title, until they were advanced into the Senate, or degraded for some misdemeanour.
And as in Marbles, so in Coyns, are there memorials left us, of this ancient Order.
De Viti m|perat. pag 25 Octavius Strada exhibits one of Drusus, the Son of the Emperor Tiberius, by Agrippina; on the one side is the Effigies of this Drusus, thus circumscrib'd, NERONI CLAVDIO DR VSO GERM. COS. DESIGNAT. And on the re|verse is this Inscription (which takes up all the middle of the Coyn) EQVE|STER ORDO PRINCIPI JVVENTVTIS. From whence we learn, that the body of the Equestrian Order did at this time offer their service to Drusus; he having then obtained the appellation of Princeps Iuventutis.
Imper. Rom. Numism. p. 11 Adolphus Occo sets forth two Coyns, the one of Gold, the other of Silver, both which are in all particulars the same with this already discoursed of, and inserts them among those belonging to the Emperor Nero; and so doth Hubertus Goltzius in his Sub nomi Neri. Thesaurus.
We doubt that Strada hath misplaced that Coyn above-mentioned, in regard we meet with no Inscriptions upon Coyns, or other publick Monuments, either in Occo, Goltzius, Angelonus, or elsewhere, that gives to Drusus the Son of Tiberius, any other Name or Title, than Drusus Caesar Tiberii Augusti Filius; but to Nero (before he was made Emperor) the names of Nero Claudius Drusus Germanicus, are frequently attributed.
'Tis true, the very same names of Nero Claudius Germanicus are all stamped upon the Coyns of Drusus, Brother of Tiberius the Emperor; but there the Head is crowned with Vid. Numism. Imp. Rom. Ca|roli Ducis Croy|iaci  Aschot. Tab. 17. Num. 17. vide etiam Numis. ejusdem ducis Croyiaci per Hemelar. edit. Antuerp. 1627. Tab. 4. Num. 8. Laurel, which Drusus the Son of Tiberius wanted, and the Face made older in all places, than that set forth by Oct. Strada, (which indeed is a perfect juvenile Effigies) nor hath this Drusus the Brother of Tiberius, the Title of Princeps juventutis, any where given to him, but that of Imperator only, added at the end of his Names.
Imp. Rom. Numis. p. 311. Besides these, we are beholding to Occo, for the description, and to La Historia Ag. p. 217. Fr. An|gelonus, for the Ectyp of another Coyn, appertaining to Commodus, the Son of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus on whose Reverse is to be seen the aforementioned Inscription, viz. EQVESTER ORDO PRINCIPI IVVENTVT. it being stamped when Commodus had the like address made to him from the Equestrian Or|der, he having then also attained that attribute of Princeps juventutis.
And thus have we let in a glimps of the Equestrian Order, established among the Romans, with its Dignity and Honors, which for many Ages flourished in great glory and reputation; it being the continual care of that famous Nation, to preserve, partly, the Fame of valiant men to posterity, by the memory of their noble Acts; and partly, to stir up the spirits of the younger sort, to the imitation of their Virtue; upon whom the glory of their Ancestors might have such an in|fluence, as to make them eagerly contend for the attainment of a like degree of Honor, by proportionate degrees of Virtue and Noble deeds. All which we have thought requisite to bring in by way of Introduction, to those Knightly Honors, that afterwards succeeded in the world.
What we have further to say in this Chapter, shall be to touch upon those de|grees of Knighthood, which have been personal, and obtained by Creation only, (after such time as the French Empire took beginning) and are, or may be com|prehended, under the modern Title of Equites Aurati, or Milites simpliees, (be|ing indeed all of one nature, albeit they received several denominations, from those various Ensigns of Honor, and Ceremonies of Creation, wherewith the Dignity hath been in several Ages since particularly bestowed) and as this Eque|strian Dignity is distinguished from the several Orders of Chevalry instituted in Christendom, whether they be of greater or less note, who have received their Titles as Knights, used together with that of their peculiar Orders, which differ|enceth them from those we call Milites simplices. In the circumstances of whose Creation, we confess that nothing in the Ordo Equestris among the ancient Ro|mans hath place, though that might well be the ground and original of the Dig|nity, and one common end in both; namely, the pursuit of military exploits and service in the Wars.


SECT. IV. Of the modern Degrees of Knighthood.
Knights girt with the mili|tary Belt.AND first, concerning those whom some call Monozoni, that is, Knights be|girt with the Military Girdle; a custom devolved to the Germans, and Gauls, from ancient time, and from them to later Ages.
Our learned Countryman Sir Henry Spelman notes, Glossar. Ar|haiolog. verbo Miles: That the later Emperors conferr'd the Dignity of Knighthood with the military Girdle, instead of all other Arms; because that part, more eminent amongst them, girdeth, supporteth, and adorneth the rest. Whence our learned Selden calls this girding, Titles of Ho|nor. p. 451. the most essential part of the Ceremony. Nor do we find, that among the various Ceremonies belonging to Knighthood, there have been any (to the later ages) that hath continued so con|stant and frequent in practice, as the endowing with Girdle and Sword: Orna|ments indeed most proper to the Knightly Dignity, and marks of Honor and Virtue,

with which the Statues and Portraitures of Knights have been adorned after death; is may be seen on divers of their Monuments and Grave-Stones.
For as at this day, Knights are in some places stiled Equites Aurati, from the golden Spurs, heretofore put on at their Creation; so were they more anciently Cingulo militari donati or (according to the old word used by Bracton) Ringae enim dicntur ex o quod Rne gyran  circmdant,  inde dicitur ccin|gere Gladio to. Bracton de Legibus  Consutud. regni Angliae. lib. 1. cap. 8. num. 2. Ringae Gladiis; in regard that when any one was Knighted, he was not (as in this Age) only smitten with the Sword, but invested with Sword and Belt. Nor is this Ceremony wholly lost, since it is retained among those, ap|pointed to be used at the creating our Knights of the Bath; who are to be girt with a Sword and Belt, when they receive the aforesaid Honor, as the old For|mulary thus hath it. Dugdale's An|tiq. of Warw. p. 39. Then shall the King, of his great favour, take the Sword, and gird the Esquire therewith.
In the second place (taking leave to rank those following degrees of Knight|hood here mentioned,Knights Bat|chelor. according to their antiquity, not the precedence they have since gained) the Baccalaurei or Knights Batchelors, are to be consider|ed; who are also indifferently stiled Chevaliers, Milites, Equites Aurati, and Knights.
This degree is truly accounted with us, Primus [E|ques Bacca|laurcus] apud Britanno dig|nitatis omnis Miitaris gra|dus est, Hono|um omnium in Republica ba|sis. l. R. p. 143. the first of all military dignity, and the basis and foundation of all Honors in our Nation; and is certainly derived from if not the same, with that immediately preceding. For as the Ceremony of a gentle touch on the shoulder, with the flat side of the Sword, hath been since used, instead of endowing with the Sword and Belt (especially in times of War, or in haste) as an initiation into the Military Order; so on the contrary, it is not un|usual, now adays, for the Prince, at least Gladio, if not Cingulo donare; for he of|tentimes bestows the Sword upon the person whom he Knighteth.
The Equites had the Epithete of Ab ornamen|tis aureis. Mi|raeus, Origines Ord. Equestri|um, p. . juxa impressionem 168. Aurati given them, from the priviledge of wearing Gold upon their Swords and Spurs; and the 265 Knights, created upon Hadrians Bridge at Rome, by Frederick the Third, Emperor of Germany, the 18. of March, Anno Dom. 1451. as he proceeded to the Cathedral Church of St. Iohn de Lateran to be crowned, are by Vitae  Gesta summ. Pntif. l 2. p. 925. Ciaconius called Equites Aurati; and were in|deed no other than Knights Batchelors; such were also the Platina de vis Ponti. p. 262. Italian and German Knights, created in the same place, by Sigismond the Emperour, on Whitsunday 1432. as he went to the Lateran from the Vatican, where he had received his Crown from Pope Eugenius the Fourth.
And here we have an occasion offer'd, to insert the distinction which Andrew Tiraquel puts between those Knights, who are, and who are not noble before they receive that dignity; allowing the later the Title of Equites Aurati, and to the former that of Milites. De Nobil. c. . sect. 13. For (saith he) it is to be observed, that those whom we in the French Tongue call Chevaliers, were made noble assoon as they attain'd that dig|nity, even though they were not such before, yet they were not called Milites, contrary to the position of all Interpreters of the Law: but such as speak properly, have cal|led them Equites Auratos. Which appellation Lib. Epist. 24. Epist. . ad Alb Parisium. Franciscus Philelphius did first of all find out, and Bebellius in his Commentary De abusione linguae, brings many things against the Interpreters, who call those (that are not noble before their Creation) Milites.
Somewhat to like purpose would our learned Spelman deduce from the addi|tion of Gloss. Archai|olog. verbo Eques. Aurati, conceiving it introduced ad distinguendum Equitem ritu honorario institutum, ab inhonorato istiusmodi; and by him made applicable to the Nea|politan Gentlemen, (usually called Cavalieri) who are all stiled Equites, though they never have attained the Knightly dignity.
Thirdly,Knights Bne|rets. concerning the Knights Banerets, a Title bestowed on such who had so well deserved in the Wars, that they were afterwards permitted to use the Vexillum quadratum, or a square Banner; whence they were truly called Equites Vexillarii, or Chevaliers  Baniere, from the Dutch word Ibid. verb Baneret. Banerherr, Lord, or Ma|ster of the Banner.
Our learned In Brit. p. 124: Edit. Lond. 1608. Cambden derives the original of this Knightly dignity among us, not higher than the reign of King Edward the Third, and believes him to be the

first Institutor thereof, and this honorable Title to be then first devised, in recom|pence of martial prowess; a recital of which dignity received, is mentioned in a Pat. 20. E. 3. par. 2. mem|brana 22. Patent, whereby that King grants to Iohn Coupland, for the maintenance thereof, five hundred pounds per annum out of his Exchequer, to be received by him and his Heirs; and this was for his good service performed, in taking Speeds Chron. p. 592. Da|vid the Second, King of Scots, Prisoner, at the Battel of Nevils Cross, neer Durham. But some few years before the Creation of Sir Iohn Coupland, there is mention also in the Patent Rolls of 10. E. 3. par 2. m. 7. Sir Reignald Cobham, and 13. E. 3. m. 13. Sir William de la Poole, both Banerets: And doubtless the Title and Dignity was much more an|cient with us (as well as in Vide Seld. Tit. of Honor, p. 543. France) for in our perusal of the Accounts of the great Wardrobe, we find such like Robes allowed to several persons made Knights, as were appointed usually for the Creation of Banerets; and this before the reign of King Edward the Third, which implies, that there was then a Degree of Knight|hood, so called, amongst us. For instance, Ex Rotul. Compoi Tho. Vseflet de an. 20. E. . Gerardo de la Bret, ad apparatum suum pro Militia, tanquam pro Baneretto,  Rege suscipienda, c. viz. ad unam Tuni|cam, c. after which is set down the particular Robes, and other Ornaments, appointed for his Creation; and then it follows, Consimilem apparatum habuerant subscripti, viz.

Hug. de Courtney. Viz. Singuli eo|rum tanquam pro Baneretto.
Rad. de Wylington. Viz. Singuli eo|rum tanquam pro Baneretto.
Rad. Daubeney. Viz. Singuli eo|rum tanquam pro Baneretto.
Ioh. de Willouby. Viz. Singuli eo|rum tanquam pro Baneretto.
Edw. Stradling. Viz. Singuli eo|rum tanquam pro Baneretto.
Rad. Baro de Stafford. Viz. Singuli eo|rum tanquam pro Baneretto.
Ioh. de Meules. Viz. Singuli eo|rum tanquam pro Baneretto.
Will. de Percy. Viz. Singuli eo|rum tanquam pro Baneretto.
Gerard de Insula. Viz. Singuli eo|rum tanquam pro Baneretto.
Pet. Breton. Viz. Singuli eo|rum tanquam pro Baneretto.
Rog. le Straunge. Viz. Singuli eo|rum tanquam pro Baneretto.
Ernone de Potes. Viz. Singuli eo|rum tanquam pro Baneretto.
Ioh. de Neville. Viz. Singuli eo|rum tanquam pro Baneretto.
Gerard de Trassyns. Viz. Singuli eo|rum tanquam pro Baneretto.
Willect de Ciply. Viz. Singuli eo|rum tanquam pro Baneretto.
Mulect de Blekey. Viz. Singuli eo|rum tanquam pro Baneretto.
Disram de Keney. Viz. Singuli eo|rum tanquam pro Baneretto.

In like manner in the preceding year have we met with an account of Robes, given to Ex Comp. praed. Tho. de Vseflet. Iames Botiller of Ireland, ad apparatum suum, pro se novo Milite facien|do, tanquam Baneretto; as also to William Mountacute, Ebulo le Strange, and others. So also An. 18. E. 2. to Hugo de Poynts, and Hugo de Plesey; and Ex Comp. praed. Tho. de Vseflet. Ann. 16. E. 2. to Raymund Durant. And our learned Spelman (in Pellae exitus An. 8. E. 2.) doth find Gloss. Archai. verbo Baneret. vide etiam 4. part. Instit. p. 6. Iohn de Crumbwell, written with the addition and Title of Baneret.
But that this Dignity was yet more ancient in England, is sufficiently apparent from a Writ of King Edward the First, under the Privy Seal, directed to the Clerk of the Wardrobe, to furnish Thomas Bardolf with Robes, such as were usually al|lowed to a Baneret; he being to receive the honor of Knighthood, at that emi|nent solemnity, when Edward of Caernarvon, the Kings eldest Son, was made Knight; which Writ runs thus.
Ex Brevi R. Ed. 1. penes Rem. Regis in Scacc. Edwardus Dei grati Rex Angliae Dominus Hiberniae  Dux Aquitaniae, Di|lecto nobis Radulpho de Stoke, Clerico magnae Garderobae nostrae salutem, Mandae|mus vobis, quod dilecto nobis Thomae Bardolf tanquam Baneretto, decentem appa|ratum, pro se novo Milite faciendo ad festum Pentecostes proxim futurum, in Comi|tiva Edwardi filii nostri karissimi habere, de dono nostro faciatis. Et nos vobis inde in compoto vestro debitam allocationem habere faciemus. Datum sub privato Sigillo nostro apud Wolveseye tertio die Maii, Anno Regni nostri Tricesimo quarto.
This Degree of Honor is Mills Caa. of Honor p. 80. esteemed the last among the greatest, viz. Nobilium majorum, or the first with those of the second rank, and Gloss. Ar|chaiol. ver|bo Baneret. is placed in the middle between the Barons and the other Knights; in which respect, the Baneret may be called Gloss. Ar|chaiol. ver|bo Baneret. Vexillarius minor, as if he were the lesser Banner-Bearer, to the end he might be so differenced from the greater, namely, the Baron, to whom properly the right of bearing a square Banner doth appertain.
But there are some remarkable differences tween these Knights, and Knights Batchelors; to wit, as to the occasion and circumstances of their Creation; the Baneret being not created, unless at a time when the Kings Standard is erected and displayed; besides, Gloss. Ar|chaiol. ver|bo Baneret. he bears his own Banner in the field, while the Knight

Batchelor follows that which is anothers, which evidently shews the Dignity to be of a higher nature; nevertheless, Sir Henry Spelman notes, this not to be dishonourable, since the Emperor Gloss. Ar|chaiol. ver|bo Baneret. Maximilian was pleased to serve in the Wars, under the Banner of our King Henry the Eighth, in the Lord Herbert Hist. of Hen. 8. M S. fo. 47. quality of his Soldier, in the Camp before Terwin in France, wearing the Cross of St. George, and re|ceiving the pay of one hundred Crowns a day.
This further difference is observed between them, by Andrew Favin, to wit, In le Thea|tre d'Honeur l. 1. c. 6. Vexillarius, qui Vassao su|o habeba el|to Vexillo;  Baccalaureus qui sub alieno vexillo procede|bat. Jo. Tilius Commentar. d reb. Gall. l. 2. p. 180. that the Knight Baneret was he who had so many Gentlemen, his servants, at command, as that he could raise a Banner, and make up a Company of Soldiers to be main|tained at his Table, and their wages paid out of his own Purse: But the Knight Batchelor he, who had not servants sufficient to lead to the War, at his own charge, but marched under the Banner of some other. Idem Favin. loco cit. These two degrees of Honor (saith he) were also distinguished by their Wages, in regard that a Knight Baneret had twenty Sols per diem to dispend, the Knight Batchelor ten, and the Esquire but five; proportionable hereunto is that which Mr. Selden notes out of the Ward|robe accounts, an. 4. E. 2. Titles of H|nor, p. 991. That the Banerets wages by the day was four shillings, the Knights two shillings, and the Esquires one shilling.
Next unto the Knights Banerets, we shall speak of Knights of the Bath;Knights of the Bath. which is a degree that hath the Investiture and Title of a Knight, with an additio|nal denomination, derived from part of the Ceremony of his Creation.
It is the most received opinion, that our King Henry the Fourth, first instituted these Knights; and true it is, according to Chronic. l. 2. p. 24. Sir Iohn Froisard, He at his Corona|tion (to adde to the lustre and magnificence of it) created Chronic. l. 2. p. 24. six and forty of them; making an especial choice of such as he favoured, either out of an inward affe|ction, or consideration of their service or deserts.
And as he designed them to attend him in the Ceremonies of his Coronation, then at hand, so did he retain them neerer unto his person; thereby seeming to honor them with a more familiar consociation, than he vouchsafed to the Knights Batchelors.
But if the Ceremonies and circumstances of their Creation be well considered, it will appear that this King did not institute, but rather restore, the ancient man|ner of making Knights; and consequently, that the Knights of the Bath are in truth no other than Knights Batchelors, that is to say, such as are created with those Ceremonies wherewith Knights Batchelors were formerly created by Ec|clesiasticks; but some of them having been for a long time laid aside with us, were then brought again into use, and made peculiar to the Degree of Knights of the Bath, and since continued to them, upon some solemn and great oc|casion.
At the first view, this Degree looks like a peculiar and distinct Order of Knight|hood, and may perhaps (by some) be thought more fit to be spoken of in the third Chapter rather than here: But it cannot properly and justly be so accounted, if we consider, that they have not either Statutes or Laws assigned them, nor are they in case of vacancy supplied; (which are the essentials of distinct Orders) nor do they wear their Robes beyond the time of that occasion upon which they were created; as chiefly the Coronation of Kings and Queens of England, or otherwise the Creation of a Prince of Wales, Duke of York, and the like, where|to also is to be considered, that their Number hath been uncertain, and always at the pleasure of the King.
Andrew Favin will have these Knights to be otherwise called En le Theatre d'Honeur l. 5: c. 2. Knights of the Crown, because (saith he) to distinguish them from Esquires, they wear upon their left shoulders an Escutcheon of Black Silk, with three Crowns of Gold em|broidered thereon. But this is a great mistake, for it is not found that such, or indeed any other Badge, was at any time (after that manner) used by them, save only a Silk Lace; but the Jewel worn, to be known by, is made of Gold, con|taining three Crowns, with this Motto, Tria juncta in una, and hanging down under the left arm at a Carnation Ribbon worn cross the body.
This leads us to the consideration of another Degree among us here in Eng|land, namely,Baronet. Baronets, who seem to be allied to Knighthood, by having granted

to them the addition of Sir to be set before their Names; but this Title gives not the Dignity of Knighthood, nor can any of them be properly stiled Knights, until they be actually knighted.
It is a Degree but of a late erection, to wit, in the ninth year of King Iames, and the grant thereof made only by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, a Copy of one of which is transcribed into the Pag. 8 21. Titles of Honor. This Honor is made hereditary to them, and the Heirs males of their bodies lawfully begotten, for ever; and by a subsequent Decree of the said King, precedence is granted to them before all Banerets, Rot. Pat. an. 10. Iac. pars 10, m. 8. except such as should be made by the King, his Heirs, and Successors, under his or their Standard displaid in an Army royal, in open War, and the King personally present; and next unto and immediately af|ter the younger Sons of Viscounts and Barons.
The ground for erecting this Degree (as appears by the Instructions given to the Commissioners appointed to treat about this affair) was partly Mar|tial; for though themselves were not enjoined personal service in the Wars, yet the motive of this Honor was a certain contribution from each Baronet, Seld Tit. of Hon. p. 827. to main|tain thirty Foot Soldiers, for three years in Ireland (after the rate of eight pence a day) for the defence of that Kingdom; and chiefly to secure the Plantation in the Province of Vlster.
Their Qualifications were, that at least they should be descended from a Grandfather, on the Fathers side, that bore Arms, and had a Revenue of one thou|sand pounds per annum, of Lands of inheritance in possession, or Lands of old Rents, as good as one thousand pounds a year of improved Lands; or at least two parts of three, to the said value in possession, and the other third part in rever|sion expectant, upon one life only held in Jointure.
The year after the first Patent past, King Iames was pleased to adde some new Priviledges and Ornaments to this Degree, namely, Rot. Pat. 10. Iac. pars 10. m. 8. to Knight those Baronets already made, that were no Knights, as also such as should be afterwards crea|ted, and the Heirs males of their bodies, when they attained the age of one and twenty years; that the Baronets and their Descendants might bear either in Can|ton, or in an Inescutcheon the Arms of Vlster, and further, to have place in the Armies of the King, and his Heirs and Successors, in the gross, neer about the Royal Standard, for defence of the same.
Since the Institution of Baronets in England, there have been made divers in itles of Ho|nor p. 842.Ireland, after the like form. And the Knights of Heylins Cos|ogr. printed 1652. l. 1. p. 306. Nova Scotia in the West-Indies, were ordained, in imitation of Baronets in England, by the said King Iames, anno Dom. 1622. and upon a like design; to wit, the planting of that Country by Scotch Colonies, and the Degree made likewise hereditary.
These later have the priviledge to wear an Orange-tawny Ribbon, as a Badge of Honor, to distinguish them from other Knights: and it appears by a Ex MS. in Of|fic. Armor. [L. 2.] fol. 23. Letter from Henry Earl of Holland, dated the 29. of Iune 1627. and directed to the Officers of Arms, that there was some intention to move his then Majesty to de|clare his pleasure, that all Baronets and Knights Batchelors might wear in Ribbons of several colours, some Badge or Iewel, to distinguish the one from the other, and both from persons of inferiour quality, in such sort as did the Knights of the Baeth; to which end, he desired their opinion, touching the fitness and conveni|ency thereof.
Which Officers, from precedents of the differences and marks set upon Robes belonging to several Degrees of Nobility and Honor, and from the Ensigns and Ornaments of Knighthood, used for distinctions sake, both at home and abroad, being esteemed as peculiar marks of Soveraignty in the Giver, and eminent tokens of Honor in the Receiver; grounded their opinion, that such Ornaments for di|stinction of those two Degrees, namely of Baronets and Knights Batchelors, were no way unfit or inconvenient, either to his said Majesty, or to his Subjects: But it seems, there was nothing further done in this matter.
We shall conclude this Section with a general observation, which relates to the conferring of Knightly Honor; That Kings and Princes have in no Age li|mited themselves, or confin'd their bestowing of this Dignity to Martialists

alone, who profess Arms, and give themselves to the exercise of Military Virtue, as it was in its original Institution, viz. a Military Employment; inasmuch as men of the long Robe, and such as have dedicated themselves to the managery of Ci|vil Affairs, through their great worth and desert in that kind, have so well merit|ed of their Prince and Country, as to be thought worthy to share with those of the short Robe, in having this Honor conferr'd on them.


SECT. V. The Etymologie of Eques, Miles, Chevalier, Ritter, and Sir.
WE have observed before,1. Equi. that the Grecian Captains had a Title of Ho|nor in their Language, equivalent to the signification of Eques in the La|tin, to which a Horse gave the denomination; we shall here further add (it be|ing testified by Lib. 33. c. 1. sub finem. Pliny) that the Title of Eques, given and appropriate to the Ordo Equestris among the ancient Romans, as a name of Title and Dignity, was at first likewise derived from Equus a Horse; and indeed it is a proper and significant term since among them, they were esteemed Equites, Demster in Rosin. p. 94. who having a publick Horse, did receive the stipend of a Horseman to serve in the Wars: because one part of the Ceremony, whereby this Honor became conferred, was the giving of a Horse, bestowed on them at the Publick Charge; of which more anon. In the ancient times (saith Turneb. ani|madv. in Rul|lum: Petri Ra|mi Comment. p. 76. Turnebus) they who received pay, upon the account of a publick Horse, were called Equites. And the Legionary Soldiers, which L. 33. c. 2. Pliny saith were sometimes called Fluxumines, De re mil. Rom. p. 231. Salmasius calls Fluxutes, and derives the word  fle|ctendis Equisin Gyrum.
It is also to be noted, that the word used to denote the Degree of Knighthood, in the several Dialects of other Nations, hath the same derivation, to wit, from a Horse; for in the French, a Knight is called Chevalier; in the German, Ridder; in the Italian, Cavagliero; nay even in the ancient British, Morchog; concerning some of which, hear also one of Geoffry Chaucer's Scholars.
Io. Lydgate MS. of the Horse, Sheep, and Go. Eques, ab Equo, is said of bery ryght,
And Chevalier, is said of Chebalrie,
In which a Rider called is a Knight,
Arogoners done also specifie,
Caballiero through all that partie,
Is name of worship, and so took his 'ginning,
Of Spurs of Gold, and chiefly Riding.
And albeit the Latin word Miles, and the English word Knight, had not their derivation from a Horse, as have those before enumerated; nevertheless they are now restrained to a Title of Honor (though heretofore they had other signi|fications) and ordinarily used to express a dubbed Knight.
According to the opinion of our learned Spelman,. Miles. Miles (in a general sense) is he Gloss. Archa verbo Mile. who is legally inrolled for the War: which Inrollment he also saith was two-fold, Honoraria,  Vulgaris. This pertaining to the Foot, or common Soldiers; that to persons more renowned and famous. To the admittance of a Foot Sol|dier, the bare entrance of his Name upon the Military Tables sufficed; but at the creating of the other, some solemnity was used, for he was adorned with Arms; not of his own choice, but given and granted, upon the account of Honor, from the Prince, and that after a certain kind of ceremonious Pomp. Thus he.
But though the word Miles anciently among the Romans, and hitherto in a strict sense, is allowed by all to signifie a Foot Soldier, whence Miles,  Militia;

yet how this word became usurped, continued in use, and in tract of time natu|ralized, to signifie the same which Eques did, we could no where receive so clear satisfaction, as from the learned Pen of Claudius Salmasius, who in his Treatise De Re Militari Romanorum gives this following account.
Pag. 2. It is manifest (saith he) that there was one kind of Military Discipline among the Romans, when their publick Affairs were first setled by Kings; ano|ther, when in the flower of their Government Liberty was established; ano|ther, when the Caesars and Augustus's were Masters of the Empire; and lastly, another, under the Successors of Constantine, when upon the translation of part of the Empire to Constantinople, the Militia was changed from Foot to Horse. For the new Romans of that time being continually engaged against Nations power|ful and abounding in Horse, and reposing no further confidence in the Legionary Militia, the rigour of the ancient Discipline being wholly lost, began to exer|cise and train up only the Horse Militia, deserting that of the Foot, whereof there was hardly any advantage to be made against the innumerable Forces of the Alani, Gothes, Vandals, Persians, Saracens, and Sarmatians, which consisted in Horse.
In those times the Greeks, who writ ought concerning that part of Military Discipline, which relates to Tacticks, taking all things from the Ancients, ex|press'd the Affairs of their own Age (by reason of the alteration of the Militia) in words proper to the ancient Militia. What the former had said of the Foot Soldiery, these later applyed the same things in their writings to the Cavalry. And what is more to be admired, the names whereby the ancient Greeks and Latins called the Foot, these transferr'd to the Horse of their time. Hence , which before was said of the Foot Soldier, was by these later Greeks and Constantinopolitans, properly attributed to the Horseman. So also among the Romans of the same Age, the word Miles was no longer said of him that serv'd afoot in the Wars, but began to be properly spoken of the Horse|man.
Whence it came into vogue (as the same Author concludes) that among the Titles of Nobility, he who had that of Miles bestowed on him (whether in pub|lick Monuments and Archives of Courts, or in the private Instruments and Tombs of illustrious Families) was understood to be a Horseman, or Eques, that is of the Equestrian Dignity, or descended from it.
Our learned Tit. of Ho|nor p. 436. Selden also notes the word Miles to be equivocal, and that in the old Feodal Laws of the Empire it signifies a Gentleman, as the word Gentle|man is signified in Nobilis: and with us the word hath been frequently and indiffe|rently used, to denote both a Gentleman and a Knight: as for instance, Milites signifieth Tit. of Ho|nor p. 436. Gentlemen, or great Freeholders of a County, and not dubbed Knights, viz. such who hold by Knights-service from a Lord of a Mannor, they being also called Vide Tit. Hon. cad. pag. Milites or Knights in our Laws, that concern either choice of Coroners, or who are chosen from the several Counties of this Kingdom, to serve in the High Court of Parliament; although they be not advanced into the Degree of Knighthood.
That Miles with us hath denoted the dignity of Knighthood (which is indeed the chiefest of Military professions) even in the Saxons times, Ibid. p. 770. Mr. Selden not only believes, but fortifies his opinion from the authority of several Charters of that Age, wherein this Title is given to sundry persons, as may be Idem, pag. 771. there seen to satisfaction; observing withal, that the Et pag. 934. ancientest use of it, in the German Empire, as a Title of Honor, that he finds it had, was about the Year of our Lord 1064. but Aubertus Miraeus (in Apud Iu|risprud. Heroic. p. 69. Cod. donat. pier.) exhibits an ancient diploma, in which the Title Miles is mentioned, in chart Gerardi Cameracensium Episcopi, de anno 1046. since which it is become more frequently used, in all publick In|struments written in Latin, and most generally appropriate in our Law, to per|sons who have received the Order of Knighthood, and to signifie the same with Eques and Chevalier, though indeed it may seem less properly to signifie a Knight, than that of Eques; in regard Knighthood is by Ferns Glory of Generosity, p. 108. some called the dignity of Horse|manship, and the tenure of Lands by Knights Fees here in England, is in truth a

Horse-service, and the Tenants such as served the King on Horseback in Wars, and Gentlemen at least, if not persons of noble extraction: besides, to note the dignity of this Tenure, it is anciently called Cokes pre|face ad lib. 3. fo. 3. a. Regale Servicium, because due to and for the King and the Realm.
As the Greeks and Romans derived a Title of Honor from Horses of service,3. Chevalier. and conferr'd the same upon their men of Arms, so did the French; among whom, the word Chevalier hath the like signification and relation: For at first, it pro|perly signified a Horseman, or  that rides a Horse; but at length it came to be used among them, more  to express one, upon whom the Honor of Knighthood had been bestowed.
And this cleerly appears from Claude Fauchet, a French Writer of good account; who speaking of the original of Knighthood, and the Etymologie of the word Chevalier, saith, Origines de Chevaliers Ar|moir.  He|raux. f. 1. it is evident that the Chevaliers derive their name from Cheval [a Horse] which (to say truth) is the properest Animal that can be found for War; and which by reason of the swiftness thereof, is by the Vide Com. Servii ad Vir|gilii primum Georgicon. Poet ascribed to Neptune, at the contention he had with Pallas for the invention of profitable things.
The skilful management of a Horse, hath been heretofore accounted one of the principal marks and properties of a Knight; and so greatly delighted were the active and warlike youths, among the old Gauls (to wit, the ancient Inhabi|tants of France) with gallant Horses, that no Present could be more acceptable to them.
It is evident, that with the nobler sort among us, the Title of Eques or Cheva|lier hath been esteemed more honorable than Miles (though Miles had before much prevailed in England, even to a general Title and Appellation) which may be proved out of those Records, instanced in the fourth part of the Pag.  Institutes, by which it appears that the Barons in Parliament, who had been Knighted, liked to be called Chevaliers, rather than Milites. And in Writs of Summons they were more usually stiled Chevaliers, than by the Titles of their Baronies; or if these were used, nevertheless, that of Chevalier followed at the end of the style. Anno 7. E. 4. all the Barons in Parliament have the addition of Chevaliers, and there|fore they subscribed thusEquites aurati omnes. And about Seldens Tit. of Honor. p. 746 King Henry the Eighths Reign, the Custom began, to stile all the temporal Barons in their Writs of Summons, Chevaliers; whether they were Knighted or not, which is hither|to continued in practice; all which are considerable proofs of the estimation they had of the Title of Chevalier, above that of Miles.
Among the modern Germans,4. Ridder. the Title of Knight is understood by the word Corn. Kilian. Dict. Teutonico-Lat. lit. R. Ver|steg. Antiq. p. 314. Ridder, which in English is the same with Rider or Horseman, and equivalent both to the ancient Title Eques, and the modern Chevalier; and the Order of Knighthood or Equestrian Dignity, is in high Dutch called Frisius Dict. Latino-Germ. lit. R. Ritterschafft, in low Dutch, Iurispruden|tia Heroica. p. 389. a. Riderschap.
As the German Ridder or Ritter, is observed by our learned Tit. Hon. p. 436. Selden, to be the same with Miles (viz. a Gentleman) so the Ghe-slagen Ridder, is interpreted by Kilianus in lit. R. Eques Auratus, viz. Miles factus, or the dubbed Knight, he being created by the Ceremony of a gentle stroke, or light touch with a naked Sword, upon the shoulder (Ghe-slaeghen, signifying but as percussus) for albeit The Estate of the Empire, Dialog. 8. in prin. Lewis du May tells us, that in Germany the Gentlemen to this day, writing in Latin, stile them|selves Equites; yet no man among them is accounted a Tit. of Honor loco cit. Ritter or Ridder, in the same sence as Eques Auratus, or Cingulo Militae donatus, denotes it, unless he be actually Knighted.
And besides, the said Eod. Dialog. Lewis du May notes down these manifest differences, be|tween them and the dubbed Knight: as first, that the Knight hath been always more priviledged than the Gentleman. 2. That the chance of Birth makes the Gentleman, without his contributing any thing to it; but Worth and Valour raises the Knight to that degree of Honor. 3. Princes and Lords do not seek for the Title of a Gentleman, as they do very earnestly for that of a Knight: And 4. The Gentleman is born so, the Knight comes to be so; that is, a Gentleman be|gets a Gentleman, but a Knight begets not a Knight.
The Saxon word 5. Knight. Cniht (from whence our Knight) is by our learned Country|men,

men, Gloss. Archa. verbo Knight. Spelman, Titles of Ho|nor. p. 769. Selden, and Dict. Saxon. verbo niht. Somner, rendred a Boy, a Servant, or an Attendant, and also a Soldier. We shall not meddle with the word, as it baely signifies Puer, Puerilis, Iuvenis, or Puber, as making nought to our purpose; but as it hath signified Servus or Famulus, a Servant or Attendant (being not otherwise used at this day among the Dutch) and also, as it imports the dignity of Knighthood (to which purpose we now commonly use it) it will deserve observation; and this chiefly in the words of Mr. Somner, that painful Inquisitor into the so much neg|lected, and almost forgotten Saxon Tongue Saxon. dict. loco cit.  (saith he) that use of it remaining in our Knights of the Shire; which  Knights by dignity or place as indeed but few of them are, or need to be, yet are so called, but why? under fa|vour, in regard of that service which is required and performed of them in Parlia|ment, for their several Countries, whose servants for the time they are.
But that we may know it was used with us, as an honorary Title and Appel|lation, shortly after the Conquest, there is an ter Cod. MS. a Guil. Archiep. Cant. Bibl Oxon. do|natos [E. 80. fo. 64. b.] old Manuscript yet extant in Bibli|otheca Bodliana, in which the Annals are continued down to King Stephens Reign, wherein the Annalist having told us, that King William the Conqueror accusto|mably wore his Crown at the Feasts of Easter, Whitsontide, and Christmas, he further noteth ter Cod. MS. a Guil. Archiep. Cant. Bibl Oxon. do|natos [E. 80. fo. 64. b.]  Then were with him all the wealthy (or potent) men throughout England, viz. Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, and Knights.
Antiq. p. 314. Impr. London. 1629. Verstegan is of opinion, that this word began to be made use of among our An|cestors, as a Title of Honor, from such as were admitted for their merit to be Knights to the King; viz. his own Servants and Reteyners, and such as were ap|pointed to ride with or attend on him; to whom our industrious Minshew agrees, the Verbo Knight. Equites (saith he) which heretofore followed and accompanied the Emperor, are in the German Tongue called Knechtes, that is, Servitors or Ministers. But our learned Cambden is of opinion, that the word Knercht, Brit. p. 125. was in far more ancient times used and accepted as an honorary Title, and among the old Germans, sig|nified a person armed with Spear and Launce (the Ensigns of their Knighthood) as in after times such were among other Nations, adorned with a Girdle and Belt, who are since called Equites Aurati, and sometimes simply Milites.
6. Sir. In the last place, we think it not amiss to say something here, touching the usual and accustomed English word, with us added to the names of Knights, viz. Sir: We note then, that since Titles and honorary Appellations have been in use, (for anciently no other Appellations were used, but only the persons names) the word Sire in old French was taken to signifie Seignieur or Lord; and though in Latin the word Dominus hath been indifferently attributed to all Degrees of Nobility, yet in the Registries of the most noble Order of the Garter, it is us'd with a di|stinction. For wherever the Names of any of the Knights Companions are re|corded, if he be a Baron of the Kingdom, it is exprest by Dominus, and his Sur|name only, added thereunto; as for instance, the Lord Cameux is termed Lib. N p. 58. Do|minus de Cameux, and so others; whereas a Knight Baneret or Batchelor hath his Christian Name adjoined, as Sir Iohn Chandos (who was one of the first Foun|ders of this most noble Order) is stiled Idem p. 30. Dominus Iohannes Chandos, Sir Walter Paely, another of those Founders, is written, Dominus Gualters Paely, and so of others.
Now this addition Sir, is properly attributed to the Names of all Knights Ba|nerets, Knights of the Bath, and Batchelor Knights; the words sometimes pro|nounced at the time when they are dubbed being with this compellation to their Christian Names, Arise Sir Iohn, or Sir Thomas, or whatsoever else is his Chri|stian Name, and therefore is accounted parcel of their stile, as among the French Messire is used in the same nature. But to Knights Baronets the addition of Sir is Pat. 9. Iac. pars 45. granted by a peculiar clause in their Patents of Creation, to be prefixt to their Christian Names, albeit they be not dubbed Knights.
How it came to be first given we cannot find, but Custom from former times hath continued it to ours, upon the Degrees before mentioned, and divers of our old English Writers have bestowed it upon the major Nobility, after they had

been received into the Order of Knighthood. Nevertheless, though it be wholly uncertain when it first began to be used with us, yet our learned Selden hath ob|served it in an Additions and Amendments t the Titles of Honor. p. 939. Hebrew Star, of King Edward the First's time. And in the life of Saint Thomas Becket, written also about that Age, we meet with the Title prefixt to the Names of the four Knights (there called Luther Knigths) who slew the said Saint Thomas.
MS. penes Sylam Taylor gen. so. 253. His Knyghts tho hi i husde this, hi stode some stille,
Hi bethoghte stillelich, to pay the Kyng at wille,
Hour that mest rewen wer, bithoghte of one gile,
Sir Renaud le uz Ours, and Sir Hewe de Morbile,
And Sir William Trati, and Sir Richard le Brut.


SECT. VI. The Ensigns of the Equestrian Order among the Romans.
THE Equestrian Order among the ancient Romans was conferr'd by parti|cular Ceremonies, 1. A Publick orse. to wit, the donation of a Horse, or giving of a Ring; and these were accounted the two chief and principal Ensigns and Ornaments of that Order, as appears out of Lib. 33. c. . sub finem. Ro|sin. de Antiq. Rom. l. 1. c. 17. Pliny and other Writers; and both bestowed upon the publick account.
The giving of the publick or military Horse was a far more ancient Ceremony, than that of bestowing the Ring: there being a time when only those who receiv|ed the publick Horse, we of the Equestrian Order, and none other; and this was long before the Gold Ring was used, as a mark of this Honor.
For it appears out of Livy, that upon Servius his Institution of the Cense, and his inrolling the Knights by it, he forthwith took care to pay them out of the publick Treasure, Livy. l. 1. c. 43. Ten thousand pieces of Brass Money to buy them Horses: and certain Widows were assigned to pay two thousand pieces of like money annually, Livy. l. 1. c. 43. towards the keeping of them. De re mil. Rom. p. 239. circa medium. Therefore (saith the learned Salmasius) no other were then enrolled in the Equestrian Order, but such as had the Equestrian Cense, and to whom a publick Horse was assigned. And this is further evident from this passage in Pliny; Quod ante militares Equi nomen dede|rant, hoc nunc Pecunae Iudi|ces tribuunt. l. 33. c. 1. That the Name (to wit Equites) which was heretofore (saith he) derived from the ilitary Horses, now the Iudges upon the account of money (viz. the Censors) bestow.
But here instead of the word Iudices, the learned Critick Iustus Lipsius is ra|ther willing to read De militia Romana. p. 3 Dialog. 5. Indices (and we find the Letters n and u are frequently mi|staken by Transcribers, the one for the other) which indeed seems as well sutable to the meaning, which the whole sentence aims at; for the former part thereof de|clares, that the Rings were the Notes or Ensigns of the middle (viz. Equestrian) Degree; and then according to Lipsius his correction of the word, the latter part runs thus; that the Name which formerly the military Horses gave, the Notes and Indices of wealth did afterwards (to wit in Pliny's time) bestow.
And as the donation of a Horse was the ancienter badge of Knighthood, so were those to whom it was given, Lips. loc citato. saith Iustus Lipsius, most anciently, properly, and alone in times past called Equites. The same Lipsius (reflecting on the twofold Ensigns of Knighthood among the Romans) makes a dichotomy of the Equestrian Order, into Lips. loc citato. those who had a publick Horse, and others who had none; but only the honor of wearing of a Gold Ring.
In succeeding times, when the Custom was received of electing Knights, as well by bestowing of a Gold Ring, as formerly had been used by the single Ce|remony of giving a publick Horse (yet still to those who had the Equestrian Cense) then was the number of these Knights very much increased; whereupon no pub|lick Horses were afterwards assigned, but unto such as were ready to enter into

the military service, and to fight in the Legions; and then also to such persons only, who were chosen Salmas. de e mil. Rom. p. 239. out of the Body, Number, and Order of the Knights, to wit, Ib. p. 240. such as to whom there had not yet any publick Horse been assigned, but were only known to be of that Order, by wearing of a Gold Ring. Those therefore to whom the publick Horse was then assigned, were thenceforth called Legionary Knights, from being Et. p. 231. annexed and joined to the Legions by such donation; and likewise to distinguish them from the rest of the Equestrian Order, who had only received the honor of a Gold Ring; though they had not as yet taken upon them any mar|tial employment.
Hence we may observe, that all those who were of the Equestrian Order, were not employed in military service, or rather very few, in respect of the whole Body; but only such of them to whom a publick Horse was assigned, and had the peculiar Title given them of Legionary Knights, as aforesaid; being chosen from the entire body of the Ordo Equestris, to the end they might forthwith serve in the Legions.
Nor was every Citizen, whose wealth could entitle him to the Equestrian Cense, received into the Equestrian Order, for doubtless many concealed the just value of their Estates from the Censor, and so escaped the admission and inroll|ment; but whosoever were found possess'd of such a proportion of Riches and Substance, as would reach the Equestrian Cense, were constrain'd (if debauchery and vitiousness hindred not) to enroll themselves within that Order, and thereby become capable of receiving a publick Horse; as is evident from Lib. 39. cap. 19. Livy, in that which he relateth concerning P. Aebutius, the Son of a Roman Knight, where in favour to him, and recompence of his service, by whose (together with Lib. 39. cap. 19. His|palo Fessenia's) means, the abominable Ceremonies, used in the nocturnal Feasts of Bacchus, were first discovered, the Senate decreed, Lib. 39. cap. 19. that the Consul should mind the Tribunes of the Commons, to prefer a Bill to the people for his exempti|on from all military service, and notwithstanding to aow him his Pension, as if the time of service which the Law required, had been accomplished; and more|over Lib. 39. cap. 19. to prohibit the Censor from assigning to him a publick Horse, or compelling him to serve in the Wars, against his will. By which it is manifest, that the Censor might force any man (in that time) who had the Equestrian Cense, to accept of a Horse, and constrain him to serve out (in the Legions) the time appointed by the Law; otherwise what needed so great endeavour to obtain such a prohibition? Howbeit Salmasius adds, De re mil. Rom. p. 238. that in the more ancient method of Election, constrain was not used.
This Horse (which first gave name to the Knights, as hath been before noted out of Pliny) was in relation to his service called Godw. Anthol. Rom. Hist. p. 29 Equus Militas, and from the annu|al allowance to keep him, Equus publicus. And after such time as the Office of Censor was instituted (which was in the Fastorum Rom. l. 1. vide Liv. l. 4. c. 7.  Rosin. Antiq. Rom. l. 7. c. 10. 310. year after the foundation of the City) this Horse Idem Rosin. l. 1. c. 10. was bestowed by the Censor (which also is apparent from the case of P. Aebutius, cited by Livy, and mentioned a little before) and not as yet by the Emperors, who (it is true) in succeeding times gave the same, (which ought nevertheless to be distinguished from the Horse that the said Emperors gave among the Praemia militaria, and by and by touched upon) And it was so assigned by the Censors, as they were Judges of manners (as is well observed by De mil. Rom. p. 33. dial. 5. Lipsius,) for it was part of the Censors duty, Rosin. l. 7. c. 10. vide e|tiam Dion. Halicar. l. 4. to observe the lives and manners of every man, even of those who were of the Senatorian and Equestrian Order; and to brand (if they saw cause) any Citizen whatsoever with infamy. And therefore were neither all persons, or those unadvisedly, inrolled for a publick Horse, but such only as could endure the test and examination of their reputation and good behaviour, and whose fair conversation and carriage, had given proof of their good and commen|dable life.
Wherefore, as the aforesaid Salmasius observes, Polybius useth in this kind of Election, the word  which comes from , signifying to be in good repute and esteem, and , which signifies to prove, to examine, to enquire, c. De re mil. R. . p. 238. because they chose from the Equestrian Order, and from all the number of Knights, those of known virtue and of approved life, who might take Horsemans pay, and serve with publick Horses, and be inrolled in the Legions.
And as this power in judging of mens manners and behaviour in general,For what cause withdrawn. was placed in the Censors, so also did they of censuring, in particular, the Knights de|baucheries and miscarriages, if they were chargeable with any such, after their Election into the Ord Equestris; for if they observed any thing in their lives, Rosin. l. 7. c. 10. contrary to hoesty and good report, they took away from them both Horse and Ring, than which a greater disgrace and dishonor could not befall them.
The Knights were not only to be circumspect, as to their own demeanour, but also obliged to be careful of their Horses; for if upon the Censors review of the publick Horses, any were found poor and lean, or that the Knight kept him not well drest, and in good order, he who owned him A. Gell. Noces Attica. l. 4. c. 12. was noted for negligence and carelesness; Lips. de re mil. Rom p. 33. Dial. 5. and if the Censors saw any blemish or impediment in them, they forth|with took them away.
But such might be their Crime, that withdrawing the Horse was not thought an agreeable punishment, for we read in Livy, that the Censors did not only take away the publick Horses from the Knights who came off safe, after the defeat at Cannae, but Lib 4. c. 18. they removed them all from their own Tribes, and wholly dis-franchis|ed them. The like did the Emperors, when, in succeeding times, they took upon them to bestow the publick Horses, in such manner as the Censors had formerly used; among whom we find, that Augustus (after he had obtained his ten Coad|jutors) exercised at one time, several of the powers belonging to the Censors, for Sueton. in l|a Aug. c. 39. be compelled every Knight to give an account of his life, and of those whose manners be approved not, be punished some, and noted others with reproach and infamy, and many with admonition, but after various kinds. So also Caius Caligula, who not only reviewed with some severity, the Musters of the Equestrian Order, but Idem in vita Caii Cal. c. 6. openly took from them their Horses, in whom was found any foul reproach or infamy. And those who were less guilty, and culpable but of smaller faults, lost also their dignity, to|gether with their Horses, albeit they avoided that publick note of disgrace, which the former underwent, from whom (as it is shewn) he openly, and in the face of all took away their Horses; for concerning these, the said Suetonius adds, Ibid. He only passed over their Names in reading the Roll. Now Rosinus, in laying down the manner and order used in ejecting such Knights, saith it was thus: A Lib. . cap. 1. recital being made by the Censor of all the Knights, that were inrolled in the Ordo Eque|stris, those whose names he omitted, Lib. . cap. 1. were thereby understood to be deprived of that dignity.
In the last place, where any of this Order had consumed their Patrimony, and had not an Estate left answerable to the Equestrian Cense, they were reduced to the same condition with those, who (for some great mis-behaviour) were de|prived of the publick Horse, and Gold Ring, Rosin. l. . c. 17. and cast into the lowest rank and Order, being thenceforth reckon'd among the Plebeians.
When the Legionary Knights had accomplished the full time of service in the Wars, appointed by the Law, and that the publick Horse had not for any crime or mis-demeanour of the Owner (all that while) been taken away from him, then was he delivered back to the Censor; the manner whereof is thus taken notice of by In vita Pompeit. Plutarch. It was the custom (saith he) with the Knights of Rome, when they had served in the Wars the time appointed by the Law, to bring their Horses into the Forum, before the Duumvirs (who were called Censors) and giving an ac|count under whom, and what Generals, or Captains, they had served, thereupon to be dismissed from further service in the Wars: an example whereof, the same Plutarch relates to have been given by Pompey himself, which was briefly thus.
In vita Pompeit. When the two Censors Gellius and Lentulus had placed themselves in the Fo|rum, to view the Knights that were to appear before them, Pompey came from the farther end thereof, leading his Horse in his hand by the Bridle (all the Ensigns of a Consul being carried before him) and passd by the Bars where the Censors sat, who seeing him so obedient in the observation of the Law, gave him great respect, after which the senior Censor thus examined him. Pompey the Great, I de|sire you to tell me, whether you have served so long in the Wars as the Law doth enjoin? To which he answered, that he had, and under no other Captain tha himself; whereupon the Censors rose up from their Seats, and accompanied him home to his House.
Iustus Lipsius De mil. Rom. p. 35. Dial. 5. exhibits the Reverse of a Coyn, which he refers to the Emperor Claudius, as made upon his reviewing of the Legionary Knights, whereon is drawn the Censor sitting in the Forum, and a Knight leading his Horse up to him, and underneath is this word CENSOR inscribed; which since I have not met with in any other Author, who writes concerning the Roman Coyns, I though ne|cessary to mention in this place; together with another Roman Coyn given us by Rom.  Gaec. Monumenta p. 165. Hubertus Goltzius. This latter might possibly be stamped by M. Tullius Decula, who was Consul with Cneus Cornelius Dolabella, in the Fastorum Rom. l. 1. sub finem. 672. year after the foun|dation of the City.
And although on the Reverse the Censor is not to be seen sitting in the Forum, as in the former, yet there is a Figure representing a Knight leading his Horse, and in the very same posture as before, which doubtless was design'd by Tullius Decula, to represent the manner of bringing a publick Horse to a review before the Censors; and to strengthen this conjecture, there is insculped on the other side, the Effigies of Servius Tullus, the Sixth King of Rome. For in regard the Tullian Family is said to be descended from Servius Tullus, in remembrance there|of, his head was stamped thereupon. Yet certainly this was not all, but that as well the Reverse was designed, to perpetuate the memory of the same King's in|stituting the Cense, and ordaining a publick Horse to be given to the Roman Knights, whereon to serve in the Wars. Albeit I am not ignorant that the learn|ed Commentator upon the Duke of Croy's Coyns (among which is set forth the very same piece) likes rather to have it represent a Consular Horse, led by a Groom; but he gives neither remarque nor observation of the use, custom, or occasion for a Consular Horse to be soled.
We shall close our discourse concerning the publick Horse, as it was the princi|pal Ensign of the Equestrian Degree, with this observation; That amongst the Ro|man Inscriptions, collected by the great industry of Inscript. An|tiq. orbis Rom. Ianus Gruterus, there are several written thus, Equo publico honoratus, Equo publico donatus, ornatus, exor|natus, which at first sight may seem to infer, that this publick Horse was bestowed as an Ensign of Knighthood, and the person thereby admitted into the Equestrian Dignity.
But these expressions ought more rightly to be referr'd to the praemia milita|ria, with which the Emperors used to recompense some particular service done, by the honor of such a gift; and therefore we conceive it necessary here to insert that cautionary note, which Salmasius gives in this very case. De re mil. Rom. p. 240. Wheresoever we read of any that have been honor'd or adorn'd with a Publick Horse, it must be un|derstood not of him who served with a publick Horse, and really took Horsemans pay, but of him on whom this honor had been bestowed by the Emperor.
From this learned Author we shall add a further observation; that Equus publi|cus (which doth often occur in old Monuments and Inscriptions) is by a won|drous, but nevertheless an accustomed speech among the Romans, taken for the person himself, Ibid. qui Equo publico meret, that is, for one of the Equestrian Order, or that served with a publick Horse; but qui Equo publico donatus, for one, to whom a publick Horse had been given by the Emperor, as an honorary reward.
Another Ensign of the Equestrian Order was a Ring: a Ring in Latin is called Annulus,  Circuitu, from the roundness of its figure, whereby the Finger, as with a Crown is incircled; It is also taken diminutively from Annus the year, from its circulating within it self: but the Graecians have derived its name from the Finger, viz. that part of the body whereon it is worn, and called it .
That it hath been very anciently used, is undeniable, seeing the Author of the Book of C. 41. v. 42. Genesis hath noted Pharaoh to have taken off his Ring (then esteemed one of his Kingly Ensigns) and put it upon Iosephs hand.
We shall not need here to exhibit the (even almost innumerable) forms and fashions of Rings, or other their various uses, as little relating to our present purpose: But for asmuch as the Gold Ring hath been used and taken as an Ensign of the Equestrian Order, and consequently reputed as a Symbol of Honor, among the Romans; as such, it falls within what we design, and therefore we shall here note a few things in relation thereunto.
When the custom of wearing Rings began first to be taken up at Rome, liny affirms, that the ancient Romans wore only the Iron Ring, Lib 33. c. 1. in princ. it being accounted by them the Ensign of Military Virtue. Nor were then Rings worn by any other, but by those Lib 33. c. 1. in princ. who had received them upon a publick account. This use of Iron Rings continued a great while amongst them, as is manifest from the same Author, who also saith, Lib 33. c. 1. in princ. that it was a long time e're the Roman Senators did wear any of Gold. And therefore all the while the Senate wore only Iron Rings, it cannot be supposed, that any of the Equestrian Order should wear those of Gold; and consequently in those elder Ages, the Gold Ring was not received, or reputed as an Ensign of their Knightly Degree.
Howbeit in process of time, we find Gold Rings were also drawn into use among the Romans; yet when they were so, we observe it was not lawful for men of any Degree to wear them, but only those to whom their use was restrained; as appears from Dion the Historian, who alledgeth, Vide Cl. Rhod Lect. Antiq. 16. c. 12 prope finem, ex Dione. That none of the ancient Ro|mans, except the Senators and Knights, were permitted to wear Gold Rings. And now was it that the Gold Ring became enobled among them, when assumed by these two Orders, which included all the Roman Nobility.
These Rings (saith Isidore) were given at the publick charge, In Origini|bus. l 19. c. 32. but not without manifest distinction; In Origini|bus. l 19. c. 32. for to the Senators Rings were given, set with precious stones to others (to wit the Knights) those made of massie Gold: which were so called (saith Licetus) De Annul. Antiq. c. 137. because they were not made hollow to receive Gems into them.
But more particularly, the Gold Ring was another Ensign of the Equestrian Or|der; Plin. l. 33. c. 1. in finem. Annuli plan medium ordinem Plebi  Patribus inseruere. Here Pliy notes it for the Symbol of the middle Degree, inserted between the Senators and Plebeians, which was that of the Appian l. 2. de  Ci|vilibus. Equites, as hath been befor shewed.
The Learned Salmasius interpreting a place in Plny, immediately following that before cited, to wit, L 33. c. 1. sub finem. Quod antea militares Equi nomen dederunt, hoc nunc pecuniae Iudices tribuunt, saith, that his meaning can be only this, Salm. de re milit. Rom. p. 239. That all per|sons who had an Equestrian Cense, that is, an Estate of Equestrian value, did comport themselves as Knights, and (when afterwards they) were elected into that Order (it was) from and by virtue of the Cense alone, Idem, in fine;  in proxima pag. qui desig|nabuntur An|nuli aurei ge|stamine. whose Ensign was a Gold Ring. Hereupon the Ordo Equestris became conferr'd by the publick Do|nation and acceptation of a Gold Ring, as formerly was wont to be done by the giving of a Horse.
And we also observe, that Tacitus doth use the phrase promiscuously, Equestri dignitate donare, and Annulo honorare, to give the Dignity of Knighthood, and to bestow honor with the gift of a Gold Ring: as where he tells us, Hist. l. 2. c. 20. that when the Army intreated Vitellius to make Astaticus, his Freedman, a Knight, he represt their unbeseeming flattery; but soon after (such was the fickleness of his mind) at a private Banquet (which In vit Vi|tel. c. 12. Suetonius saith was in Supper-time, on the first day of his Empire) he gave him what before he had deny'd, and honor'd him with Gold Rings.
Thus we see that at length Slaves were created Knights, and the Ius Annulorum, to wit, the right of wearing a Gold Ring, was given to Freedmen, no less than to Freeborn men.
But if it be inquired, why Tacitus here useth the word Annuli in the plural, Turnebus will give the reason, viz. Advers. l. 20. c. 2. That some of the Ancients who were more sumptuous and gallant, had two kinds of Rings; to wit, one for Summer, and another for Winter; and I (saith he) should judge those for Winter to have been of greater weight, the other for Summer more light; and he groundeth his opinion upon the first and seventh Satyrs of Iuvenal, who in the one calls such Rings Aestivos, or Summer Rings, and in the other Semestres, or six Months Rings.
Statius shewing that mean extraction hindred no man from attaining to Honor, and that Freedmen and Servants (known by wearing of an Iron Ring) had as|sumed at their manumission the Gold Ring and Equestrian Dignity (whereby they became equal to others of high birth) and left off the use of the Iron Ring, hath these elegant Verses.

Lib. 3. Syl|var. de Lachr. Hetrusci.Tenues nihil minuere parentes,
Atque idem in Cuneos populus cum dixit Equestres,
Mutavit genus, laevae ignobile ferrum
Exuit,  celso natorum aequavit honore.
Whereupon, one of his learned Domitius. Commentators gives an instance in Claudius Etruscus, (whom Vespasian had advanced from the condition of a Freedman, to the Equestrian Order) and notes, that the said Emperor caused him to put off the Iron Ring, which Servants and Freedmen used to wear, and to put on a Gold Ring, the note or mark of Knightly Dignity.
Salmasiu upon the words of Aurelius Victor, cited by Iulius Capitolinus in the life of Macrinus, viz. donatum Annulis aureis, saith thus, Hist. Aug. Sriptores. p. 43. Freedmen (and such a one was Macrinus) upon whom Gold Rings were bestowed, were thereby made Knights: besides he there cites the above-mentioned Verses of Statius, and thence infers, that Claudius Etruscus, the person of whom the Poet spake, was a Freed|man, whose condition the Emperor had so changed, that of a Freedman he be|came a Knight, and for Ibid. Iron Rings, such as Freedmen did wear, he gave those of Gold, which were the proper Ensigns of Knights. At length he positively con|cludes; Ibid. That whereas Knights were high-born, nevertheless he, who having laid aside his Iron Rings, and put on those of Gold bestowed on him by the Emperor, was equal to them in honor. Agreeable hereunto is that of Freinshemius, Notis in L. Flor. l. 1. c. 5. the Gold Ring was the proper Ornament of Knights, to the end they that were honored there|with from the Emperor, should be understood to be taken and received into the Eque|strian Order.
For the donation of the Gold Ring did bestow upon slaves such Priviledges and Immunities, as if they had been free-born; who being now freed from service, Salmuth. in Pancirol. Tit. 58. p. 313. in|genuitatis jura consequebantur, did thereby not only obtain the rights of Freeborn men, but encrease of Honors; Alex. ab A|lex. in Genial. Dier. l. 2. c. 19. in fine. living in such sort, that they were to bear Magi|stracy and Honors, and to sustain all Offices of freeborn Citizens, like other Free|men. And more particularly, Salmuth. Loco cit. were also esteemed to have attained unto the Eque|strian Order, or enjoyed the Priviledges equal thereunto. And all this meerly from the donation and permission of the use of the Gold Ring, upon receiving of which they Salmuth. Loco cit. left off wearing the Iron Ring, that being then (though not anci|ently) Isidor. in O|rig l. 19. c. 32. a badge of servitude and slavery; and Alex. ab A|lex loco cit. rejecting their old name also, they assumed that of Knight.
It distinguish|ed the Knights from the Se|nators and Plebeians.But as this noble Symbol, the Gold Ring, was an Ensign of the Equestrian Or|der, so was it also one of the notes or signs of distinction, to difference them from the two other Degrees, namely, Senatorian and Plebeian.
And first, though anciently while the Senators wore plain Gold Rings, we confess the Knights Rings being plain also, carried not a sufficient distinction; ne|vertheless after such time as the Senators began to adorn their Rings with Gems and precious Stones, (as is before noted) was the difference evident enough.
Secondly, they were also worn to distinguish the Equestrian Order from the Plebeian; and that the Knights used them to that end, is evident from Plin. l. 33. c. 1. sub fine, Ro|sin. de Anti Rom. c. 17. Salmuth. in Pancirol. Tit. 58. Salmas. de re mil. Rom. p. 240. Cl. Fau|chet. Crigines des Cheval. Ar|mairies  He|paux. p. 2. many Au|thors, in regard the Plebeians had permission to wear no other than Rings of Iron. The difference among the Rings of these three Orders is thus observed by Licetus, De Annulis Antiq. p. 136. Gold Rings set with precious stones were given to the Senators only, plain Rings without stones to the Knights, and Iron Rings to the Plebeians, which the said Au|thor here calls Ferrei Militares, because the aforesaid Degrees at first used the Iron Ring, Ibid. to shew themselves good Soldiers and expert in Arms. But after such time as the Gold Ring was appropriate to the Equestrian Order, the people conti|nued the custom of wearing the Iron Ring only; for albeit they enjoy'd the pri|viledge of free birth, yet because they wanted Nobility they might not wear Gold Rings, but rest contented with those of Iron.
But at length grew into common use.We are informed by Appian, that one of the Ornaments of a Tribune, was likewise a Gold Ring; the Tribunes (saith he) wore Gold Rings, among the Sol|diers, when other inferiors wore those of Iron; and lest it should be doubted that the

word  might refer to those of the Equestrian Order; Iustus Lipus clears this place, saying,De mil. Rom. l. 2. p. 87. that the words of Appian were meant only of the Infantry, in regard the Knights were of equal rank and dignity with the Tribunes.
At length, in the middle times of the Empire, it appears that the Foot Soldiers were also allowed the honor of wearing Gold Rings, no less than Knights; for L. 3 c 25 Herodian affirms, that Severus (among other Priviledges granted by him to his Soldiers) was the first, of all the Roman Emperors, who permitted them the use of Gold Rings. And afterwards, in times of greater liberty, the use of them grew far more frequent and promiscuous; insomuch (as In Genial. Dier. l. 2. c. 19. Alexander ab Alexandro noteth) that not only the Roman Soldiers without distinction, but at length the Freedmen, as also Women, and the meanest Slaves, were allowed to wear Gold Rings, which formerly was not lawful.
Among the Interpreters of Lucius Florus, we find that Zevecotius upon these words Lib. 2. c.  Modii duo Annulorum Carthaginem missi, dignitas Equestris taxata men|sur, whereby Florus observes, that from these two measures of Rings, the Car|thaginians did judge how many Roman Knights were slain at the Battel of Cannae; we say the said Zevecotius hath this observation; for the dishonor received at this overthrow, unto the time of Severus the Emperor, the use of Gold Rings was not granted in warlike Expeditions, but only to the Tribunes; and to others those of Iron, which exclusion of the Roman Knights, he conceives included in the word caeteris; but what ground he hath for this opinion we know not, since we find no such remark in any ancient Author.
For had the Equestrian Order, after the said Battel, been prohibited the use of Gold Rings abroad, until the time of Severus, doubtless Herodian had then men|tioned them to have received, not a donation, but restauration of this priviledge from Severus; besides, those he speaks of were  only the Foot Sol|diers, not Knights; moreover it was the donation of a thing  which they never before enjoyed. And therefore most certain it is, he could not intend the Knights here; since they from ancient time had enjoy'd, and (for ought we can find to the contrary) did to this time, and beyond, continue the wearing of Gold Rings abroad, no less than at home.
To conclude, that which seems very much to perswade, that the use of Gold Rings was grown promiscuous, long e're these times, to wit, before the Battel of Cannae, is this following passage of Pliny; Lib. 33 cap. 1. That there was a promiscuous use of Gold Rings in the second Punick War; and his reason is this, Lib. 33 cap. 1. If they had not been at that time worn by others, as well as Knights, Hannibal could not have sent those three Measures of Rings to Carthage.
But L. Florus, an ancienter Author than Pliny, is clear (in the place above cited) that it was only they of the Equestrian Order, who (by those Measures of Rings) were known to be slain neer Cannae, and not any other; and that there were but two Measures of them, not three, as Pliny reporteth; so that Pliny grounding his opinion for the confused or indifferent use of Gold Rings, upon the number of those Measures they are said to fill, which number by an Author more ancient is affirmed to be less; we conceive, this deduction of his hath not weight enough to be relyed on.


SECT. VII. The Ensigns and Ornaments of Knighthood among other Nations.
FRom the Romans we shall pass to other Nations,1. Shield and Launce. and first to the Germans; among whom, as Tacitus affirms, the Shield and Launce were accounted the grand Badges of Military Honor, or Knighthood, and accordingly given their young Gentlemen that were to be admitted to so honorable a Dignity: Tacit. de mo|rib. Germ. c. 2. for it was not the custom (saith he) for any one among them to take Arms, before the State

had approved him able to manage them; but then in their publick Assmblies, some Prince, or the Father, or else a Kinsman of the young man, adorn'd him with a Shield and Launce (and whom they termed in their Language Camb. Brit. p. 125.Knecht) to which Taci|tus also adds, Loco cit. That this Investiture was the Gown among them; and the first honor bestowed upon their youth.
This also saith Loco uper relat. Cambden, was the first and most simple manner of creating a Knight. This the Lombards, this the Franks, and this our Country-men, all de|scending out of Germany, in old time used: and was to us (in the opinion of the learned Gossar. ver|bo Miles. Sir Henry Spelman) the Foundation of the Knightly Order.
Much like that of the ancient Germans, was the custom of making Knights among the old Irish: for either theFroissard. Hist l. 3. c 63. King, or Father of the young man created him a Knight; and if his Father were dead, then the next of Kin did it; and the manner of creation was thus: Froissard. Hist l. 3. c 63. A Shield was hung upon a Pole or Stake, fixt in the ground, and a small Launce or Spear (such as the Youth design'd to this honor could weild) was given to him, and therewith he ran a Tilt at the Shield, and the more he broke of these Launces, the greater reputation he gain'd.
In le Thea|tre d' Hon. l. 1. c. 2. Andrew Favin notes, that the Shield and Launce were the proper Arms ap|pertaining heretofore to a French Knight, and therefore in their Capitularies, called Arma Patria; these, Esquires carried always after their Masters, wheresoe|ver they went, and what occasion soever they were engaged in.
And it is an Observation of Cl. Salmasius, in relation to the Nobility and Gen|try of France, De re milit. Rom p. 227. in pric. that at this day all the Ensigns and Marks of Honor, appertaining to persons of highest extraction, are questrian, and take denomination from the Equestrian Militia: and that the Shields and Scutes (as they are vulgarly called) in which the Arms of the Nobility are exprest, are Ibid. Equestrian Targets, not Shields or Bucklers of Foot Soldiers.
The form of the Equestrian Targets among the Romans, were inclining to an Oval, as may be seen by those cut upon Trajans Column at Rome; after which Figure, divers of our Nobility and Gentry have of late times also fashioned the Escotcheons, whereon their Arms are born: but the figure of our more ancient Escotcheons, came neerer that description which Lib 9. circa finem. Livy gives us of the Samnites shields, whose upper parts were broader, and the head of an even height, for defence of the breast and shoulders, but growing narrower and narrower, towards the bottom, finished in a point.
2. Belt.Another Ensign and Ornament of Knightly Honor is the Cingulum militare, or Military Belt, called also Balteus, or Baltheus, which Varro saith is a L. 18. Rer. hum. Tusan word, and signifies a Military Girdle. That which the Roman Soldiers wore, was made of Varro l. 4. de Lingua Lat. Leather, and adorn'd with Studs or Bosses (from whom it devolv'd to the Germans and Franks) and is in like manner described by Theat d' Hon. l. 1. c. 6. Favin, to be made of a large Thong of white Leather, having the ends pure Gold, covered and fastened with Studs of the same metall, to which the Sword was made fast on the left side.
With him doth another French Writer concur, saying, that theClaude Fau|chet, en les O|rigines des Che|valiers, c. fo 2. Incincture was made of a large Thong of Leather, and was termed Balteus, and by the French a Baudrier, which Favin affirms to be so called of the old French also.
Apud Io. Iac. Chisterium in Anast. Childeri|ci Regi. p. 197. Rudolphus Abbot of St. Trudon in Germany, speaking concerning the finding of the Body of St. Gereon Knight and Martyr, at Colen, in the Monastery of St. Pantaleon, saith that his Military Girdle was found to that time whole and entire, and that it was of black Leather, almost an Ell long: But his Sword was consum|ed, and only the pomel (of the form of an Egg) almost eaten up with rust, was likewise found at his left side nigh to his Belt.
This Ensign of Honor came in time to be richly adorned both with Gold and precious Stones, as Favin also notesL. 3. c. 1.in another place of his Theatre of Honor, out of St. Gregory Victor Arch-Bishop of Tours: as also that it was not the common wearing Girdle, inasmuch as the French in general used golden Girdles; but that the Knights wore such as were garnished with great Buckles, Studs, and Rings of pure Gold, being of great price and value; to shew their dignity and power in Military Commands: and with such a BeltMalsb. de gest Reg. l. 2. c. 6. set with Pearls and precious Stones, was young Athelstan (afterwards one of our Saxon Kings) girded, when he received Knighthood from his Grandfather Alfred.
It is to be frther noted, that by this Badge of Knighthood, were our Knights anciently known, no less than by their gilt Swords, Spurs, and golden Collars of S. howbeit it hath not for a long time been used with us, at the creation of a Knight, save only of the Bath; but instead thereof, the dubbing with a naked Sword sufficeth.
To this Belt was also added a Sword,3. Sword. and such a one, as in the esteem of some, was different from the ordinary use, and therefore is by Favin termed Theat. d'Hon|neur. l. 1. . 6. the Sword of a Knight. In time of Christianity this Sword came to be hallowed with great Ceremony, either by some great Prelate, or other Ecclesiastical Person: the form of the Benediction is to be found in thePag. 781.Titles of Honor, and in FavinsLoco ci.Thea|tre of Honor.
This among the Ensigns of Knightly Honor hath obtained the principal place and regard; for it is chiefly the Sword with which Knights are now created; and hath become so far ennobled, that the Red Cross assumed by theFrancise, de Rades y An|drada en Chro|nic. Sanctia|go. c. 1. p. 1. b. c. 4. p. 6. b. videsis Histo|ria de los Or|dimes Militares per Fr. Car de Torres. l. 1. p. 9. b. Knights of St. Iames in Spain for their Badge of Honor, is drawn in the fashion of a Sword. And the Collar of the Order of the Sword and Belt in Sweden is com|posed of Swords bloody at the point, and encompassed about with Leathern Belts; the manner and order whereof may be seen in the Plate prefixt to the third Chapter ensuing.
Another eminent Badge of Knighthood (which succeeded in the place of the Gold Ring) is the Golden Spurs,4. Spurs. wherewith at the time of their Crea|tion Knights were wont to be adorn'd; and Fr. Menen. Delic. Equest. Edit. Colon. Agrip. p. 13. these (a little after the Conquest) were added to the other Ensigns, for more and greater Ornament, and are usually carried by a Nobleman at the Coronation of our Kings, to signifie their Knighthood.
Those Spurs appointed to be made against Christmas, Anno Domini 1252. and sent to York, to be used there, at the Knighthood of Alexander the Third, King of Scots, were of Silver, Claus. an. 36. H. 3. m. 30. gilt over, and the Straps curiously wrought of Silk, in|stead of Leather.
They were usually put on after the person had been conducted and presented to the King or Prince, who gave the Honor, beginning with the right Heel; and given to signifie, Theat. d'Hon|neur. l. 1. c. 6. that the new made Knight should not only declare his valour by his Sword, but also by the management of his Horse; which he should encourage and excite with his Spurs to the carrying on of his valiant designs.
Of so great an esteem hath the Knightly Spurs been, that from thence, Seld. Tit. of Honor. p. 437. Knights Batchellors are generally called in Latin Equites Aurti, among the Germans Ritterdess Gulden Sporns, and with us heretofore Rot. Parl. 3. E. 4. Knights of the Spur. Nay one of the Military Orders was instituted under this Title: and the Delic. E|quest. p. 150 Collar of the Order of the Elephant in Denmark, is (according toDelic. E|quest. p. 150 Franciscus Mennenius) composed of Elephants and Spurs. It was conceived so proper and sutable a Badge of Knighthood, that it has been thought fit to be given for Coat Ar|mour, to some Families here in England, who bear the Sur-name of Knight: as namely to Registrum Armor. partiam borealium Angliae, tempore Regis Hen 8. penes Thom. nuper Com. Arundell.  Sur. Knight of Shrewsbury [I.] Inter Collect. Concess. Knight of Charwelton in the County of Northampton [II.] and Ibid. Knight of St. Dennis in Hampshire [III].


We further have it certified by the Kings and Heralds of Arms, Anno 10. Iac. Regis, among other rights belonging to the Degree of a Knight Baneret, that he MS. in Offic. Armor. upon the account of his Knighthood, might wear gilt Spurs, as well as a gilt sword: and that they have been accounted an Essential Badge of Knighthood, may be col|lected from the Ceremony of the degradation of a Knight, where his gilt Spurs are See the de|gradation of Sir Andr. Har|clay in Seldens Titles of Ho|nor, p. 788. first cut off with a Hatchet.
5. Collar.In the last place, although the use of wearing Collars of Gold hath been most ancient, and one of the usual causes for which they were bestowed, was to honor Military Virtue; and though among the Romans, the Collar gave a Sur-name to one of their chiefest Families, and consequently became of much esteem among them: yet do we no where find it reckoned among the Ensigns of their Equestri|an Order: But among some other Nations it was accounted a Badge and Mark of Knighthood.
De Antiqu|rum Torquibu p. 37. Iohn Schefser, from a passage out of . varior. c. 10. Pancirollus, which tells us that Golden Collars were reckon'd among the Ornaments, worn by the Roman Presidents of Provinces, would likewise have it an Ensign of Scheffer de Antiq. Torq. p. 38. Knightly Dignity among the Ger|mans, affirming withall, Scheffer de Antiq. Torq. p. 38. that the more ancient Statues and Images of their Knights, were adorned with Collars.
He also notes, as a thing observable, Ibid. p. 42. that this custom of bestowing Collars upon Martialists, was very much practised by the Germans, especially as to their Knights; and that in ancient times, such as were in repute for their gallantry and valour, were adorned therewith.
It may be safely presumed, that Collars were Badges of Knighthood among the ancient Gauls, since they were bestowed upon valiant men, and such as had rendred themselves conspicuous by acts of Prowess and Chivalry, as a worthy recompence of their Virtue: and from Pliny it appears, that the an|cient Gauls were wont to wear them in Fight, for as the said Schefser notes upon Gallos cum auro pugnare solitos, Torqua|tus indicio est. Plin. l. 33. c. 1. his words, no other thing can be understood by the word Auro than Tor|ques.
The like may be said of the ancient Scheff. Syn|tag. p. 56, 57,  5. Britans, Danes, and Goths, among whom it was customary to wear them, as denoting such as were remarkable for their valour.
But in later times, it was the peculiar Fashion of Knights among us, to wear Golden Collars, composed of SS, or other various works; so that those Monu|ments are known to belong to Knights, on whose Portraictures such Ornaments are now found.
To conclude, we must acknowledge that this noble Ensign hath been likewise honored with a particular and high estimation among the Founders of Military Orders, since it is manifest from Catalogue des Cheva|liers de l'Or|dre du Collier de Savoy dict. de l'anonciade. Francis Capre, that the Order of Savoy was at first called, The Order of the Collar, and not by the Title of the Catalogue des Cheva|liers de l'Or|dre du Collier de Savoy dict. de l'anonciade. Anunciade, until the year 1518. as will more amply appear by and by.
So that if we sum up the principal Ensigns of Knighthood, ancient, and modern, we shall find them to have been, or are, a Horse, Gold Ring, Shield, and Launce, a Belt and Sword, gilt spurs, and a Gold Chain or Collar.
But from these have later Ages, more especially, selected the Belt, or golden Girdle, Sword, Collar, Spurs, and Rings;  which we find innumerated, and particularly called the Ornaments and Ensigns appertaining to Knighthood, in some Imperial Diplomas, and wherewith the Emperor is therein said to have adorn|ed and invested his new created Knight, according to Custom; as for instance, that of Rodolph the Second, granted to Sir Robert Sherley, and dated at Prague, the second of Iune 1610. of which a fuller account may be taken in Pat. 2. l. 10. p. 1806. Purchas his Pilgrimage, where the Imperial Instrument (containing also the creating of him an Earl Palatine of the Empire, and bestowing sundry Priviledges and Preroga|tives therewith, worthy of knowing) is translated verbatim.
The Author of the Iurisprudentia Heroica has afforded an Example in this kind, in another Diploma of the same Emperors, made toPag. 403.Sir Charles Rillehe, dated at Vienna the eleventh of February, anno 1594. And there is a priviledge usually granted in these Diplomas, that the Knights shall in all Exercises, Actions,

and Enterprises, use and wear Chains, Swords, Spurs, Robes, Trappings, and what|soever Furniture else belonging to Horses, either all Gold or gilt.
The Trappings here mentioned put us in mind of a passage in Lib. 33. c. 1. circa medium. Pliny, whence it may be conjectured, that Horse-Trappings were sometime heretofore accounted part of the Ensigns of a Roman Knight; for, having told us that one Flavius a man of mean birth, had ingratiated himself with the Commons, by publishing the My|stery of the whole course of days, pleadable and not pleadable, which his Ma|ster Appius Claudius Caecus had discovered to him; he adds, that a Bill passed by general consent, to create him Aedilis Curulis, together with Q. Anicius, without any regard had to those other, who, being nobly born, had lkewise stood for that Dignity: And that at the same time he was also made Tribunus Plebis, at which the whole Senate took such offence, that they laid aside their Rings, and some thought (but were mistaken) that the Knights did the like, nay believed further, that they left off their Horse-Trappings, as if from them the name of Knight had been bestowed; and consequently the Phalerae, no less than the Annuli, or Equi, were accounted Badges of the Equestrian Order, after they were drawn into fashion and use.
However we may suppose, that the publick Horse, if at first, was not afterwards given naked; but with such accoutrements and furniture, as were both for use and ornament in War: the fashion whereof may be observed among those Sculptures upon Trajans Column at Rome, a Draught whereof was first made by Iulio Ro|mano, then set forth by Franciscus Villamena; and last of all, after a long and retchless neglect (these Plates being thrown by, and welnigh spoil'd with rust and carelesness) were happily brought to light and repaired, by the care and ex|pence of my noble Friend, accomplished with great variety of useful and inge|nious knowledge, Iohn Evelyn Esquire, during his residence at Rome.


SECT. VIII. Qualifications for Knighthood.
AS touching the Qualifications which formerly made persons capable of this Honor of Knighthood, the principal and most remarkable were these three, Merit, Birth, and Estate.
In the right distribution of this Honor and Dignity,1. Merit Merit has been by all al|lowed to challenge a principal share; and the deserving judged fittest to be preferr'd, before those who wanted that Qualification.
Among the Romans, no Soldier was denyed or envyed his part in the Prizes of Honor or Recompence, to wit, that sort of Crown, or such other of the Milita|ry Rewards which their valour had deserved; and not only their Emperors, but all other Princes found the advantage of conferring benefits on the meritorious, in being thereby best served: For those who have shewed themselves inclined to noble and valiant Actions, having once tasted the sweet of Reward, are gene|rally so encouraged, as no danger hath seem'd too great to attempt, no enterprise so difficult but might be made feasible. But of this subject there is so much spoke, and to be met with almost every where, that we need not add more.
As to the second Qualification,2. Birth. namely, Birth; there was so great cre taken, that (saith In le Theatre d' Hon. l. 1. c. 1. Andrew Favin) to prevent the admittance of any, not of eminent and generous Extraction, into this Dignity; of the Ordinances made concerning the Order of Knighthood, the first Article is, That the parties who enter thereinto, ought first to make it appear they be Gentlemen of three paternal descents; and that the Arms they bear have been born by their Fathers, Grandfathers, and great-Grandfathers.
It was also the Law of the Empire, That no man should be capable of this Dignity,

but he that was descended from one, who was Miles (which Mr. Selden interprets not by Knight, but Gentleman, or Nobilis) as appears by the Constitution of Frede|rick the Second, elected Emperor anno 1212. and mentioned in thePag. 436.Titles of Ho|nor; and perhaps there was an Eye had to this Law, in the Sentences upon the following Cases.
Nor hath it been (by some) accounted sufficient, that the person Knighted should be a Gentleman by the Fathers side, unless he were so also by the Mothers, at least she was to be a Free-woman, and not a Servant: Io. Tilius Comment. de Rebus Gallicis l. 2. p. 181. vide Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 23. for if she were a Servant or Bond-woman, though the Father were a Gentleman, the Children were still ranked within the Degree of Servitude, andIn Servum autem non ca|dit Equestris Diguitas. Ib.counted incapable of the Knightly Dignity.
Heretofore the conferring of Knighthood was not restrained to the Soveraign power, as now it is; but that the greater Subjects did sometime make Knights: But where the honor hath been given by such, to those who were Vassals to ano|ther, the bestowing thereof was accounted illegal, and they that took upon them to give it, were liable to censure; because by this action they took anothers Villain or Bondman from him, which was a manifest wrong, and ought not to be done. As in the case of the two Sons ofIo. Tilius Comment. p. 182.Philip de Bourbon, one whereof was Knighted by the Earl of Flanders, the other by the Earl of Nevers: Whereupon by an Order dated on All-Saints day, Anno Domini 1279. and another at Whit|sontide following, both the said Earls were fined, and the two Brethren con|demned to pay one thousand pounds apiece; though by the Kings grace and fa|vour they kept their Knighthoods.
And to shew that this Law was elsewhere observed more strictly, and the breach thereof liable to more severe sentences, those among the Mennen. Delic. E|questr. p. 25. Aragonians that de|scended from Knights in a direct line by the Fathers side (which were called In|fanones, and accounted Gentlemen, whether legitimate or illegitimate) were capable of being Knights, and no other: Mennen. Delic. E|questr. p. 25. So that if one, not an Infanon, were promoted to Knighthood, by a Rico Hombre (which seems to be a higher Degree of Nobility) both the Rico Hombre was to lose the Honor he had, and the person whom he pretended to promote, remained still a Villain or Plebeian.
But it was otherwise where a Nobleman Knighted his own Vassal, as in the case reported by Io. Tilius Comment. de Reb. Galli|cis. l. 2. p. 181. Philip de Beau-manoir in his Customary of the Year 1283. where the Son of a Gentleman and a Woman-Servant, was Knighted by him, whose Servant the Woman was: and his condition being afterwards discovered, the Nobleman would have challenged him for his Slave, but in regard his Knightly Dignity had vindicated him from servitude and vassallage (though his Lord was deceived in conferring the Honor) he was adjudged to remain free and a Knight; which he could not have done, if any other but his Lord had Knighted him: for which this reason is there given, Io. Tilius Comment. de Reb. Galli|cis. l. 2. p. 181.because no other person had sufficient power to infranchise him.
3. Estate.The third and last of those Qualifications, which we have thought fit to take notice of here, is that of Estate or Wealth, which serves to support the Dignity of Knighthood: for we find that in all Times and Countries, when men were grown wealthy, they thereby (as by Merit or Birth) became capable of Honors.
Thus Wealth was so much regarded among the Chalcedonians, asLib. 5. Herodotus tells us, that those who were rich, bore the name of Knights. It was Arnobius, ad|versus Gentes. lib. 4. Estate that in|titled a man to this Honor among the Romans: for the Censor (as hath been before observed out ofL. 9. c. 19. Livy) might compel any Citizen, who had an Estate equal to the Equestrian Cense, to enter into the Equestrian Order, and this old Roman Cense consisted of Plin. l. 33. c. 1. vide porro Ber|negger in Sue|ton. in Caesar. c. 33. 400000 Sesterces, which according to our learned Seldens computa|tion amounts to Titles of Ho|nor. p. 438. 3025. l. of our Money.
And as anciently in old Rome, so not long after the Conquest here in England (asBrit. p. 126.Cambden observes) were Knights dignified for their wealth, and state of liv|ing. For they who had a Knights Fee, to wit (saith he) six hundred and four|score Acres of Land, might claim as their right the Ornaments and Badges of Knighthood.
But by the way it appears from Tit. of Honor. p. 691. Mr. Selden, that not any certain number, or

extent of Acres made a Knights Fee: and by several Writs directed to the Sh|riffs of all Counties in England, to make Proclamation for receiving the Honor of Knighthood, in the Reigns of Hen. 3.  Ed. 1. as also by the Act de Militibus, anno 1. Ed. 2. it appears that the Census Militis, or valuation of the Estate of a Knight, was measured by Twenty Pounds Land by the year (and sometimes more) and this was counted the most reasonable way of Estimation, because one Acre might be more or less in value thn another.
And the Parallel yet held as to the matter of enforcement and compulsion, to take this Honor; for by an ancient Prerogative, several of our Kings, have at their pleasures compell'd such persons who held a whole Knights Fee, or so much Land, whose annual value, as aforesaid, answered thereto, to take this Digni|ty upon them; and to that purpose sent forth their Mandates in Writs, directed to the Sheriffs of each County, to make Proclamation, Claus. de an|no 9. H. 3. membr. 24. dor|s,  Claus. 1. E. 2. membr. 25. dorso. That all those, within their several Bailiwicks, who were of full age, and had one whole Knights Fee, and were not Knighted, should appear before the King (on a certain day, in the Writ set down) ready fitted and prepared to receive the Honor of Knighthood.
Sometimes these Writs included, both such as were pos|sest of Lands worth Qui habeant 20 l. librata terra, vel Feo|dum unius militis integrum valens 20 l. per annum. Claus. 37. H. 3. in. 25. dorso. Twenty pounds per annum, and such as held a whole Knights Fee, valued at that annual sum: but the yearly value set by the King was not always certain, for sometimes we find it to be Stows Abr. p. 290. an. 40. H. 3. Camb. Brit. p. 126. fifteen pounds, then Claus. 28. H. 3. m. 12. dorso. twenty pounds, at other times Claus. 5. E. 3. pars 1. m. 12. thirty pounds, then Rot. Parl. 20. E. 1. Claus. 17. E. 2. m. 8.  19 E 2. m. 16. dorso. Claus. 7. E. 3 pars 1. m. 22. dorso. Brevia Rgis an. 2. R. 2. pars 1.  par. 2. Pat. 15. E. 3. pars 1. m. 15. dorso.  Claus. 12. H. 4. m. 10. dorso. forty pounds, and sometimes Claus. 9. E. 2. m. 13 dorso. de decreto Parl. fifty pounds.
Anno 40. Hen. 3. Speeds Chron. p. 533. The Sheriffs in England were amerced, because they had not distrained all those who had such Estates in Land, as the Law limited to take the Order of Knighthood, or otherwise to pay their Fines; and we observe the Command in the Kings Writ to be now and then accompanied with much severity, in case the Sheriff should be negligent in the discharge of his duty, or connive with any for lucre of a Bribe; as appears in that directed to the Sheriff of Northamptonshire, the words whereof are.
Claus. 28. H. 3. m. 12. dorso. Rex Vicecom. Northt. salutem. Praecipimus tibi quod sicut teipsum  omnia tua diligis, omnes illos in Rallivatua, qui habeant viginti libratas ter|rae distringas, quod se Milites faciendos, citra Nativitatem Sancti Iohannis Baptistae proxim futur. Sciturus pro certo, quod si pro munere, vel aliqua occasione, aliquam relaxationem eis feceris, vel aliquem respectum dederis, Nos ita graviter ad te capiemus, quod omnibus diebus vitae tuae te senties esse gravatum. T. R. apud Wyndesor decimo quarto die Aprilis.
Where, upon appearance, after such Proclamation, a reasonable or lawful ex|cuse hath been alledged, as Pat. an. 20. E. 3. pars 2. m. 29. old age, Pat. 15. E. 3. p. 1. m. 16. irrecoverable weakness, Pat. 7. E. 3. pars 2. m. 30. loss of Limbs, being Claus. 25. H. 3. pars 1. m. 7. dorso. in holy Orders, or the like, whereby the Body was wholly disabled to perform personal service; there, the allegations have been admitted by the King, the per|sons acquitted, and by Letters Patents exempted from taking this Military Order during life.
But there were many other causes and reasons which usually obtained a suspen|sion for some certain time, (besides those set down in the Act of Parliament An|no 1. E. 2.) as where a man was at present greatly Claus. an. 36. H. 3. m 23. indebted, or bound to attend some necessary employment, as a Communia de Term. Mich. 9. H. 6. Ro. 14. dorso. Serjeant at Law in the Common Pleas Court, for which nevertheless, the party suing for such favour, paid a Fine, and therefore in some Writs we have seen a clause added, to give intimation, that (where any rea|sonable cause could be made appear, at the time of Knighthood, to impede the receiving of the Order) the person might be admitted to make Quod sin ad Nos, c. para|ti, ad capien|dum Arma mi|litaria, vel ad sinem nobiscum faciendum pro respectu haben|do de milicia sua. Fine for the respite thereof.
Yet was not this Fine constant or certain, but estimated and set according to the nature of the excuse, or length of time given: for instance, Robert de Menevil of Northumberland, having obtained respite for two years, was set at Orig. 51. H 3. m. 6. five Marks, and Peter Founden at Ib. m. . forty eight Shillings and eight Pence, for three years respite; but Iohn de Drokensford paid Orig. 7. E. 3 ten Pounds for a suspension of his Knighthood, only

for the same time. And in these cases the Kings Writ usually issued to the She|riff, with command to Claus 35. H. 3. m 2. dorso,  Claus. 36. H. 3. m 23. permit the person to have that respite, and to forbear taking any distress, till the time compounded for should be expired, and if, ne|vertheless, the person happened to be impleaded for not having received Knight|hood, the Kings Letters Patents (granting him the time of respite being produced) have been Placita coro|na in Com. Derb. coram I. de Vallibus, c. anno 9. E. 1. allowed.
If any person had been distrained by the Sheriff, and a retorn thereof made to the King, and did not appear at the time and place, in the Writ nominated, to re|ceive the Honor of Knighthood; in such case we sometimes find that a Writ hath issued, giving command to the Sheriff, forthwith toOrig. de anno 51. H 3. m. 4.seize all his Lands and Tene|ments into the Kings hands, and answer the profits thereof into the Exchequer.
The Fines and Amerciaments set upon such contempt, seem to have been arbi|trary, and the Court swayed, according as the nature of the default appeared: William the Son of Gilbert de Alton, paid Communia Fines, c. Term. Mich. 9. E. 3.20.2. Ebor. twenty shillings for not appearing and receiving Knighthood, according to the command of the Kings Proclamation; Thomas Pauncefoot paid Com. de Term. Hill. 14. H. 4. Somerset. four Nobles, Iohn de Lodbroke Communia de Term. Mich. 56. H. 3. incipi|ente 57. Warr. forty shillings, the Commun. de Term. Mich 33. E. 3.23.3 dorso. like Fine was set upon Simon de Bradeney and Thomas Trivet, both of Somersetshire, and Iohn de Neirvote in the County of Bucks; and lastly, William Lassels paid Communia de Term. Pasch. 31. E. 3. fines,  Rot. 2. Ebor. four pounds, for that he had not received Knighthood before Michaelmas, Anno 30. E. 3. and for obtaining respite for three years from thence.
But albeit in the promiscuous course of bestowing of Knighthood, where the men of Wealth and Estate (whether otherwise worthy or not) became dignified, yet was not the gate of Honor then shut against those, who wanting Riches sought her out, by the paths of Virtue and Merit: For where men of low Fortunes deserved well of their Country, and that for their good services the King had judged them wor|thy of Honor; He was accordingly pleas'd to bestow such annual Pension, or Lands upon them, as He esteemed sufficient to maintain that degree of Dignity (whatsoever it was) so conferr'd. And this is agreeable to the judgment of the Author of the Division du Monde, who saith, That the Honor of Knighthood is not to be given to any person who hath not a considerable Estate; unless sufficient means to support the Honor of that Order be also given with it.
Hence it is, that the Kings of England have allowed Pensions (and frequent men|tion of them is made in the Rolls) sometimes during pleasure, and then again during the lives of those on whom they have thought fit to confer the Honor, for their better support: as for instance, King Edward the Third granted by Let|ters Patents Pat. 33. E. 3. pars prima. m. 22. forty Pounds per annum, out of his Exchequer, to Iohn atte Lee, Queen Isabel's Steward; in auxilium status sui manutenendi, first during pleasure, and afterwards for his life.
But the case is more remarkable of Sir Nele Loring (who afterwards attain|ed the Honor to be one of the first Founders of the most noble Order of the Gar|ter) for whose valiant performances, in the Naval Fight against the French at Sluce, the King conferr'd the Dignity of Knighthood upon him, and immediately after granted to him and his Heirs Males Communia de Term. Tri. 15. E. 3. twenty Pounds per annum, that he might better maintain that Honor, until he could settle on him and them, so much in va|lue of Lands, or yearly Rents in Fee.
And here the following Grant made by King Richard the Second to Sir Iohn Walssh, of forty Marks per annum for life, to support that Dignity of Knighthood he had given him, may very well be inserted.
Pat. 8. R. 2. pars prima m. 8. Rex omnibus ad quos, c. salutem. Sciatis quod cum nos pro eo quod di|lectus  fidelis noster Johannes Walssh, nuper in praesentia nostra pro defen|sione su multum strenue fecit, prout satis est notorium, ipsum Ordinem Militarem suscipere facerimus,  Ordinem illum ei de manibus nostris de|derimus,  eum penes nos ipsos retinuerimus: Et quia ipse sufficienter non habet unde Onus cum honore valeat supportare, Dedimus  Concessimus ei Quadraginta Marcas per annum, ad terminum vitae suae, percipiend. per ma|nus Vicecomitis nostri Lincolniensis qui pro tempore fuerit, de exitibus ba|livae suae, ad terminos Paschae  Sancti Michaelis, per aequales portiones. In cujus, c. Teste R. apud Westminst. quinto die Decembris.
The Kings of England, upon the same account, did usually bestow like annual rewards on such whose merit raised them to the Degree of Baneret; and in the Letters Patents, whereby such Pensions are granted, we observe it usually exprest, ad manutenendum statum Baneretti, or words to the like effect.
Hereupon King Edward the Third gave to Sir Reginald Cobbm Pat. 10. E 3. part. 2. m. 9. four hun|dred Marks per annum, during his life, to be paid him out of the Exchequer; afterwards the Pat. 11. E 3. pars 1. Mannor of Tippenham, in Buckinghamshire, for life; and a Pat. 14. E. 3. p. 1. m. 23. Mill under Oxford Castle, with a Meadow there, called Kings Meade.
We find moreover, that Thomas de Rokeley, who in the service of this King had received the Degree of Baneret, had Claus. 20. . 3. pars 2. two hundred Marks per annum granted unto him, pro sustentatione sua, during life. To Sir Iohn Lysle (one other of the Foun|ders of the said most noble Order) Pat. 29. E. 3. pars prima m. 29.ut ipse statum Baneretti (which the King had before conferr'd on him) melius manutenere possit, he gave two hundred pounds a year during life; and upon Roger de Swynerton Baneret, He bestowed for life pro statu suo manutenendo, all thePat. 8. E. 3. pars prima. m.  Mannors, Lands, c. which, lying in the Counties of Stafford and Chester, came to the Kings hands, by the forfeiture of Hugh le Despenser, as likewise the Mannor of Barew in the County Palatine of Chester, to him and his Heirs.
And it is worthy of note, that some times such like Grants have been made by the consent of Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament; for so were theClaus. 30. H. 6. m 21.two hundred Marks per annum given to Geoffry le Scroop Baneret, in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth.
Thus far we have spoken of the Qualifications, which capacitate him, who re|ceives the Degree of Knighthood; it will not now be amiss to touch upon one particular relating to the Person, who confers this Honor, before we leave this Section.
It hath been thought by divers, that no man can make a Knight unless himself be first Knighted, and because that some have not given this Honor before they received it, they thence would imply, that no man ought: for soMath. West|minst. anno 1306.Prince Ed|ward of Carnarvan, having been first Knighted by his Father, King Edward the First, forthwith Knighted a great number more in Westminster Abbey. So Anno 20. E. 3. the King being landed at Hoggs in Normandy, KnightedStows Chron. fo. 377.Edward his eldest Son, and immediately the said Prince made Mortimer, Monteacute, Ros, and others, Knights. AndIbid. fo. 1000.King Edward the Sixth, being Knighted by the arl of Hertford, in the Tower of London, assoon as the Ceremony was over, Knighted Henry Hoble|thorn Lord Mayor of London, with the same Sword, wherewith himself receiv|ed this Military Honor.
But it is apparent enough, that they who never were, and others who never could be Knights, have conferr'd this Dignity; and we are to understand that ne|cessity and custom hath in this case the force of a Law; for anciently Bishops and Priests made Knights, so also do the Popes, and some Common-wealths, nay Women, in whom the supream Power is vested, may, and have done the like, witness our Queens, Mary and Elizabeth, and we find it to be the ancient Law in Spain, L. 11. tit. 2. partida 2. That the King or his Son and Heir, though they be no Knights, may nevertheless make Knights, by reason that they possess the Kingdom, and are therefore the Head and Chief of Chivalry, and consequently all the power thereof, is closed up and contained in the Kings command.
To conclude, in all the instances and examples, where the creation of a Knight hath been performed, either with Ceremony, or by Diploma (of which we shall speak in the next Section) it may be observed, that the Dignity was always given by, and received from the hands of another Person, except only the Kings of Spain, who Io Iac. Chif|flet. in suis lu|minibus novi praerogativis, ad vindicias Hispanias, Lu|mine 13. p. 395.time out of mind have made themselves Knights, and this by virtue of an oldLex Suprar|briensis. Law written in the Aragonian Tongue, as Ambrosius Morales reports, which saith thus: In Chron Hi|span. l. 13. c. 2.The whole night preceding the Ceremony (viz. of Knighting) the King shall watch in the Church, in the morning he shall hear Mass, and offer both Pur|ple, and some of his Money, and after he shall receive the Sacrament: And when they are going to raise him, he shall ascend upon his Shield, the Noblemen holding and sup|porting him: Then shall all cry with a loud voice three times, Real, Real, Real: This

done, he shall command to scatter more of his Money, to the quantity of one hundred shillings among the People; and to shew that no man upon earth hath any power over him, he shall gird himself with the Sword, made after the form of a Cross, and that day can no other man be Knighted.
One Example of this ancient Rite is remembred by the said In suis Lu|min. p. 397. Chiffletius, at the Coronation of King Ferdinando the Third, who took from the high Altar the re|gal Sword, and with his own hand girt himself therewith; to the end being so girded, he might shew himself openly to the People, and declare, that he recei|ved the power of Governing and making War from none but God alone, and that he owed not his Kingdoms to the gift of any mortal man.
And it seems this manner of Knighting was a thing of such remarque, that it was sometime taken notice of and entred for a memorable note of time; as for instance in the Teste of a Anno 1220 facta Charta apud Segoviam quinto Kal. Febr. Era 1258. anno regni mei tertio, quo ego memoratus Rex Ferdinandus, in Monasterio Sanctae Mariae Regalis de Bur|gos, manu propri me accinxi cingulo mi|litari. Charter, which this Don Fer|dinando made to the Monastery of De solos alvos, in the third year of his Reign, and is reported by the said Chiffletius, out of Colmenars History of Segovia, c. 20. as also by another Char|ter, wherein the Seldens Tit. of Honor. p. 577. Knighting Prince Edward eldest Son to our King Henry the Third, by Alphonso King of Castile, at Bruges anno Domini 1255. is remembred after the same manner.


SECT. IX. The various Ceremonies used at the conferring of Knighthood.
BEsides the donation of the before-mentioned honorary Ensigns, there were several Ceremonies and Formalities, begun to be used in the middle Ages, at the investiture of Knights; some of which we shall here set down by way of In|stance.
1. Girding with the Sword and Belt.The most ancient of these, is the investing of the Knight with a Belt and Sword; and this was performed, either by putting the Belt loose over the shoul|der, or girding it close about the waste: the Bend in Armory represents the one, and the Fess the other. Of this kind of Honor we have spoken Sect. 4. before.
The first Christian Kings and Princes (saith Theatre d' Honneur l. 1. c. 6. Favin) at the giving of the Cin|gulum militare, kissed the new Knight on the left cheek, and used these words, In the honor of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, I make you a Knight. And this was called Osculum pacis, the kiss of Favour or Brotherhood.
Some think this to be the same with the Accollade, or Ceremony of imbracing, which was performed by Charles the Great,Aymnius de gesis Francor. l. 5. c. 17. who (before his expedition against the Hungarians) Knighted his Son Lewis the debonair, at the City of Ratisbone; for upon the girding him with the Military Belt and Sword, he gave him the Accol|lade, that is, he imbraced him, (though it be rendred for kissing by the L. 1. c. 6. p. 51. Transla|tor of Favin) and this was the first time we observe the Ceremony of the Accol|lade to have been used.
It was in the time of the same Emperor that the way of Knighting by the Cola|phum, or giving a blow on the Ear was used, in sign of sustaining future hard|ships and indurances; which is thought to have been derived from the manner of manumission of a Slave among the Romans, where Rosin. Antiq. l 1. c. 20. first the Praetor gently struck him on the head with the Vindicta, a Rod so called, after which the Lictor did the like, and moreover struck him on the Face and Back with his hand, in to|ken of full liberty and freedom.
This Custom was retained long after both in Theat. d'Hon|neur, l. 1. c. 6. Germany and France (much like the Seld. Tit. of Honor. p. 577. Pescosada, or blow on the neck, given in Spain at the Creation of the Caval|leros de Espuela d' orada, or Knights of the Golden Spur) as appears from a clause,

in the Instrument of the Frizons Infranchisment to this effect. Mennerius de Deliciis Eque|stribus. p. 7.That the otestate or Governor of the Country should gird the Sword about him, who was to be Knighted, and then give him a Box on the Ear with his hand, with which Cere|mony he was made a Knight, he also gave him special charge and command, that thenceforth he should go armed after the manner of Knights of the sacred Empire, or of the Kingdom of France.
It is also said this Emperor ordain'd, Ios. Micheli, Marquez en le Tesoro militar. fo. 16. .that no King should succeed to the Em|pire, if he were not Knighted, as aforesaid, before his Coronation. And there is an eminent example of this formality inDelic. E|quest. p. 8.William Earl of Holland, who when he came to be chosen King of the Romans, Anno Domini 1247. preparation was first made to create him Knight, Delic. E|quest. p. 8. according to the custom of other Christian Empe|rors (before they were admitted to take upon them the Imperial Diadem) to which purpose he was presented by Iohn King of Bohemia before Petrus Capucius Cardinal of St. George, the Popes Legate, whom the King besought on the be|half of this elected Esquire (for so Earl William was yet called) that he might have the Oath of his profession administred unto him, and be inscribed into the Mili|tary Colledge: which he having taken, the King of Bohemia gave him the blow on the Ea, and then pronounced the words of signification, Tesoro Mili|tar. fo. 17.after which  girt with the Sword.
The Ceremony at large is to be found in Seldens Titles of Honor. pag. 442 443. and 444. as also in Iurisprudentia Heroica. p. 400.401.
In the time of the Saxons here in England,2. Watching and Bathing. Knights received their Institution at the hands of great Prelats or Abbots; it being the opinion of our Ancestors, that nothing so happily succeeded, as that which was performed by religious persons; in the accomplishing of which solemnity they were very punctual, by adding di|vers religious Ceremonies, as Watching, Fasting, Bathing, Conscrating of the Sword, and the like: and how solemnly these things were observed, will appear in that famous Constitution, mentioned by Ingulp. Hist. inter Rerum Anglic. Scrip|toes. London. excus. anno 196 fo. 512. . Ingulphus (speaking of Heward Lord of Brune, in Lincolnshire, who coming into England from landers (where he had lived in exile) with a considerable assistance, and force of his Friends and Fol|lowers to recover his Fathers possessions; received the Honor of Knighthood from Brand, Abbot of Saint Edmunds-bury) which being thence transcribed by our learned Tiles of Hon. p. 780. Selden, Brit. 125. Cambden, and Antiq. of War. p. 531. Mr. Dugdale, upon a like occasion, we here omit it.
Shortly after the Conquest, the Custom of receiving Knighthood from religi|ous persons began to be restrained here in England, insomuch that at a Synod held at Westminster in the year of our Lord 1102. viz. anno tertio Hen. primi it was among other things ordained, Concil. Brit. Tom. 2. p. 22. Ne Abbates aciunt Milites; by which word Abbates, we suppose is understood all sorts of spiritual persons.
However, the religious Ceremonies for the most part continued, especially the Vigils and Bathings; an eminent example whereof, we have not long after in the time of King Edward the First, who to adorn the splendor of his Court, and augment the glory of his intended Expedition into Scotland, di at Whitsontide in the four and thirtieth year of his Reign, begirt Edward of Carnarvan his eld|est Son, with the Military Belt, and this young Prince, immediately, at the high Altar in Westminster Abbey, conferr'd the same Honor upon neer three hundred Gentlemen, the Sons of Earls, Barons, and Knights. The Habit, Equipage, Atten|dants, and Ceremonies of which grand solemnity, being already transcribed at large, out of Matthew of Westminster, both by Tit. of Honor. p. 776.Mr. Selden and Mr. Brit. p. 127. Cambden, we shall thereunto refer our Reader.
But in regard their Author tells us, that the number of these Knights were about Pag. 458. ed. Lond. anno 1570. three hundred, and the old Annals of Ireland, cited by Loco cit. Mr. Selden, add one hundred ore, which was further wide of the mark; we will here out of a re|spect to truth, and the memory of those Noble persons, with such as are descended from them, take occasion to give a perfect Catalogue of their Names, which amount to no more than 267.
Only first, we shall take notice, because that part of the Ceremony, namely, Bathing, is not remembred by Matthew of Westminster, that it is not only imply'd

in the solemnity of the Vigils then held, but we find in the Accounts of the great Wardrobe, for the aforesaid year, among the Robes and other Ornaments ap|pointed to be prepared for the young Prince, that there were six Ell of Cloth de|livered out for the covering of his Bath.
The religious Ceremonies of Bathing, Watching, and offering up the Sword at the high Altar, are retained amongst us at this day, but restrained only to that peculiar Degree of Knighthood, which from hence hath the denomination of Knights of the Bath.



The Names of all the Knights made at Whitsontide, anno 34. E. 1.

Ex Rot. Com|pot. Io. de Dro|kensford Custo|dis mag. Gard|robae Regis, pe|nes Rememo|rat. R. in Sca|cario remanen|tibus.DOminus Edwardus
Princeps Walliae.
Iohannes de Warenna.
Edmundus de Arundel.
Thomas de Greilly.
Iohannes de la Ware.
Thomas de Ferers.
Bartholomeus de Enfeud.
Iohannes de Moubray.
Alanus Plokenet.
Aungerus filius Henrici.
Gilbertus de Clare filius Domini Thomae de Clare.
Edmundus de Cornubia.
Iohannes de Frivill.
Willielmus de Freigne.
Amaricus de Fossad.
Fulcius filius Warini.
Walterus de Hugeford.
Stephanus de Burghash.
Iacobus de Nortwoode.
Humpfridus de Waldene.
Rogerus de Chaundos.
Iohannes de Deen.
Willielmus de la Zouche.
Ricardus Lovel.
Rogerus de Mortuomari.
Walterus Hakelut.
Rogerus de Ransou.
Galfridus de Seye.
Richardus Porteseie.
Egidius de Breheus.
Walterus de Mollesworth.
Rethericus de Ispania.
Petrus de Gavaston.
Thomas de Verdon.
Humfridus de Bassingbourn.
Nicholaus Kryell.
Robertus filius Roberti fi|lii Pagani.
Iohannes de Harecourt.
Iohannes filius Domini Iohannis de Sulleye.
Willielmus Tracy.
Hugo filius Domini Hugo|nis le Despenser.
Willielmus de Huntingfeud.
Thomas Bardolp.
Nicholaus Malemeyns.
Robertus de Scales.
Willielmus Trussel.
Iohannes de Hants.
Willielmus de Monteacute.
Thomas de Multon.
Walterus de Montgomeri.
Rogerus filius Domini Ro|geri de Mortuomari.
Eustachius de Whyteneye.
Iohannes Mautravers.
Thomas de Veer filius Co|mitis Oxoniensis.
Thomas de Lodelawe.
Willielmus de Bernyngham.
Griffinus filius Griffini de la Pole.
Willielmus de Lodelawe.
Philippus de Courtenay.
Vrianus de Sancto Petro.
Warinus de Bassingburn.
Iohannes le Blount Major London.
Iohannes Denre.
Iohannes de Insula.
Thomas de Lucy.
Radulphus de Botetourte.
Hugo de Mailly.
Radulphus de Kamoys.
Petrus filius Domini Petri de Malolacu.
Edmundus de Willington.
Robertus de Kendale.
Henricus de Den.
Iohannes de Nevill.
Rogerus de Ingelfeld.
Hugo Braboef.
Iohannes de Weston.
Iohannes filius Warini.
Thomas de Ponynges.
Iohannes de Foxley.
Iohannes de Walkingham.
Willielmus de Harden.
Radulphus de Weden.
Iohannes de Meryeth.
Radulphus de Rolleston.
Iohannes de Manduit.
Thomas de Boiville.
Willielmus Corbet.
Willielmus Brabason.
Georgius de Thornetone.
Iohannes de la Penne.
Iohannes de Bykebyry.
Willielmus de Cosyngton.
Radulphus Bagot.
Willielmus de Bassinges.
Andreas de Sakeville.
Nicholaus Pershots.
Morganus ap Mereduk.
Vmfridus de Boune.
Walterus de Skydemore.
Iohannes Chaundos.
Walterus de Derlyngham.
Walterus de Stirkelonde.
Iohannes de Clyndon.
Ingelramus Belet.
Laurentius de Hollebeche.
Iohannes de Stauntone.
Iohannes de Wachesham.
Iohannes de la Mare.
Hugo Howel.
Willielmus de Menymrate Socius Amenrey de Fossad.
Willielmus Pyrot socius Stephani de Burways.
Iohannes Sauvage.
Philippus de Vyreley.
Robertus Lovel.
Adam Walran.
Iohannes de Penbrug.
Rogerus Pychard.
Henricus le Moigne.
Robertus de Lcy.
Iohannes de Boillaunde.
Iohannes de Guyse.
Willielmus Motoun.
Rogerus Waleys.
Philippus le Lou.
Iohannes de Hinton.
Iohannes de Twyford.
Richardus de Breheus.
Stephanus de Cobbeham.
Iohannes de Haulo.
Thomas de Sanwico.
Iohannes de Mounteney.
Robertus le Conestable.
Iohannes Marteyn.
Iohannes de Bello Campo.
Robertus de Ros.
Radulphus Basset.
Petrus de Grisle.
Thomas Malorie.
Richardus de Sculton.
Willielmus de Haundesacre.
Iohannes de Thouthorp.
Walterus de Romeseye.
Iohannes de Ruda.
Petrus de Bosoun.
Nicholaus de Geneville.
Iohannes de Knoville.
Iohannes de Lacy.
Willielmus Bernak.
Richardus Daniel.
Robertus de Wygkham.
Robertus Achard.
Willielmus de Herppeden.
Iacobus de Lambourne.
Iohannes Mauncel.
Robertus de Wyvill.
Philippus le Rous.
Iohannes Comyn.
Iohannes de Somery.
Iohannes de Lungevill.
Iohannes de Harpefeld.
Egidius de Astele.
Iohannes de Boivill.
Henricus filius Conani.
Rogerus de Burton.
Iohannes de Multon.
Godefridus de Meaux.
Iohannes de Plescic.
Edmundus de Plescis.
Willielmus de Hollande.
Henricus de Rypsford.
Thomas de Zedefen.
Iohannes de Lyngeyne.
Rogerus de Bavent.
Galfridus de Colevill.
Iohannes filius Iohannis Mautravers.
Iohannes Conquest.
Willielmus de Stopham.
Radulphus de Dryby.
Thomas de Grey.
Robertus de la Mare.
Thomas Corbet.
Iohannes de Heryk.
Robertus de Hoo.
Iohannes de Lacy.
Willielmus de Manneby.
Iohannes de Mortone.
Gerardus de Aillesford.
Gilbertus de Aton.
Ricardus de Berley.
Iohannes de Neubourgh.
Iohannes de la Poille.
Robertus filius Guidonis.
Hugo Hose.
Willielmus de Goldington.
Walterus filius Domini I. de Insul.
Thomas de Brompton.
Willielmus de Wrotesle.
Richardus Huwys.
Robertus de Hildyard.
Iohannes de Kyrkeby.
Thomas de Leukenore.
Petrus de Evercy.
Warinus de Scartil.
Gerardus de Vfflet.
Petrus de Burgate.
Robertus de Fandon.
Willielmus de Saustone.
Iohannes Mauleverer.
Willielmus de Lucy.
Rogerus de Chedle.
Hugo de Dulton.
Iohannes de Haveryngton.
Rogerus de Somerville.
Adam de Walton.
Nicholaus de Sheldon.
Willielmus de Weilonde.
Walterus de Fauumberg.
Nicholaus de Rye.
Rogerus de Grymeston.
Henricus de Erdyngton.
Willielmus Dautrie.
Iohannes de Launey.
Iohannes de Ryson.
Henricus Beausun.
Rogerus filius Domini Thomae Corbet.
Hugo de Pykeworth.
Baldewinus de Colne.
Robertus de Skale.
Henricus de Biry.
Richardus de Bermyngham.
Walterus le Poure.
Thomas de Bechum.
Walterus filius Humfridi.
Edmundus Pecche.
Iohannes de Treiagu.
Richardus Foliot.
Richardus de Echebaston.
Robertus de Godemauston.
Adam de Everingham.
Iohannes de Wassingbourn.
Adam de Wanerville.
Willielmus de Somercotes.
Thomas filius Domini T. de Chaworth.
Radulphus de Kele.
Petrus de Lekeburne.
Hugo filius Henrici.
Iohannes de Salsbiri.
Richardus de yvers.
Iohannes filius Iohanis de Wegetone.
Iohannes le Rous.
Georgius du Chastel.
Willielmus de la Motefacto.
Willielmus de Bayons.
Willielmus Marmyon.
Willielmus Rosel.
Iohannes de Langeton.
Willielmus Littebon.
Iohannes de Pabenham.
Thomas Mordac.
Iacobus de Norton.
Iohannes de Belhous.
Brankaleo de Boloigne.
Iohannes Pykard.
Walterus de Kyngeshevede.
Robertus de Watervill.
Rogerus de Kerdeston.
Iohannes de Daventre.




These Religious Ceremonies were not alone observed here in England, by the Saxons and Normans; but also by the Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 6. c. 14. French, Spaniards, and other Nations abroad.
Concerning the first of these Iean du Tillet, a French Writer in his Memoirs saith, Lib. 2. f. 277. a vide Io. Tili Comment. de reb. Gall. l. . p. 180. That the old French, being observers of Forms and Ceremonies, in most of their acti|ons, brought in many Customs to be observed at the making of Knights, enjoin|ing them before the Solemnities, to Watch, Bath, and do other things, to

teach them, that upon their taking of this Order, it did behove them to be pure of heart and mind, and of virtuous inclinations, valiantly to suffer for virtues sake, all manner of pains and necessities, to be circumspect in word and deed, and above all to observe Faith and Truth.
And much to the same effect, but more particularly to the Ceremonies used, In le Thea|tre d' Hon. l. 1. c. 6.Favin tells us, That the proof of Nobility being made (after the manner which a little before he sets down) the Esquire prepared himself to receive the Order of Knight|hood, watching the night before in the Church or Chappel, with devout Prayers and Meditation: When morning came, he entred into his Bath, to wash and make clean his whole Body, whereby he was given to know and understand, that in all his following life time, he ought to be neat and clean, as well of Body as Soul, honest in his Man|ners, and behaviour of life, wholly disposed to imbrace Virtue, and to use in all his actions, Modesty, Providence, and Wisdom.
And that the like religious Ceremonies were heretofore (about the time of Alphonsus the Tenth) observed in Spain at the Creation of Knights, whether they were Cavelleros de Espuela d' Orada, or Armados (which are no other than our Equites Aurati, or Knights Batchellors) may be seen in the Pag. 576. Titles of Honor, our learned Selden having collected and transcribed thither the manner of such Crea|tion, from the Spanish Partidas; and is briefly thus.
The Person that was to be Knighted was Bathed on the Evening, and presently laid in Bed, then clothed in rich Robes, and led to the Church, to perform his Vigils; that being over, and Mass heard, his Spurs were put on, and his Sword girt unto him, then drawn out, and put into his right hand; whereupon the Oath was forthwith administred to him, which taken, he that bestowed the Dignity, gave him una Pescoade, a blow or stroke on the neck, saying, God assist you in the performance of that which you have promised.
3. Taking an Oath.To the aforesaid Ceremonies of creating a Knight, an Oath was for the most part adjoined, which drew its original from the Military Oath, imposed anciently upon the Roman Soldiers, several particulars of which are collected by Honor Mili|tary and Civil. l. 1. c. 5. Sir Wil|liam Segar, sometime Garter, principal King of Arms.
This Oath or vow of Profession Theat. d'Hon. neur. l. 1. c. 6. Favin observes to have been at all times, and in all places, continually uniform and alike; and to the same purpose cites a passage out of Saint Hierom, relating to Nepotianus, who had the Military Belt bestowed upon him, to the end, That he should relieve and protect Widows, Fatherless, the op|pressed and miserable, and these particulars, together with the defence of the Church of God, made up afterwards the substance of the general Vow, which for a Knight to observe and keep, and to perform all that belongs to the Order of Knight|hood, was (as Tiles of Ho|nor. p. 851. Mr. Selden observes) esteemed as meritorious, as to do all that a Monk, Frier, or Canon regular should.
In the aforesaid Example of William Earl of Holland, it is particularly mention|ed, that at the request of the King of Bohemia, he might have the Vow of his profession administred; whereupon the Cardinal Petrus Capucius, gave him ad|monition, what a Knight ought to be, in an Acrostick, according to the Etymo|logy of his name Miles, thus,
Mennen. De|lic. Equest. p. 9.
Magnanimus in adversitate,
Ingenuus in consanguinitate,
Largifluus in honestate,
Egregius in curalitate, 
Strenuus in virili probitate.
Among the religious Ceremonies of making a Knight (called sometimes conse|crare Militem) set down by Mr. Selden, Favin, and Petrus Blessensis, there is par|ticular mention made of consecrating the Sword, offering it at the Altar, and re|ceiving it again from thence; which manner of reception from the Altar, was an implicite kind of taking an Oath, as may be deduced from the said Petrus Blessensis, who saith, Epist. 94. That Candidates in his time received their Swords from the Altar, that they might profess themselves the Sons of the Church, and that they received the Sword, to

the honor of the Priesthood, defence of the poor, punishment of Malefactors, and de|liverance of their Country.
Lastly, at the institution of those Christian Orders of Knighthood, erected for the defence of the Holy-Land (which we shall in the next Chapter discourse of) the Knights entred into a solemn Vow and Oath, chiefly to propagate, and sight in defence of the Christian Faith, and to repel the violence and cruelties of Pagans and Saracens.
In fine, among the various Ceremonies performed at the admission of Knights, in all the several Orders and Societies of Knighthood, whether Religious or Secu|lar, which have been erected; there are none esteemed greater, or ought more solemnly to be observed, than the taking of an Oath.
It was in the times of Peace and great leisure,4. Dubbing with a Sword. that the before-mentioned solemn and tedious Ceremonies, used at the making of Knights, were observed; whe|ther by great Princes in their own Courts, or by Ecclesiasticks in the Church: but much otherwise in times of War, or on a day of Battel, where the hurry and throng of Affairs, gave not time for so long and troublesome Ceremonies: And therefore, aswellInstances in both are to be found in Iuris|prudentia He|roica. p. 391.392.393  394before the joining of Battel, as after Victory obtain'd (theIo. Tilius Commentar. de Rebus Gall. l. 2. p. 181.one to encourage and stir up the Valor and Virtue of gallant men to overcome, or if they dyed in fight, to give their bodies the Honor of Knightly Enterment: the other to reward the eminent prowess, and valiant performances of those that hap|ned to survive) it was usual for the Prince or General, in the Field and sight of the whole Army, to give those whom he thought fit to advance to the Honor of Knighthood (they humbly kneeling before him) a Flecti genu ante Principem Candidatu, ab oque leniter nudo Ense in humero percu|titur; addit.  verbis solenni more concepis. Aub. Miraeus, Orig. Ord. E|quest. p. 1. Vide Sander. in Fland. illustrat. Tom. 1. p. 12. stroke with a naked Sword, flat-wise upon their shoulders, or else to touch their heads or shoulders lightly as aforesaid, without any other Ceremony, except pronouncing the Si Eques in nomine Dei,  postea addit, Surge Eques, or as in French Su vel soi Chevalier a nom de Dieu. words of Creation, which latter kind of Ceremony is used in Europe at this day, it supply|ing all the rest: and this we commonly call Dubbing, the old English word used for creating of a Knight.
As touching those Ceremonies, used at the making of a Knight in Scotland, which are chiefly dubbing with a Sword, and putting on urs, together with the particulars which the Knights Oath contains, see our learned Seldens P. 850.851 Titles of Ho|nor, they being for substance, much the same, with what the Knights of former Ages either swore or profest.
The Benediction of a new Knight, at the time of his Creation by the Pope, or those, whose power in this particular is derivative from him, as it is set down in the Pontificale Romanum, may be found there; or in the said P. 445. Titles of Honor, whi|ther it is transcribed.
But there is another manner of creating of Knights abroad,5. Bestowing of Royal Co|dicils. namely, by Royal Codicils, or Letters Patents (these the Spaniards call Privilegios de Cavelleria) and thereupon such Knights are intituled, Quo  suo diplomate (quod suae dignita fidem facit) Codicillares appellare otes Vinc. Lupan de Magistrat Francorum. l. 1. Equites Codicillares; and this without any actual Ceremony or Solemnity; for the Codicils were chiefly design'd, to supply the ordinary way of Dubbing, to those who dwelt in remote Countries, yet under the Dominion of the Prince that bestowed the Honor.
In these Instruments, the Emperor or King is said thereby, to make and create them Knights, willing and intending that thence-forward they should be held and reputed for such; and moreover grants, that they shall, in all their acts and affairs, enjoy all the Rights, Liberties, and Franchises, accustomably due to all other Knights, throughout all his Dominions, aswell also in the same form and man|ner, as if the person had been actually Knighted by his own hand.
Of this manner of Creation, two Presidents are exhibited by the Author of the Pag. 395. Iurisprudentia Heroica, the one granted by Philip the Fourth King of Spain, to Sir Philip Ryckewaert, Councellor of his Council of Brabant, dated at Madrid the twenty seventh of October 1663. and the other by the present King, namely, Charles the First, and Mary Anne Queen Regent, to Pag. 394 Leon Iean de Pape, Coun|cellor also, and Advocate of the Exchequer, of his said Council of Brabant, dated likewise at Madrid the sixteenth day of December Anno Domini 1665.
These Royal Codicils have sometimes (though very rarely) extended so far, as to make this Knightly Degree hereditary, which being unknown among us, in

the Dignity of Knighthood (though that of Baronet comes something neer it) a few Examples may be worth mentioning.
We have met with two of these Diplomas in the time of Charles the Fifth, Em|peror of Germany, whereby this Dignity or the Degree of Knight of the Roman Empire (as therein it is called) is granted by him (20. Nov. 1553.) to Iurispr. He|roica. p. 64. Sir Stephen Prats of Barcelon, and made to reach to his posterity, which then, or afterwards, should be born. As also another of the same Emperors, made to Pag. 410. Lucas de Broyart, the twenty fourth day of September 1540. that extends much farther, to wit, not only to himself and Children, born or to be born, their Successors and Heirs, and the Successors and Heirs of their Children, born in lawful Matrimony, and carrying the Surname of Broyart; but also to all those who should marry any of the Daughters of the said Luke, or the Daughters of his Sons, their Successors or Heirs.
There are besides Examples of Grants in this nature, which take in the Colla|teral Lines, as in that ancient Diploma, which Sir Edward Bysshe Knight, Cla|renceux King of Arms, hath transferr'd to his Pag. 24. Notes upon Vpton, where it ap|pears, that Raymond Viscount of Turine, anno 1219. granted to Rodolph de Bessa, that he and his Nephews (Sons to his Brother Ademar) and their Successors should be Knights, and enjoy all the Priviledges and Honors of Knights: This is the an|cientest that I have met with of this sort; to which there is another in that place adjoined, whereby Maximilian the Emperor granted the Dignity of Knighthood to Pag. 25. Thomas Salernitana, President of the Council of Naples, and to his seven Bro|thers therein named, and their Sons born or to be born, and their Male descen|dants in infinitum.
But there is one Example of greater rarity, in relation to the creating of Knights, than any yet remembred, viz. by the bare signification of a Kingly Letter, without using either any of the afore-mentioned Ceremonies, or granting Letters Patents under Seal to that purpose. Of which kind the Author of the Iurispru|dentia Heroica, gives an instance worthy taking notice of: where Pag. 28. Philip the Fourth King of Spain, the fifteenth of Ianuary 1633. conferr'd upon all the Cap|tains that had behaved themselves valiantly in the defence of Mastricht (then lately besieged by the Hollanders) and remained faithful to the Spanish interest, to wit, Pag. 28. to those of them that were Gentlemen, the title of Knights; and to others that of Gentlemen.
Having thus briefly shewed the various forms of Creation of Knights Batchelors, if any be further desirous to know, what were the ancient Rites and Ceremonies, used at the making of Knights Banerets among us, the Example of Sir Iohn Chan|dos, in the Reign of King Edward the Third, will give sufficient information, which being at large recorded by Chron. l 1. c. 137. Sir Iohn Froisard, and from him by Brit. p. 124. Cambden, and Tit. of Honor. p. 790.  791. Selden, it will be needless to transcribe them hither. With what Ceremony also the Duke of Burgundy made the Seigneur de Sans Baneret in Flanders, is re|ported by En le Thea|tre d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 12. Andrew Favin.
But in later times it appears, that he that was advanced to this Honor in the Field, Videsi Camb. Bri. loc. cit. Seld. Tit. of Ho|nor. p 790. Gloss. Spelm. in verbo Baneret. vide eiam Cokes 4. part of Insti|tues. p. 6.  lib. E. in Of|fic. Armor. fo. 89. went between two senior Knights, with Trumpets before them, the He|ralds carrying a long Banner called a Penon, with his Arms painted thereon; and so was brought unto the King or his Lieutenant, who bidding him good success, commanded the end or tip of the Banner to be cut off, that of an oblong it might become a square, like the Banner of a Baron: this done, he returned back to his Tent, conducted as before.
In the last place, there are many and various Ceremonies performed at the Crea|tion of a Knight of the Bath, as appears by the Formulary thereof in old French, in|serted by Sir Edward Bysshe, among his Pag. 21. Notes upon Vpton, and in English by Wil|liam Dugdale Esquire, Norroy King of Arms, into his Pag. 531. Antiquities of Warwick-shire; to which we refer our Reader for a full view, as we do in all other like Cases, where things at large may be readily had, purposely to avoid the swelling of this discourse, beyond what is necessary. We shall therefore close with this observation, that the Knights of the Bath, made by the present Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, to attend him at his Coronation, were created with the principal of all

those Ceremonies noted in this Section, and appointed to Knights Batchellors, both in former and later times, which to compleat their Honor, were jointly united and placed upon them: for they Watched and Bathed, they took an Oath, they were girded with a Sword and Belt, and lastly Dubbed by the King, with the Sword of State.


SECT. X. Of the Dignity, Honor, and Renown of Knighthood.
BEfore we conclude this Chapter, it will be necessary to subjoin something con|cerning the Dignity, Honor, and Renown appropriate to the Knightly Order; whereunto, though enough might be said to fill a Volume, yet to avoid tedi|ousness, we shall touch only upon the principal and most material.
Of all Virtues those that have gain'd the highest honor and repute, are the Military, hereupon saith De Privileg mil. p. 6. G. Acacius Evenkelius, a Noble modern Writer; It is not without great reason, that in all renowned and famous Common-wealths, which ever were, great honors and profits have been proposed to military persons, and in conse|quence we hear of several Prerogatives, Priviledges, and proper Rights granted to them, above other men; yea it will appear, not only living, but also after death, having died for the Common-wealth, they are still honored, in a high degree, and ever to be honored. And to the great honor of Baldwinus Pulchrobarbus, Earl of Flan|ders, it is remembred, Sander. in Flandr. illust. Tom. 1. p. 12. that he conferr'd many Prerogatives upon the Knightly Dig|nity.
But of all the Titles of Honor, Knighthood (being a Degree above common Honor) must be acknowledged the first and most principal, derived from the field and military services; whose very Name and Title (as Delic. Equest. p. 1. Mennenius affirms) seemed to include somewhat of magnificence, beyond what he was able to express, and something more excellent than Nobility it self; and which, as it were, mounting the Royal Throne, becomes the assertor of civil Nobility, and sits as Judge at the Tribunal thereof.
Our learned Brit. pag. 126. Cambden notes from some of our Law Books, that Knight is a Name of Dignity, but Baron is not so: and he there adds the reason, Brit. pag. 126. For if heretofore a Baron had not received the Order of Knighthood, he was written simply, and plainly, by his Christian Name, and the Name of his Family, without any addi|tion, but that of Dominus; which term is as much attributed to a Knight: But the Title of Knight seems to be an adjunct of Honor, since Kings, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Barons have coveted the Dignity, together with the Name. And to this the aforesaid Mennenius (for the greater Honor) observes, that in ancient Charters, the Dell. Equest. p. 17. Titles and Names of Knights may be seen to be set before Barons.
Sander. in Fland. illu|strat. loco cit. The Degree of Knighthood is of so great splendor and fame, that it bestows Gen|tility, not only upon a man meanly born, but also upon his descendants, and very much encreaseth the honor of those who are well descended. 'Tis a Maxim laid down by a learned Civilian, Andr. Tira|quel. de Nobi|litate. c. 8. f. 43. That Knighthood enobles, inasmuch, that whosoever is a Knight, it necessarily follows, that he is also a Gentleman. For where a King gives the Dig|nity to an ignoble person, whose merit he would thereby recompence; Florentin. de Therriat. de la Noblesse civile p. 188. He is understood to have conferr'd whatsoever is requisite, for the compleating of that which he bestows. And therefore in some instances Sect. 8. before, where though this Honor had been conferr'd on Vassals, no way capable thereof, and for which both the Givers and Receivers were put to Fine, the Knights were esteemed so enobled by the action, as to be adjudged fit to keep, and retain the Dignity, and to remain free from Vassalage and Servitude. Hereto also agrees the Common Law of England, which saith, Glanvil. l. 5. c. . Bra. l. 4. f. 198. . If a Villain be made a Knight, he is thereby immediately in|franchised, and consequently accounted a Gentleman: And this is the same with the

Roman La, where the donation of a Gold Ring (the Symbol of Knighthood) to a slave, enobled him with all the Priviledges, belonging to one Free-born, as hath been Sect. 6. before observed.
It is manifest of what reputation and esteem the Equestrian Dignity among the Romans, was with Maecenas, who though his descent was Maecenas atavis edite Regibus. Hor. Carm. l. 1. Ode 1. great and high, and though the Tunc Vrbs Custodiis Praepositus. C. Maece|nas, Equestri, ac splendido genere natus vir. Vellcius Patere. l. 2. c. 88.  Dion. l. 55. Custody of the City, was for a long time committed to him by Augustus, whose Salmuth. Notis ad Panciroll. de Novis repertis. p. 315. Chan|cellor he also was, and that he lived his chief Favorite; yet would he not rise beyond that Dignity, but . dyed a Com|panion of that noble Order:Augustus bellis civilibus Cilnium Maecena|tem, Equestris Ordinis cunctis aud Romam,  Italiam Praeposuit. Tacit. l. 6. in princ. and is by Horace called Maecenas Equitum decus. l. 3. Ode 16. Maecenas Caesarianus Eques. Matt. lib. 10. Epigr. 73. the honor and glory of the Roman Knights.
In later Ages it hath been accounted so full, and so com|pleat an Honor, that men were not so often advanced from Knighthood, as from a meaner degree, to higher Titles and Dignities; and that those of the chiefest quality and rank, even Kings and Princes, have been so far from taking it to be a diminution to their Honor, that such of them, as were invested with this Order, took it as an accession thereunto, their other Titles shewing more their Dominion and Power, this their Valor and Cou|rage, as may be properly instanced in Otho. Frisin|gensis. l. 1. c. 32. Geysa King of Hungary, who waging War with the Austrians, was by the Bishops (when he came into the field) Armis accinctus, girded with Arms, that is Knighted; and in like manner, Leopold Marquess of Austria, Ottacher Duke of Stiria, and Frederick Duke of Austria and Stiria, so also Godfrey Duke of Brabant (with Henry his Son) solemnly re|ceived the Order of Knighthood, before his Expedition to Hierusalem. So Hier. Blancus in Hist. rerum Hispanic. Peter King of Aragon, was girt with the Military Girdle, from Pope Innocent the Third anno Domini 1204. the Emperor Lamb. Schfnaburg. in Chronico. Henry the Third, was made Knight by the Bishop of Breme, and our Malmb. de gest. Regum. l. 4. p. 67. b. Edi. Lond. 1596. William Ru|fus by Lanfranke Arch-Bishop of Canterbury.
But to proceed yet a little farther in Examples of this na|ture, Kings themselves have been Knighted, not only by in|feriour Princes, but sometimes by their own Subjects, as Lewis the Eleventh of France, at his Coronation, by Renat. Chopin de domanio Fran. l. 3. ti. 26. Sect. 13.  Marthe de la Ma|son de France l. 1. p. 60. Philip le bon, Duke of Burgundy. Francis the First, immediately after the memorable Fight at Marignan, neer Millan, by Perrus Ter|raiius Baiardi Dominus. Iurisprudentia Heroica. p. 386. vide Mezeray Hist. de Franc. p 390.  Io. Tilius Commentarior, de reb. Gall. l. 2. p. 181. Pe|ter Baiarde: Of our own Nation, King Edward the Third, by Sir Rich. Ba|kers Chronic. p. 127. Edit. 1665. Henry Earl of Lan|caster, King Henry the Sixth, by his Uncle Lib. N. p. 79. Iohn Duke of Bedford; King Henry the Seventh, by the Earl of Bakes Chro|nic. p. 321. Arundel, and lastly, King Edward the Sixth by Stws An|nals p. 1000. Ed|ward Seymour, Earl of Hertford, afterwards created Duke of Somerset.
And though it is commonly said, Append. Mon|straleti apud Chapp. de do|manio Franc. l. 4. tit. 26. Art. 13. p. 574. That all the Sons of the French King are Knights, assoon as they receive their Baptism; nevertheless Glossar. verbo Miles. Sir Henry Spelman (from Goropus) seems to contradict this opinion, by informing us; that they were not judged worthy of the Kingdom, unless they had been first solemnly ad|mitted into the Knightly Order. And we elsewhere find, that the Hier. Blancus. Royal Heirs of Aragon were suspended from the Crown of that Kingdom, until they had received the Honor of Knighthood.
To this purpose, the usage and fashion of the time shortly after the Norman Conquest is considerable, when our young Princes were sent over to neighbour|ing Kings, that from them they might receive this Honor; Thus was our Rog. Hoved. Annales. p. 280. b. Edit. Land. 1596. vide I. Lesleus de Reb. gest. Scot. l. 6. p. 223. Edit. Rom. 1578. 4^o. Henry the Second, sent to David King of Scots, and Knighted by him in Carlisle, and Math. Paris. Hist. Anglicana. p. 890. Edit. Lond. 1640. Walsingh. in Ipodigma Neustriae. anno 1254. Edward the First, at the Age of fifteen years, to Alphonsus the Eleventh King of Castile, for the same Dignity.
In like manner did Foreign Princes repair hither to re|ceive the Honor from our Kings; as Anno 6. Hen. 7. vide Rog. Hoved. p. 281. Malcolne King of Scotland, and Math. Paris. p. 231. Alexander Son of William King of Scotland, Knighted by our King Iohn, anno Domini 1212. So was Ib. p. 829. Alexander the Third, by our King Henry the Third, on Christmas day at York anno 1252. and Stows Abrev. p. 290. Magnus King of the

Isle of Man, by the same King. All which sufficiently demonstrate the great Renown of Knighthood, and the honor and esteem which was ever had for that Order.
The estimation of Knighthood may be yet further manifest from divers expres|sions, in that part of an Edict (transcribed by Tit. of Ho|nor p. 445. Mr. Selden, out of Goldastus) which Conrade King of the Romans sent to those of Palermo, to give them notice he had received the Order of Knighthood; which he did after this manner,Tit. of Ho|nor p. 445.That although he ought not to want the Ensigns and Tokens of Military Honor, considering the nobleness of his Birth, and greatness of his Dignity (he at that time swaying two Scepters) yet because he had not as then received the Military Girdle (established by venerable Antiquity) he did chuse to adorn himself therewith in that Month of Au|gust (wherein the said Edict passed) to the end, that from thence the lower of his victorious years might put on the Ensigns of greater valor, and the excellency of this new Militia renew the lustre of original Nobility. What peculiar respects Knights have had paid them in our own Nation, Mr. Selden hath collected from our legal proceedings, and set down in his Titles of Honor, pag. 783, 784, 785, and 786.
In the close of this Chapter,Declarations of Knighthood we think fit to insert a few memorials of that ad|ditional favour (in augmentation of the Knightly Honor) which some of our Kings have pleas'd to afford those Strangers, on whom they have conferr'd the Dignity of Knighthood; and to make it more known and publick, given Declarations thereof under the Great Seal of England (where the person so honored made sute for the same) whereby they have declared and attested, that willingly, and of their own accord, they have given and conferr'd on them the Degree, Honor, and Title of a Knight, as due to their Virtues and Merits; to the end, that those per|sons should be esteemed and ranked in the place and number of Knights, aswell among their own Subjects, as in their own Countries, and also by all persons elsewhere; no less than themselves should esteem any other honorable and wor|thy men, adorned with the like Honor from other Kings and Princes.
The first that we have met with in this kind, was given by King Henry the Eighth, to Sir Gregory de Caalis, born of a Noble Family in Rome, on whom in consideration of his Virtues and Merits, the King had bestowed the Honor of Knighthood; as may be collected from a Billa signata an. 11. H. 8.Warrant directed to the Cardinal Arch-Bishop of York his Chancellor, to make out Letters Patents under the Great Seal, as well of the said Order of Knighthood, as of the Grant of an annual Pen|sion, of two hundred Crowns of Gold per Annum, during his life; for the better and more honorable maintenance of that Dignity.
His late Majesty of ever blessed memory, King Charles the First, having Knight|ed Sir Iames Cats, Doctor of Law, Syndick of Dort, and Ambassador extraordi|nary to his said Majesty from the States General of the Vnited Provinces; was also pleas'd (26^o Ian. 1627.) to give him a Ex R. pees W. Hutchinson gen. An 1641. Declaration thereof, under the Great Seal of England, to notifie his being such, not only with us here, but in his own Country, and elsewhere.
And sometimes there hath past in these Letters Testimonial, a kind of Ennoble|ment to their Posterity (where that hath been before wanting to the Family) which the King in regard of the Knights great Virtue and Merits, hath thereby rais'd into that Degree, Title, and Dignity of Gentleman; as may be seen by thoseEx R. pees W. Hutchinson gen. An 1641. Letters Patents, granted to Sir Lewis Van Alteren, eldest Son to Simon Van Alteren, Lord of Iaervelt, and Councellor in the Court of Admiralty of Amsterdam, dated the twenty ninth of Ianuary anno, 4. Car. 1.
The like Ex R. pees W. Hutchinson gen. An 1641. Letters Patents of Declaration of Knighthood and Ennoblement of Posterity, were shortly after (viz. 26. Feb. following) given to Sir Peter Pau, Son of Sir Adrian Pau, Lord of Hemsted, and then extraordinary Ambassador from the aforesaid States General.
But in some others, this declarative Clause, of having bestowed the Dignity of Knighthood, hath been much more contracted, then in the Precedent before remem|bred, and the testimony of donation only, and that briefly express'd: as in those Letters Patents made forth to SirEx R. pees W. Hutchinson gen. An 1641. Aloysus Contareni, Leiger Abassador for the

State of Venice, to King Charles the First, 20. Iuly 1629. as also to Sir Ex R. pees W. Hutchinson gen. An 1641. Peter Paul Rubens, Secretary to the King of Spain, and one of the Privy Council in Flanders, 15. December 1630. to both of whom he thereby also gave augmentation of Arms.
With these before mentioned, may be here also inserted a few Examples, testify|ing the Creation of a Knight from abroad; such like Royal Declarations being of|tentimes granted by the Emperors of Germany, and other Foreign Princes, to the Knights they have Created, both for the same reason, and upon the like ground, as is before noted.
Such was that Imperial Diploma of Rodulph the Second, Emperor of Germany, given at his Court at Prague, the second of Iune 1610. whereby he declared to have See the Di|ploma at large in Purchas Pil|grimage part. 2. l. 10. p. 1806. created and ordained Sir Robert Sherley (our Countryman) a true and lawful Knight, to have received him into the State, Degree, and Honor of Knighthood, to have girt him with the Sword of Valor, and adorn'd and invested him with the Robes, Ensigns, and all other Arms and Ornaments, appertaining to the Order of Knight|hood, according to the Imperial Custom: Decreeing moreover, by his said Im|perial Authority, that for the future he should be esteemed, reputed, named, and honored for a true and lawful Knight, without lett or contradiction, and might use, possess, and enjoy all whatsoever Honors, Prerogatives, Ensigns, Priviledges, Freedoms, Favors, and Liberties, which the rest of his Knights, the Knights of the Roman Em|pire, as also the Knights of S. Iohn of Hierusalem used, possessed, and enjoyed, in what manner soever; either of right or custom, none whatsoever forbidding the contrary.
There is transcribed into the Pag. 403. Iurisprudentia Heroica, a like Diploma at large, and almost in the same words, granted to Sir Charles Bellehe by the same Empe|ror; in which it is also testified, that Pag. 405 he had by the stroke of his Sword, and Imperial word, made, created, nominated, and constituted him a Knight, and invested him with the Ensigns of the Equestrian Order, and other Ornaments ap|pertaining thereto; and by virtue and force thereof, did decree unto him the Ho|nors, Ensigns, and Priviledges, which other Knights did use, possess, and enjoy, without any impediment or contradiction.
Lastly, the Diploma of Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, made to Sir Henry St. George Knight, late Richmond Herald at Arms, when he was employed to carry the Ensigns of the most Noble Order of the Garter to that King (and tran|scribed by See the Titles of Honor. p. 459. Mr. Selden) is worthy of mention here: Wherein his Creation into the Dignity of Knighthood, is testified to have been solemnly performed in the view of the whole Army, and thereby is given and conferr'd upon him all Ho|nors, Priviledges, Immunities, Liberties, Rights, Preheminences, and Ensigns whatsoever, which at any time, according to the Custom of any Place, had been granted to this Order of Knighthood; so that he might publickly use, pos|sess and enjoy the same, in the presence of all men, and among all Emperors, Kings, c. without any prohibition, either in word or deed. And moreover, this King, as a greater testimony of his favour, did thereby grant unto the said Sir Henry, an augmentation of the Royal Arms of Sweden, to be born and used by him and his descendants.
Certificates of Knighthood.Something like the Royal Declarations before remembred, are those Attesta|tions and Certificates of Knighthood, made, as occasion requires, instead of Codi|cils, by some of the Kings, and Heralds of Arms in Flanders, for manifestation and truth, no less than perpetual memory of the Creation, and the Honor there|by accruing to them, and their descendants, who have actually received the Dignity of Knighthood, to the end they might be acknowledged and reputed for Knights, and enjoy and use the Honors, Priviledges, and Prerogatives, due to that Degree, with other Knights.
Two such Declarations are set down in the Pag. 397.  98. Iurisprudentia Heroica, the one made on the behalf of Sir Hierom Sandelin (Knighted at the solemn entrance and inauguration of Philip then Prince of Spain into Antwerp) the twelfth day of September in the year 1549. and subsigned by Iean de Arroyo, Claude Marion, and Gerard de Marbais, Heralds of Arms to the said Prince; the other by Sir Anthony Beaulincourt Knight, Toison d'or, Principal King of Arms, Henry de la

Tour, Brabant, Estienne de Morez, Haynau, Claude-Marion, Bourgoigne, Iean de Demedrano, and Piere de Vernois, also Kings of Arms to Philip the Se|cond, King of Castile and England, for Sir Roland Longin, who was Knighted by the said King at Antwerp, the twenty third day of Ianuary, Anno Domini 1555. where a Chapter was then held, for the Election of Knights into the Order of the Golden Fleece.



CHAP. II. OF THE Religious Orders OF KNIGHTHOOD in CHRISTENDOM.

SECT. I. Of ancient Societies analogous to the Orders of Knighthood.
ALthough the Orders remembred in this and the next Chapter, may seem to have had their original from the Equestrian Order among the Romans; nevertheless, we may observe from Stories yet more ancient, some things bearing proportion or resemblance to these modern Societies of Knighthood. And this, though we do not take any great notice of certain old Rabinical Comments, concerning the Anakim, or Sons of Anak, who (according to De Ecclesia nte Legem. l. 2. c. 8. p. 207. Edit. Paris. 1630. 4^o. Bouldouchius) were a Society of valiant men, imagined to have been so called, not from Anak, as being the name of any person, but as they were Torquati, Knights, endowed with a Chain or Collar, Anak signifying as much as Torquis; and the Order there|of to have been instituted at the building of the City of Hebron, which City was before called Ioshua. c. 14 v. 15. Kiriath Arba, i. c. the City of Arba; who is said to have been the c. 15. v. 13. Father of Anak, namely the Father or first Institutor of Anak, or the Order of the Collar.
What will such, as are apt to give way to ingenious Fictions and Conceits, fancy of the Argonauts, who went in quest of the Golden Fleece (a Catalogue of whom you have in Apollonius Rhodius, Orpheus, and Valerius Flaccus) but that they were a Company of Grecian Knights (the principal whereof were Castor and Pol|lux, Telamon, Orpheus, Hercules, and Hylas) who entring into a most honorable Fraternity, or Association, made an Expedition to Colchi, under Iason their su|pream?

What of the Argolic Youths, that hunted the Caledonian Boar; but a So|ciety of Knights combin'd under Meleager their head or chief? Much like to which, of later times, were those Martial Followers of Charles the Great (first Em|peror of the Western Franks) in his Expedition against the Saracens that invaded Aquitain, who (especially the chief of them, Orlando) are so renowned by that excellent Poem of Lodovico Ariasto; as also those that accompanied Godfrey of Bulloign, to the Conquest of Ierusalem, celebrated by that Heroic Poet Torquato Tasso, in his Ierusalem Liberata: both which Stories are true in the main, how|ever flourisht over and interlac'd with Fancy and Fiction.


SECT. II. The Christian Institution of Knightly Orders.
BUT waving further instances of this nature, we shall touch upon the occa|sion of founding Societies and Orders of Knighthood, in the times of Christia|nity. The grounds of their Erection were several and different (though all termi|nated in one common end) among which the principal were these that follow.
First, a perfect and sincere love to Honor, and a regard had to the prudent ma|nagement and continual advancement of Military Affairs; and therein chiefly to excite and promote Virtue, and to confer on it a sutable Reward.
Such was the Design of King Arthur of Britain; who Praefatio ad Lib. Nigrum. being wonderfully de|lighted with the valiant emulation and military experience of gallant and worthy men (in whose policy, strength, and industry he might confidently and safely rely, if need required, in all urgent and hazardous enterprizes) enjoined such as had especially signalized themselves by their Martial Actions, a freedom and familiari|ty, not only with one another, but even with himself: And further, to honor and reward their valour and desert; he formed himself and them into a Body and Fel|lowship, which he stiled Knights of the Round Table.
Upon which account also the Military Orders of the Oak in Navarr, the Gennet in France, the Crown Royal among the Frizons, the Dove in Castile, and the Bear in Switzerland, took their beginning: and hitherto may be referr'd the foundation of the most Noble Order of the Garter, as shall appear anon.
Secondly, it is not altogether from our purpose, that the generality of Romances, and several modern and heroic Poems (some of which are before remembred) make such frequent metion of Knights Errant, riding up and down to encounter Pagans; for another famous cause of erecting Knightly Orders, sprung from this oc|casion, namely, the Incursions and Robberies of the Saracens and Barbarians: to repel the violence and cruelty whereof, to vindicate the oppressed, redeem the injured and enslaved, to give entertainment and relief to Pilgrims and Stran|gers, were part of the Duties to which the Knights Hospitallers, Templers, and those of Saint Iames in Gallicia, stood engaged by their first foundation.
A third reason was to fight in defence of the Christian Faith, against Pagans and Infidels, to propagate the Christian Territories, and to promote the service of the Catholick Church; which was the chief cause why the Orders last men|tioned were instituted, as also those other of the Holy Sepulchre, Calatrava, Al|cantara, St. Saviour of Mount Royal, our Lady of Montesa, of Christ in Portugal, and the Sword-Bearers in Livonia.
And indeed, these were the main inducements that engaged them, and many other Orders of Knighthood (instituted in the Christian world) to do famous things in the cause of Religion: So that their holy zeal may be said to have very far contributed to the propagation and advancement of the Christian Profession; since generally the Knights of these Orders have employ'd themselves in the ser|vice of God, and spent their blood in the defence of his Faith, against Saracens, Turks, and Vnbelievers.
Lastly, when Soveraign Princes found themselves imbroiled in Wars or dan|gerous Factions, a fourth reason of erecting such Orders, was, that they might by such a Tye (as the Combination of many valiant Knights into a Fraternity) restore Peace, quiet all Jealousies, unite Affections, and secure unto themselves the alliance of lasting friendship and powerful assistance, both for their own, and their Countries safety and defence. Hereupon do the Orders of the Dragon in Hungary, of the Ermin, as also the Knot in Naples, and of St. Michael in France, seem to have been erected.
And to what end were the Badges of such several Orders devised, but to be di|stributed as Pledges of remembrance, that thereby the sincerity of their love who had united themselves into a Brotherhood (if at any time it should grow cold) might be quickned and renewed, and their Friendship increased and established? So that though humane occurences might occasion a distance between them, as to their persons, yet were these Ornaments as so many Remembrances of the Faith and Oath whereby they were contracted into one Body; and consequently of the harmony of minds and affections that ought to be among them.


SECT. III. The division of Knightly Orders into Religious and Military.
HAving thus briefly toucht upon some general grounds and causes, for in|stituting Orders of Knighthood in Christendom; before we proceed to a par|ticular account of the Orders themselves, it will be further necessary to acquaint our Reader, that the Knights of these Orders have been more especially divided into two kinds, namely, Religious or Ecclesiastical, and Military or Secular; which division we shall likewise follow in this place, beginning with the Religious, for the same reasons, that in all Degrees of Honor, which are esteemed of an equal rank, the Ecclesiastick hath been allowed to precede the Temporal.
But we find, that there hath risen much dispute among the Canonists, touching several of those which we are to marshal under the title of Religious (or as gene|rally they are called  Crucis in|signi. Cruciseri) to wit, whether they be truly and properly Re|ligious or not. The Arguments on both sides are numerous, and therefore we shall refer such as are desirous of a particular satisfaction in the case, to a late Treatise, written by De Ordin. Mi|litar. Disquis. 2. Quest. 2. sect. 2.  3. Edit. Lugduni. 1668. Andreas Mendo, a Iesuit, who hath judiciously contracted the Arguments, and cited the several Authors both of the Affirmative and Nega|tive part; thinking it enough here, to give this following short account thereof.
Those Knights who have taken upon them the three solemn and substantial Vows of Religion, namely Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, (that is, (1.) Obedientia prast and a Magistro, nibil pro|prii tenendum, a Castitas quantum seri potest tenenda. Pantal. de Ord. Joannit. reb. gest. l. 1. p. 19. Not to hold or possess any thing properly or peculiarly their own, nor to dispose thereof, but with the licence or allowance of the Master,Vide etiam la Regla y tablecimientos de la Cavallera de Santiago de Espada fo. 65. a. or Chief of the Order. (2.) To keep themselves single, chaste, and undefiled with Women. And (3.) to submit to the commands of their Ma|ster, and to the Rules and Statutes of their Order) they are (we say) without contradiction Mich. Anton. Frances de Eccles. Cathe|dralib. l. 5. n. 248. truly and properly ac|counted Religious, and have been numbred among Religious and Ecclesiastical persons, and consequently in spiritual concerns, exempt from all spiritual, or other Jurisdictions (except the Masters or Prelates of their own Order) as are the Knights of St. Iohn of Ierusalem.
But such of these as have permission to contract marriage, and are either married or may marry, and do prosess Con|jugal Chastity, viz. La Castidid conjugal a de ser, que con sola su mger,  convengan. La Re|gla de Santiago. f. 65. a.to enjoy only their own Wives; are not by some, simply and absolutely, called or esteemed Re|ligious,

but S. Thomas. 2.2. Q. 184. Art. 4. re|spons. ad tertium. secundum quid, and improperly; of which sort are those of the Orders of St. Iames,Vide M. A. Frances de Eccles. Cathedra|lib. loco citato. Calatrava, Alcan|tara, and Montesa, in Spain, and many others. Neverthe|less, Flav. Cherubinus Compend. Bullar. Tom. 3. p. 50. Constit. 41. Schol. 2.  Tom. 1. p. 7. Const. 5. Schol. 2.others conceive these aswel truly Religious, seeing they vow Conjugal (though not strict and absolute) Cha|stity; and this is the opinion of most.
And in truth, the Vow of severe Chastity is not in this case wholly discharg|ed, but only dispensed with; and that of Conjugal imposed instead thereof. For the Popes never changed or abolished the religious state of Knights, but only di|spensed with them as to Marriage; whilst in other things they made no alteration, but lest them whole and entire.
And therefore, since we observe those Knights, who vow absolute Chastity, and those who profess Conjugal, have alike received their approbation from the Papal See, and that some Knights have not been accounted Ibid. Tom. 1. p. 21. Cost. 1. Schol. 2. Religious, before such time, and until their rule of living hath been confirm'd to them from thence (as is noted by those of St. Lazarus) after which Confirmation, all that enter in|to any Order, are subject to the particular Rule, so approved of, unless for good cause, they be Si in votis aliquis est laxatus, id ex Pon|tiicis dispensatione dimanat, qui potuit Reli|gionis verae naturam conservare adhuc post praestitam dispensationem. Andr. Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 2. Quest. 2. sect. 2. n. 44. dispensed with: For these reasons we shall place both under the Title of Religious or Ecclesiastical Knights, in the following Discourse.


SECT. IV. Of Ecclesiastical Foundations dependant upon Military Orders.
BUT the Institutions of those Orders, purely Military, were after a while thought too weak to continue long, if not sustained by Religion and Piety, and too defective, without adjoining Ecclesiastical persons thereunto. Therefore the Founders, considering, that in all Councils and Affairs, there should be a concur|rence of Divine assistance and Military industry, began to dedicate them princi|pally to the Honor and Worship of God, or to our Saviour, or to the blessed Vir|gin, or some other of the Saints; thereby to gain no less the protection and fa|vour of the Divine goodness, on the behalf of the Founders, and Knights Compa|nions of such Orders in general, than its especial assistance in their Councils, Af|fairs, or particular Enterprises: And this they supposed more easily obtainable by the interposition of men eminent for their sincerity, piety, humility, and de|votion, set apart and appointed to say Prayers, sing Psalms, and perform other Ecclesiastical Duties (the efficacy of Religion, consisting in the Offices of the Priests) for the glory, fidelity, peace, and safety of their Kingdoms and Subjects, and the good success of their Military Undertakings.
Hereupon some of them, at their first Institutions, joined sacred Orders to their Militia, and made provision for Ecclesiastical persons, whose assigned Duty was to undertake the spiritual warfare, and spend their time in Divine Offices and Devotions at home, in their several Foundations, for the prosperity of those un|dertakings, wherein the Knights Companions themselves were engaged abroad, ei|ther as to the defence of Christian Religion, their Prince, or Country.
Hence was it, that ourOrd. Stat. Garteri Art. 4.King Edward the Third, at the first Institution of the most Noble Order of the Garter, appointed, within the Chappel of Saint George at Wyndesor, Ord. Stat. Garteri Art. 4. thirteen secular Canons, and thirteen Vicars, there to attend the cele|bration of Divine Offices. In like manner did Catalog. des Cheva|liers de l'Ordre du Coller de Savoy, dict. de l' Annunciade. a Turin. 1654. Amadis the Sixth, Earl of Savoy, who, when he had instituted the Order of the Collar (since called of the Annun|ciade) founded also the Chartreuse of Pierre Chastle in Bugey, wherein were enter|tain'd Catalog. des Cheva|liers de l'Ordre du Coller de Savoy, dict. de l' Annunciade. a Turin. 1654. fifteen Priests, and they obliged to celebrate, every day, fifteen Masses.



THE Severall ENSIGNES of the RELIGIOVS ORDERS of KNIGHTHOOD mentioned in the second Chapter






Upon the same account were erected certain Statut. T.sn d' . A. 20. foundations of Divine Service, in the Ducal Chappel of Dion, in the Dutchy of Burgundy, by Philip Duke of Burgundy, Founder of the Order of the Golden Fleece; and likewise in the Church of le Mont. S. Michel in Normandy, did Stat de l'Or|dre Monsieur S. Michel Archang. Art. 19. Lewis the Eleventh of France, ordain to be celebrated the Divine Service, and other Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, re|lating to the foundation of the Order of Saint Michael, by him instituted.


SECT. V. A brief account of the Religious Orders of Knighthood.
NOw come we to deliver a short account of the Religious or Sacred Orders of Knighthood, to which shall succeed those that are purely and compleatly Military; in both which we shall principally take notice (1.) Of the Time of their Institution, (2.) By whom founded, and (3.) The Habit, and Ensigns, be|stowed upon each of them; proceeding according to the antiquity of each Or|der's Foundation, as we can best discover it, and allowing their Precedency here, for that cause rather than any other.
But forasmuch as the Institutions of some of these Orders of Knighthood, are en|deavoured to be made more ancient than there is good ground to believe; we have therefore thought it needless (having for the most part confin'd our Dis|course to the three particulars now mentioned) to engage our Pen too far, where 'tis almost impossible to set the Chronological part right, and may very possibly give an occasion of Offence.
We have taken in all the Orders that we could meet with, though some were obscure, and but short-liv'd, and others, for other reasons, may be thought in|considerable; judging them worthy of a place here, with the most famous and known, seeing once they had such in the Register of Honor.
Lastly, where the occasion is inserted, whence (as is affirmed) some of them took their Original, and this lookt upon as fabulous and romantick: We must inform our Reader, that we take not upon us to justifie all that is spoken to this point; but suppose we have dealt fairly and candidly with him, in placing our Authorities in the Margent, and there lest them to be considered of, where we hope they will be of strength, at least sufficient to support the Text, and justifie our integrity.

The Order of the Knights of the Holy Spulchre in Ierusalem. (1.)
This Order of Knighthood, though not so ancient as some would make it (who refer the Original to Barthl. de Saligniaco in inerari su terrae sanctae. St. Iames Bishop of Ierusalem, to Ios. Micheli Marquez in Tesoro Militar de Cavalliera. fol. 14. b.  fol. 15. a. Con|stantine the Great, and to Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 197. Charles the Great) nor so late as Andr. Mend, de Ord. Milit. Dis. 1 Quest. 2. Sect. 3. n. 22. others would have it, who say this Order was founded in the year of our Lord 1110. yet is it accounted the most ancient of all those Orders which took beginning in the Ho|ly Land; and as a judicious Divine of our Nation reports, was instituted in the year Heylins Csmogr. l. 3 p. 109. 1099. at such time as the Temple of Ierusalem was regained from the Saracens: which account perhaps he ground|ed upon the date given to the ancient Statutes of this Order, established at Ieru|salem on Delicia Equ|strium. p. 213. New-years-day in the year aforesaid, and published by Mennenius.
As to the person by whom this Order was founded, he refers it to Cosmogr. loc. cit. Philip King of France, but En le Theat. d' Honneur. l. 9. c. 4. Andrew Favin will have it to be Baldwin the First, King of Ie|rusalem: For there having been (while the Saracens possest that City) certain

Canons regular of the Order of St. Augustine, to whom they permitted the Cu|stody of the Holy Sepulchre of our Lord, and whose Convent adjoined thereunto; These Theat. d'Hon. loco cit. Canons (saith he) did King Baldwin make men of Arms, and Knights of the Holy Sepulchre, and ordained that they should nevertheless retain their Theat. d'Hon. loco cit. White Habit, and on the breast thereof bear his own Arms, which were, Carol Seging in Tresor. He|raldique pag. 115 Seb. Pet. Sanctus in Tess. Gentilit. pag. 260. vide St. Marthe's. Argent, a Cross Potent Or, between four Crossetts of the same, commonly called the Ierusa|lem Cross. Their Great Master was the Patriarch of Ierusalem, who had power granted from the Founder, to confer the Order, and to receive the three Vows, of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience.
The chief Duty whereunto these Knights were obliged by their profession, was to guard Ios. Micheli Tesoro Militar. de Cavalleria. fl. 15. a the Holy Sepulchre, the custody whereof was peculiarly commit|ted to them, Mennen in Delic. E|quest. p. 42. to ight against the Saracens and Infidels with all their power; to relieve and protect Pilgrims; to redeem Christian Captives; to hear Mass every day; to recite the hours of the Cross, and to bear the five Mennen in Delic. E|quest. p. 42. red Crosses, in memory of the five wounds of our Saviour. They had their Rule confirm'd to them by I Lud Gotho|frid. in Archon|tol. Cosm. l. 3. p. 1. Andr. Asendo, loc. supra cit. Pope Innocent the Third.
When the Christians were driven out of the Holy Land, these Knights retired into Europe, and seated themselves at Pantaleon de Ord. Ioannit. reb. gest. p. 95. Perugia in Italy, after which, by consent and permission of the Soldan, the Pantaleon de Ord. Ioannit. reb. gest. p. 95. custody of the Holy Sepulchre was committed to the Franciscan Fryars. The Knights then in being, retained yet their white Habit, but changed their ancient Arms to a Sansovin. Ori|gine de Cava|lier. f. 22. a. Aubert. Mirae|us, Orig. Ord. Euest. p. 46. juxa impres. 1638 double red Cross.
By the Favin. Theat. d' Hon. l. 9 c. 4. Mennen Delic. Equest. Is. Mich. Tesoro Milit. locis cit. Sylvest. Mauro|lico in Mare Oceano, de utte le Religioni del Mundo. p. 232. Bull of Pope Innocent the Eighth, dated the 28. of March 1484. they, and all their Goods were annexed and incorporated, to the Knights Hospitalars of St. Iohn of Ierusalem, then remaining in the Isle of Rhodes, (since more com|monly known by the Title of Knights of Malta) as being under the same Vow and Rule.
But it was not long e're his Successor Favin. Theat. d' Hon. l. 9 c. 4. Mennen Delic. Equest. Is. Mich. Tesoro Milit. locis cit. Sylvest. Mauro|lico in Mare Oceano, de utte le Religioni del Mundo. p. 232. Pope Alexander the Sixth, anno 1496. transferr'd to the Papal See, all power of conferring this Order of Knighthood, publishing himself and his Successors to be the Great Masters thereof. He further Favin. Theat. d' Hon. l. 9 c. 4. Mennen Delic. Equest. Is. Mich. Tesoro Milit. locis cit. Sylvest. Mauro|lico in Mare Oceano, de utte le Religioni del Mundo. p. 232. empowred the Guardian of the Holy Sepulchre (his Vicar-general) to bestow the same upon Pilgrims and Travellers to the Holy Land; the Formulary for receiv|ing of which, is set down at large by Delic. Equest. p. 43. Mennenius, and Thea. d' Honneur. loc. citato. Favin.
Afterwards, Philip the Second, King of Spain, used his endeavours to restore this Order in some of his Dominions, to which end, several of these Knights assembled in the Church of St. Catharine at Hochstraten in Brabant (in Cameracensi Diocesi) and by their Diploma, dated the 26. of March 1558. (exhibited by Delic. Equest. p. 214. Mennenius) elected the said King, Grand Master of the Order; but this design took no effect.
Of latter times, there was another attempt to the like purpose, made by Favin. Theat. d'Hon. l. 9. c. 4. Charles Gonzgo of Cleve, Duke of Nevers, in the year 1615. and this also, up|on the application of the Great Master of Malta, to Lewis the Thirteenth of France, came to nothing.


The Order of Hospitalars of St. Iohn Baptist in Ierusalem. (2.)
Before the Latin Christians had taken the City of Ierusalem from the Saracens, certain Monast. An|glican. Tom. 2. p. 497. ex Hist. Antio|chenal. 18. c. 3.  4. Pantale|on, de Ioanni|tarum rebus gestis l. 1. p. 3. Sylv. Mourolico in Mare Oceano Religionum. p. 121. Christian Merchants of the Kingdom of Naples, who traded into Syria, and the Holy Land, with Commodities most acceptable, because most rare and strange, to the Inhabitants of those Countries, obtained leave from the Caliph of Aegypt, who then had the Dominion thereof, to Monast. An|glican. Tom. 2. p. 497. ex Hist. Antio|chenal. 18. c. 3.  4. Pantale|on, de Ioanni|tarum rebus gestis l. 1. p. 3. Sylv. Mourolico in Mare Oceano Religionum. p. 121. erect a small and convenient House, for the entertainment of themselves and their Country-men, which they built before the Patriarchal Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Ierusalem; together with as small an Oratory, dedicated to the Blessed Virgin Mary.
Alf. Cincon. de vita  gestis Paschal. 2. l. 1. p. 357. Roma 1601.To them repaired certain Monast. An|glican. Tom. 2. p. 497. ex Hist. Antio|chenal. 18. c. 3.  4. Pantale|on, de Ioanni|tarum rebus gestis l. 1. p. 3. Sylv. Mourolico in Mare Oceano Religionum. p. 121. Canons of the Order of St. Augustine, conducted by an Abbot from Naples, who in a short time built another Oratory, in honor of St. Mary Magdalen: that of the Virgin Mary being appointed for the entertain|ment

of Men, and that other of St. Mary Magdalen, for the reception of Women. And not long after, to wit, in the year of our Lord Monast. An|glican. Tom. 2. p. 497. ex Hist. Antio|chenal. 18. c. 3.  4. Pantale|on, de Ioanni|tarum rebus gestis l. 1. p. 3. Sylv. Mourolico in Mare Oceano Religionum. p. 121. 1048. they restored the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.
But the confluence of Pilgrims and Travellers, growing very great, and these places already built, too narrow for their reception, they Cassan. Catalog. gloria mundi, pars 9. Consid. 4. erected a large Hospital in that very place Caenavi Dominus cum Apostolis,  nunc ibi domus illa,  qua incepi Ordo, qui dii|tur Hospitalariorum. Abulensis in Com|ment, Epist. D. Hieronymi ad Paulam. c. 7. where our Sa|viour celebrated the last Supper with his Disciples, for the better entertainment of Strangers, that travelled thither upon the account of Devotion; (who for want of a place to lodge in, did usually, in the night time, fall into the hands of the Saracens, that Pantal. de Ord. Ioannit. c. l. 1. p. 4. rob'd and murder'd them) as also to re|lieve and cure the diseased among them. So that at length, in regard of their great Charity, and friendly Hospitality, as also for that these religious persons took St. Iohn Baptist for their Patron (to the honor of whose Name, a Chappel or Oratory was built there also) they obtained the Title of Andr. Favin. Theat. d' Hon|neur. l. 9 c. 5. Brethren Hospitalars, of St. Iohn Baptist of Ierusalem. But some are of opinion, that this Hospital was dedicated to the memory of Pantaleon lo|co citato. St. Iohn of Cyprus, who in the Reign of Phocas the Emperor, was Bishop of Alexandria, and so charitable and liberal in bestowing Alms,A. Mirus O|rig. Ord. Equest. p. 3. that he obtained the name of Iohannes Eleemosynarius.
Calvisius in his Chronology sets down the Institution of this Order, to be in the year 1092. Others refer it to the year Sansovin. Orig. de Cavalieri. fo. 13. a. Gio. Pietro de Crescenzi Presid. Roman: parte 3. l. 1. p. 496. 1099. when one Gerard, a Native of the Province of A. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quest. 3. n. 108 Tholouse, and a man of holy life and piety, came to Ierusalem, in the time of Godfrey of Bouillon, and out of zeal upon sight of the pla|ces trodden by the feet of our Saviour, and sprinkled with his blood, built this Hospital (which became the first and chief Seat of this an|cient Order) and devoutly ministred to the necessities of the poor. After a while he Vitriac. a|pud Miraeum. adjoined to himself some honest and religious men, and received the regu|lar Habit of Black, wearing on the outside thereof a White Cross.
King Favin. en. le Theat. d' Honneur. l. 9. c. 5. Baldwin the First, conferr'd on them large Priviledges and Franchises, permitting them to manage Arms, as did the Canons Regulars, Guardians of the Holy Sepulchre, and anno Favin. en. le Theat. d' Honneur. l. 9. c. 5. 1104. instituted them to be Knights. So that they, who before were pious and liberal towards Pilgrims and diseased persons, be|came at length the examples of true and Christian generosity: Their Cassan. Cata|log. glor. mun|di, pars 9. Con|sid. 4. f. 12  pars 5. Consid. 64. duty now engaging them personally to fight against the Saraens and Insidels, in de|fence of the Christian Faith.
These Knights then acknowledged obedience to the Patriarch of Ierusalem, who Pantaleon de Ord. Ioannit. l. 1. p. 19. first approved their Order, but afterwards Monast. An|glic. Tom. 2. p. 499. when their Revenues increased, it begat a neglect of their former religious and humble carriage; and forthwith they laboured with the Pope to be absolved from their obedience to the Patri|arch, which Hospitalarii praevenientes, per dona max|ima totam Curiam (Romanam) corrupe|runt, sic qud Patriarcha, ipso insecto nego|tio, ad patriam suam rediit. Ib. they obtain'd, though he, and several other Bishops of Palestine, travelled to Rome to oppose them, and manifest the injuries they sustained from the Knights.
This Order had its Mennen. Delicae Equest. p. 69. second approbation and rule of living confirmed from Pope Gelasius the Second, but De Ordin. milit. loco nuper cit. Andr. Men|do saith, from Calixtus the Second, anno 1120. and was by Adrian the Fourth Flav. Cherubin. Compend. Bllar. Tom. 1. p. 6. Const. 2. received under the protection of the Papal See; being likewise endowed with ample Priviledges, and exemption from payment of Tythes, by succeeding Popes, chiefly by Tom. 2. p. 3. Const. 9. Pius the Fourth.
The Knights of this Order then took the Pantal. de Ord. Ioannit. l. 1. p. 18. black Habit of Hermits of St. Augustine, and lived under his rule by the grant of Honorius the Second, anno A. Mendo de Ord. Milit. loc. cit. 1125. vowing Pantaleon. l. 1. p. 18. Aub. Miraeus. p. 7. Ciacon de vita Paschal. 2. l. 1. p. 357. Cassan. Catalog. glor. mundi, pars 9. Consid. 4. Obedience, Poverty, and Chastity; and on the Item omnes Fratres, Crucem in honorem. Dei,  ejusdem Sanctae Crucis, in Cappis  Mantellis secum different ante pectus. Re|gula Ord. Joan Jerusal. Art. 29. Vide Mo|nast. Anglican. Tom. 2. p. 497. Breast of this Habit wore, at first, a plain Cross of white Cloth, since changed to one with Cruz. blanca de ocha puntas, abit ne|gro. El. Conde de Lanserote en Noblez del Andalusia. l. 1. c. 2. eight points: but in the Pantaleon de Ord. Ioannit. loc. cit. time of War they used a Red Cassock, bearing the White Cross upon it.
After the death of Gerard, the Founder of this Hospital,





having increased in Men and Revenues, elected out of their own Body another Governor or Head, namely, Raimund de Podio, or Sansovin, O|rig. de Cavalie|ri. f. 13. a. Poggio a Florentine, who di|gested and enlarged their Laws and Institutions, and divided the Body of the Order into Phil. Briet. Annal. Mundi, pars 3. Tom. 2. p. 2. three Classes, viz. Knights, Servants, and Ecclesiasticks (which hath since received, from the succeeeding Great Masters, many additions.) This Body of Laws was confirmed by Pope Monast. Ang|lican. Tom. 2. p. 493. Boniface the Ninth, 7. Idus Apr. in the sixth year of his Popedom, the Composers style in it runs thus, Ibid. Ego Ramundus Dei gratia, servus pauperum Iesu Christi,  Custos Hospitalis Ierusolymitani. But af|terwards he had the Title of Mennen. De|liciae Equest. p. 69. Great Master of the Order given him, which conti|nued to his Successors, Cassan. Ca|talog. glor. Mundi, pars 9. Consid. 4. the Adjective [Great] being added to denote his pow|er and authority; the Government and Administration of the whole Militia, being lodged in him for the time being.
This great Master is a free Lord, he hath at this day the Title of Gottofridus. Archont. Cos|mic. l. 3. p. 70. Pantaleon de Ord. Ioannit. l. 12. p. 381. Prince of Mal|tae and Goza, and had that of Illustrious first given him by Ferdinand the Second, Emperor of Germany: Among sundry great priviledges wherewith he is invest|ed, he hath power to Seal in Lead, as doth the Pope and Duke of Venice. He ac|knowledges the Pope for his Head, and the King of Spain for his Patron.
Under this Great Master, there are many of the Knights in several Kingdoms and Provinces, called Priors, some of whom have also the addition of Great; With us in England he was stiled Prior Hospitalis Sancti Iohannis Ierusalem in Ang|lia, and by that Claus. 49. H. 3 m. 11. Dorso in Schedulia. Title was he summoned to the Parliament as a Baron of this Kingdom: At length he became ranked the first Baron, and had place and prece|dency accordingly above all the Barons of Parliament. There is a Memorandum of making his Oath of Fealty to the King, which I find thus recorded.
Claus. 6. R. 2. pars 1. m. 9. Dorso. Memorandum quod Frater Johannes de Radyngton Prior Hospitalis Sancti Iohannis Ierusalem in Anglia vicesimo tertio die Septembris anno praesenti apud Mansum Fratrum Praedicatorum London. fecit fidelitatem suam Domi|no Regi debitam coram Consilio dicti Domini Regis ibidem tunc existente, sub hac forma; Jeo sera foial  foie  loialtie portera a nostre Seigneur le Roi Richard  a ses heirs Rois D'engleterre de vie de membre  de terrien honour a vivre  morir contre toutz gentz  diligiament seray entendant as busoignes nostre Seigneur le Roy solonc mon sen  poair  le conseil nostre Seigneur le Roy celera  a lui  a ses maundementz en quantque a moy attient sera obeisant si Dieu moi eide  ses Seintz. Protestando quod hoc non cederet in praejudicium Hospitalis praedicti tempo|ribus futuris.
This Order grew in time to such greatness in Possessions and Lands, that in the Reign of King Henry the Third, they had in Christendom, no fewer than Math. Paris. Hist. Anglic. p. 615. sub anno 1244. Edit. London, 1640. nineteen thousand Mannors.
When Saladine had taken Ierusalem (after it had been possest eighty nine years by the Christians) these Knights retreated to the City of Favin. l. 9. c. 5 Acres, called Ptolomais; and that being also taken, they seised upon the Pant. de Ord. Ioannit. l. 4. p. 97. Island of Rhodes, and gained the chief City there, Lib. 7. p. 200. Sansovin. f. 13.  14. Miraeus, p. 7. 18. Calend. Sept. in the year of our Lord 1308. which Pope ^n Clement the Fifth confirmed to them, and thereupon they began to be called Cassan. Cata|log. glor. Mun|i. pars 9. Con|sid. 4. Knights of Rhodes.
At Rhodes they remained 214. years, even until anno Turkish Hist. p. 600. 1522. when Solyman the Great took the Island by force, and made his publick entry thereinto on Turkish Hist. p. 600. Christmas-day, after which they betook themselves to the Pantaleon, loc. cit. Island of Malta, which with Tripoli and Goza were granted to them in Flav. Che|rubin Com|pend. Bul|lar. Tom. 2. p. 4. Const. 9. schol. 1. vide e|tiam Pantal. de Ord. Ioannit. l. 7. p. 212.213. Fee, by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, the Flav. Che|rubin Com|pend. Bul|lar. Tom. 2. p. 4. Const. 9. schol. 1. vide e|tiam Pantal. de Ord. Ioannit. l. 7. p. 212.213. 23. of March anno 1530. under the tender of one Fal|con to the Viceroy of Sicily, upon the 25. day of April yearly, and on con|dition to acknowledge the King of Spain and Sicily for their Protectors. This Donation was confirmed by Flav. Che|rubin Com|pend. Bul|lar. Tom. 2. p. 4. Const. 9. schol. 1. vide e|tiam Pantal. de Ord. Ioannit. l. 7. p. 212.213. Pope Clement the Seventh, on the 9. of May in the same year. In which Isle they yet continue the Bulwark and Fortress of Europe, chiefly to shelter Sicily, and guard the Coasts of Italy: and from this settlement of theirs in this place, they have been ever since called Knights of Malta.



The Order of Knights Templars. (3.)
About the years Cassan. Catalog. gloria mundi. pars 9. Consid. 5. 1117. Ex Chron. Rogeri de Wendover. Math. Paris. Hist. Angl. p. 67. Histor. Anglic. Script. Edit. Lond. 1653. Col. 18. 1118. Andr. Favin. Theat. d' Hon. l. 9. c. 7. 1119. or Monast. Anglic. Tom. 2. p. 517. Ex Hi|stor. Antiochena. l. 12. c. 7. 1120. this Or|der took beginning (Baldwin the Second then reigning in Ierusalem, and Platina in vita Gelas. 2. p. 166. Al. Ciacon, in vita praed. Gelasii, l. 1. p. 385. Gelasius the Second possessing the Roman Chair) when Cassan. in Catal. glor. mun. loc. cit. Pan|taleon de Ord. Ioannit. l. 1. p. 23. S. Mau|rolico in Mare Oceano Religionum. p. 216. nine Gentlemen,Aub. Mirus Orig. Ord. Eq. p. 11. urged by zealous devotion, passed the Seas to the Holy Land, the chief of which (though the rest are forgotten) wereSansovin. Origine de Cavalierie. fo. 17. b. Men. Delic. Equest. p. 75 Francis. de Ra|dez de Andrada (by mistake) calls him Don Hugo de Campanes. Chron. de Cala|trava. f. 3. b. Hugo de Paganes, and Godfrey de Saint Omer, two Knights of Noble Extraction. The King, because these Knights at first had no habitation, as|signed to them part of his Pantal. de Ord Ioannit. loc. citato. own Palace, neer the South-gate, adjoining to the Temple of Solomon in Ierusalem; and gave them leave to build a small House of residence, within the inclosure thereof; and hereupon they became called Fratres militiae Templi. Cassan. loc. cit. Brothers of the Militia of the Temple, or more ordinarily, in one word, Knights Templars.
And as they began to increase in number (which they did not till after Mennen. ut supra. Mirs. p. 13. nine years, from their Institution) so their first undertaking and profession (to which they were enjoin|ed by the Patriarch of Ierusalem) was chiefly to Fl. Cherub. Comp. Bull. Tom. 1. p. 3. Const. 1. Schol. 2. S. Maurolico, loc. cit. guard the most dangerous High-ways about Ierusalem; whereupon they became safe con|ductors to Pilgrims and Travellers (who came to visit the holy places in that Ci|ty) both in coming thither, and returning thence, against the violence and robbe|ries of the Saracens; which charitable service made them acceptable to all, and for which they obtained of the Gottosred. Archont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 4. Sows abbrev. p. 281. Patriarch and Bishops, remission of their sins.
But they were yet so poor, that for the first nine years, they liv'd upon the Monast. Ang. Tom 2. p. 518. Alms of others, and wore such Clothes, as good men, for Charities sake bestowed on them: They also rode two on one Horse; in memory of which primitive poverty, there was engraved on the Seal of their Order, the Figure of two of their Knights riding upon one Horse; which is exactly represented in Ad Calcem Adversarium. vide Antiq. War. p. 04. Math. Paris.
At the Math. Paris. Hist. Angl. p. 6. Phil. Bie|tii Anal. mun|di. pars 3. Tom. 2. p. 30. Council held at Troyes in Champaigne, anno 1127. they had certain Rules assigned to them, drawn up by Andr. Favin. en le Theat. d' Honn. l. 9. c. 8. Monn. p. 230. St. Bernard, Abbot of Clairuaux (a Ib. l. 6. . 14.  l. 9. c. 7. French Gentleman, Lord of Fontaines, a Village and Castle distant about half a mile from Dion) by the appointment of Pope Honorius the Second, and Stephen Patri|arch of Ierusalem; in the Ib. l. 6. . 14.  l. 9. c. 7. presence of which Patriarch, they made their Vows of Obedience, Poverty, and Chastity, and to live under the rule of Ex Chronic. Rog. de Wen|dover. Canons Regu|lar of St. Augustine. They were also enjoined to wear a White Habit, to which (but not till the time of Eugenius the Third) they assumed the Mennen. De|lic. Equest. p. 76. F. Cherub. Com|pend. Bull. Tom. 1. p. 37. Consid. 1. Schol. 2. Math. Paris lo|co supra citato. Red Cross, and of the Dugdales An|tiq. of War|wick sh. p. 705.  707. same form that the Knights Hospitallers of St. Iohn of Ierusalem wore, (though Lib. 9. c. 7. Favin saith it was a Patriarchal Cross) and sewed it n the left shoulder of their Mantles, to distinguish them from the Knights of other Orders in the Holy Land. And thus as by their hite Habit their innocency was notified, so by the Red Cross, their resolution to spend their blood in defence of the Christian Faith.
These Knights, with those other of the Holy Sepulhre, Hospitallers, and Teuo|nicks, were the principal Columns which supported the Kingdom of Ierusalem, for a long time; and therefore their valiant encounters with the Infidels, and for|wardness to sacrifice their lives, for the honor of God, and defence of the Holy Land, ought to be had in everlasting remembrance. But Ad tantam rerum opulen|tiam devene|runt, ut silia ditata, matrem suffocare,  su|pergredi vide|retur. Hist. An|glic. Script. an|tiq. Col. 1008. when Riches in|creast, and their Revenues were augmented, they grew proud, and withdrew themselves from the obedience of the Patriarch of Ierusalem, to join with the Pope.
So that at last, upon Fav. Theat. d' Hon. l. 9. c. 7. Friday after the Feast-day of St. Denys, in the year of our Lord 1307. all the Knights of this Order in France, were (in one and the same hour) seized on and imprisoned, by the command of Philip le Bel, King of

France, with the consent of Pope Clement the Fifth, being Alf. Ciacon lib. 1. p. 674. de vita Clem. 5. Fl Cherub. Comp. Bull. Tom. 1. p. 37. Const. 3. Schol. 3. Pantaleon. de Ord. Ioannit. l. 3. p. 94. charged with most infamous and damnable Crimes; the Articles confessed are set down by oco cit. p. 404. Andr. Favin. But in England their apprehension was on Hist. Anglic. Script. antiq. fol. 2494.  2531. Wednesday next after the Feast of Epiphany,4. Idus Ianuarii. Ibid. Col. 1730. litera dominicali G. Luna currente per 17 die Mer|curii proxime post festum Epiphan. Ib. Col. 2494. in the first year of the Reign of our King Edward the Second. Shortly after, a Ibid. Quamvis in multis essent accusai, nihil tamen inventum est, quod de jure vi|deretur satum illorum anullare. Ibid. solemn examinati|on of their Crimes (upon the Articles exhibited against them) was by the special Commission of the said Pope, com|mitted to William de Grenesfeild Arch-Bishop of York, and Ralph Baldock Bishop of London, in the presence of the ac|cused Templars, who sufficiently answered all the objections. Howbeit they were afterwards convicted in a Council held at London, and all their Lands and Goods seized into the Kings hands. Upon this, the aforesaid Arch-Bishop very greatly commiserating the sad state and condition of the Templars, within his Diocess, thus left destitute of maintenance, most charitably disposed of them in several Monasteries under his Jurisdiction, where they were provided for during their lives.
An. Favin. loco cit. 3. Apr. vide Histor. An|glic Script. praef. Col. 1730 Two years after, many of these Knights were burnt in France, nay some of the Bones of Iohn de la Tur (who had been long buried) were taken up, and in like manner burnt.
Upon An. Favin. loco cit. 3. Apr. vide Histor. An|glic Script. praef. Col. 1730 Munday Sennight after Easter, anno 1312. in the second Session of the Council, called at Fl. Cherub. Comp. Bull. Tom. 1. p. 37. Const. 3. Tho. Walsingham. p. 72. n. 40. vide etiam Chron. Io. Brompton inter Script. praef. Col. 1008.  Hen. Knighton. Col. 2382. Vienna in Daulphine the year before, this Order was by Pa|pal Authority condemned, and perpetually dissolved; and in March of the fol|lowing year, the last Great Master, Iaques de la Maule, a Bourgundian, Favin. loc. cit. burnt at Paris.
Their Pantal. de Ord. Ioannit. l. 3. p. 95. Cas|san in Catalog. glor. mundi. pars 9. Consid. 5. Platina in vita Clem 5. Lands, Possessions, and Goods, by a Decree of the said Pope, dated at Claus. 7. E. 2. Dors. m. 11. Vienna 6. Non. Maii, in the seventh year of his Papacy, were annexed to the Knights Hospitallers of St. Iohn of Ierusalem (except those within the Kingdoms of Fl. Cherub. Comp. Bull. Tom. 2. p. 37. Const. 3. Castile, Arragon, Portugal, and Majorca, which were reserved to the disposition of the Roman See) Ibid. because they had constantly hazarded their lives in the de|fence of the Christian Faith, and continually suffered great dangers, and undergone vast expences in transmarine parts, as also for Alf. Ciacon. in vita Clem. 5. Tom. 2. p. 674. five years before, with exceeding great charge, and signal valor, had maintain'd the Isle of Rhodes against the Turkish power. Thus fell this Noble Order, no less famous for Martial Atchievements in the East, than Possessiones, tam citra, qum ultra mare, adeo immensas habere dicuntur, ut jam non sit in orbe Christian provincia, quae eis bo|norum suorum portionem non contulerit,  Regiis hodie divitiis praestantiores existunt. Math. Paris. Hist. Anglic. p. 67. their wealthy Possessions in the West. For, according to Doctor Heylins account, they enjoyed no less than Cosmogr. l. 3. p. 110. 16000 Lordships in Europe; and a Spanish Author tells us, their Revenue was Andr. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quest. 2. sect. 6. n. 27. two Millions annually, and had in possession 40000 Com|manderies. Which gave occasion to many sober men to judge, that their Wealth was their greatest crime. And there are several Authors remembred by In loc. citato. vide etiam Sylvest. Mau|rolico in Oceano Religionum. p. 218. Alfonsus Ciaconius, who are of opinion, they were falsly accused, and by suborn|ed Witnesses, meerly pon the ambition and covetous design of Philip King of France, who gaped after their Lands, but nevertheless the mor|sel fell beside his mouth.
The Statutes of this Order are recorded by En le Theat. d' Hon. l. 9. c. 8. Favin.


Knights of the Order of St. Lazarus. (4.)
We are here to note, that this Order was at the first Institution only a Frater|nity of Religious Monks, not Ecclesiastick Knights, whose Weapons in the Chri|stian warfare were Prayers and Tears, not the Military Sword. And albeit the time is uncertain, when they first began to be an Order of Knighthood, yet it cannot be presumed to be before the Knights of the Holy Sepulchre, took upon

them that Military profession, since to them is generally attributed the beginning of that Custom, for Ecclesiasticks to make use of Arms in defence and propaga|tion of the Christian Religion; nor was there indeed occasion administred for it, until the Christian Princes set on foot the Holy War in Palestine.
This Order then is accounted the most ancient of all others in Christendom, (which occasioned Pope Pius the Fifth, in two Bulls given in the year 1572. to stile it Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 9. . 9. Antiquissimum Charitatis  Militiae Christi Ordinem) but that (as hath been said) must be understood as an Order of Monks, and before they were made Ecclesiastick Knights: The Original of such their foundation, being by Serm. 25. in laudem S. Basilii. lav. Cherubin. Comp. Bull. Tom. 2. p. 42. Const. 28. Schol. 1. vide etiam Histor Geneg de la Maison de Savoy, par Sam. Guihenon l. 1. p. 114. Edit. Lyon. 1660. St. Gre|gory Nazianzen, attributed to St. Basil, about the years Ios. Mich. en Tesoro Milit. de Caval f 48. b 360. or 370. or between both, viz. anno S. Maurolico in Oceano Religionum. p. 207 366. about the time of Iulian surnamed the Apostate.
The first Institution of this Order was upon a most charitable account; namely, to take care of persons infected with incurable Leprosie (a Disease frequent in the Eastern Countries) by which Malady they became separated, even from the con|versation and society of men.
And albeit, through the Incursion of Barbarians and Saracens, and the injury of time, this Order lay, as it were, extinguished, for a great while; yet was it re|vived when the Latin Princes joined together in a holy League, to expel the Sa|racens out of the Holy Land; and a famous Mennen. Deliciae E|quest. p. 50. Hospital was then erected in Ierusa|lem, under the Title of St. Lazarus, for the reception and entertainment of Le|pers. For in that time the Monks of this Order added Martial Discipline to their knowledge in Physick, and became very skilful both at their Weapons, and in feats of Arms; insomuch as their services against the Infidels, begat a great esteem and value with Mennen. Deliciae E|quest. p. 50. Baldwin the Second, King of Ierusalem, and some of his Suc|cessors, and other Princes enumerated by In Orig. Ord. Eust. p. 48. Aubertus Miraeus; in which Age this Order flourished with great lustre, under the Government of a Great Master.
In the year of our LordTesoro Militar. de Caval. lc. cit. 1120. Pope Fl. Cherub. Comp. Bull. Tom. 2. p. 28. Const. 95. videsis Sam. Gichenon, in Hist. Geneal. de la Maison de Savoy. p. 113.  114. Innocent the Third, and after him Honorius the Third, granted very great pri|viledges to this Order, and received it under the protection of the Papal See. The Knights wore a Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 52. Green Cross ancient|ly plain, afterwards of eight points, and Pope Gregory the Ninth prescribed the form of creating their Great Master.
About the year Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 9. c. 9. 1150 they made their Vows of Obedience, Poverty, and Chastity, before William Patriarch of Ierusalem, and submitted themselves to the Rule of St. Benedict; receiving his black habit: But Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. uaest. 2. Sect. 15. seven years after, Pope Alexander the Fourth, commanded them to observe the Rule of St. Aug. and ap|proved the donation of the Emperor Frederick, who had given great Revenues in Calabria, Apulia, and Sicily, to this Order. Compend. Bull. loc. citato. Nicholas the Third exempted them from payment of Tythes, and several of the succeeding Popes indulged them with divers priviledges.
These Knights were so admired and favoured by Fav. heat. d' Hon. l. 9. c. 9. vide Mennen. p. 51.  Miraeus p. 48 St. Lewis of France, that he brought twelve of them with him out of Palestine, and placed them at Fav. heat. d' Hon. l. 9. c. 9. vide Mennen. p. 51.  Miraeus p. 48 Boigny, in the Diocess of Orleans, where he established a Colledge, anno Domini 1154. which (as Favin affirms) was acknowledged for the Fav. heat. d' Hon. l. 9. c. 9. vide Mennen. p. 51.  Miraeus p. 48 chief Seat of this Order in Europe.
In process of time the dignity of this Order sunk, being Compend. Bullar. Tom. 2. p. 29. Const. 95. Schol. 1. suppressed by Pope In|nocent the Eighth, who Favin. loc. cit. Menne. p. 52. united it to the Order of Hospitalars at Rhodes, by virtue of his Bull, dated anno 1490. and all the goods which they possessed in France, were carried away thither; so that shortly after the memory of this Order, as well in Italy as France was wholly obscured.
Nevertheless Pope Compend. Bull. Tom. 2. p. 28. Constitut. 95. Pius the Fourth, did again restore and re-establish the same, by his Bull dated at Rome anno 1565. confirming all former Priviledges, and granting many new; he also ordained Rules and Statutes, both for the Election of their Great Master, and reformation and better Government of the Order. Moreover he made Samuel Gui|chenon in Hist. Genealog. de la Maison de Sa|voy. l. 1. p. 114. ex Thu. Don Ianot de Chastillon, a Gentleman of Millan (his Kinsman) Great Master thereof.
The Priviledges of this Order were afterwards enlarged by Compend. Bull. Tom. 2. p. 42. Constitut. 28. Pius the Fifth, in the year 1567. who permitted them to take one Wife only, to wit, a Virgin, not a Widow.
Lastly, Pope Histor. de Mons. de Thou. Tom. 2. l. 38. p. 876. Gregory the Thirteenth, anno 1572. bestowed the Great Master|ship of this Order, upon Emanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy and his Successors, Dukes of his Line; and prescribed to them the Cistertian Rule. Furthermore, he ordained, Favin. l. 8. c. 6. vide l. 3. c. 10. that all Commanderies of this Order, under all Christian Princes, should be left freely to the said Duke and his Successors; and accordingly he had the Investiture and Collation of the Commanderies in Spain, and Italy: But Henry the Fourth of France hindered the effecting thereof in his Kingdom, con|ceiving the right of Great Mastership appertained to him, in regard the chief Seat of this Order in Europe, was (according to Favin) within his Kingdom.


Knights of the Teutonick Order, or of Prusia. (5.)
In the time of the Holy War, a Cassan. in Ca|talog. glor. mun|di pars 9. Con|sid. 6. Panta|leon de Ord. Io|annit. l. 1. p. 13. Sansovin. Ori|gine de Cava|lieri. f 20. b. wealthy Gentleman of Germany, who dwelt at Ierusalem, commiserating the condition of his Countrymen coming thither upon Devotion, and not understanding the Language, or knowing where to in|habit; made his House a receptacle for these Pilgrims, where they received lodg|ing and entertainment. Afterwards, gaining Authority and Licence from the Patriarch, he erected a Chappel neer unto this Hospital, and Segars Ho|nor Milit.  Civil l. 2. p. 105. dedicated it to the honor of the blessed Virgin Mary, whence they had also the Title of Equites Ma|riani Mennen. p. 78. Mari|an Knights.
To him And. Favin. Theat. d' Hon|neur. l. 7. c. 12. associated other German Gentlemen, who contributing to maintain this charitable work thus begun, and in short time, encreasing in Number, Piety, Wealth, and Esteem (though yet they had no rule of living assigned) gave them|selves to the Catalog. glor. mundi. Ord. Ioannit. locis cit. Aub. Mi|raeus Orig. Ord. Equest. p. 10. professions, both of the Knights Hospitalars, and Templars; imi|tating the later in their military Employments, and emulating the former in their acts of Piety and Charity: albeit the year, wherein they first assumed Arms, and entred into a Society, we do not find remembred.
But afterwards, to wit, in the year of our Lord Favin. loc. cit. 1190 (or Pontanus in rerum Danicarum Historia. pag. 284. 1191.) they elected their first Master, namely Henry Walpott, and on the 22. of February in the following year, (upon the request of Frederick the Emperor) re|ceived confirmation of their Order, from the Bull of Pope Aub. Miraeus Orig. Ord. Equest. p. 8. Celestine the Third, being the first year of his Papacy, under the Title of Nomen Pontifex Militum beatae Mariae Virginis domus The autonicorum dedit, Bar|ham alere jussit. Pantaleon. de Ord. Jo|annit. l. 2. p. 58. Knights Teutonicks, or Dutch Knights of the Hospital of St. Mary the Virgin; vowing Poverty, Obedience, and Cha|stity,: He also prescribed to them the Rule of St. Augu|stine.
Their Statutes were composed by the Model of the Knights Hospitalars, and of the Knights Templars; among which one Article was, that none but Cassanaeus, loc. citato. Germans should be admitted into this Order. But to difference them from those Orders, their Habit was ordained to be a Pantal. l. 1. p. 23.  l. 2. p. 58. White Mantle, on the breast whereof a plain black Cross (but some Segar. loc. cit. Crux nigra, cum lim|bo argenteo in veste candida,  Magi|stro Ordinis, Crux nigra, cum alia Cruce aurea eam intersecante. Mendo de Ord. Mil. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. 9. n. 32. others make it a black Cross, voided with a Cross Potence) for their Ensign.
In the year when this Order received Confirmation from the Papal See, there Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 12. joined to them some rich Citizens of Breme and Lubeck; by whose united Con|tributions another Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 12. Hospital was erected in the City of Acon.
But after that City was Pantal. de Ord. Ioan|nit. l. 3. p. 74. Cassan. loc. cit. taken by Saladine, one Hermannus then Master, and the remaining Knights removed into Germany: on whom the Emperor Frederick the Second, anno 1229. and Pope Honorius the Third, bestowed the Province of Prussia (or as some say Chronic. Chro|nicorum. p. 7. Miraeus ex lib. Ordinis Prussiae Conrade Duke of Massovia anno 1226.) where having con|quer'd that Nation, and reduced it from Paganism to Christianity, they built the

City of Mary-burgh; and there Heyl Cosm|gr. l...p. 180. anno 1340. fixed the chief Seat and Resid  of their Great Master.
This Country they enjoyed, till the year Fav. Theat. d'  l. 7 c. 12 vi|d Menn. Dc. ques. 8. 82.  3. 1525. that Albertus Brandenburg, the last Great Master, made solemn renunciation of the Order, and became Feuda|tory to Sigismund the First, King of Poland, who raised Prussia into a Dukedom and created this Albert first Duke thereof. The Conditions upon his Surrender, and the Ceremony of his Investiture into this new Dukedom, are set down in the Fav. Theat. d'  l. 7 c. 12 vi|de Menn. Dc. ques. 8. 82.  3. Theatre of Honor.
Some of the Knights disrelishing this Action, did afterward elect another Fav. Theat. d'  l. 7 c. 12 vi|de Menn. Dc. ques. 8. 82.  3. Great Master, namely Albert Wolfang, and leaving Prussia, seated themselves in Ger|many, where they now reside, though of no great account; only the Fav. Theat. d'  l. 7 c. 12 vi|de Menn. Dc. ques. 8. 82.  3. younger Sons of the German Princes, being for the most part received into this Order, give the greatest reputation thereunto.
There were some other Military Orders of lesser note instituted in the Holy Land, under the first Latin Kings of Ierusalem, in imitation or rather emulation of those more famous Orders before remembred, of which there now remains on|ly an obscure memorial: and seeing their Histories are all defective, as to the year of Institution, we think best to muster them up here in the following order.


The Order of the Knights of Mount-Joy. (6.)
THese Knights were so called from a Andr. Favin. Theat. d' Hon|neur. l. 9. c. 11. Castle in the Holy Land, where this Order was Instituted, built on the point of a Mountain, Fr de Rades y Andrada en Chron. de Cala|traa f 38 a. not far from Ie|rusalem, whence the Pilgrims first viewed the Holy City, and where these Knights lay in Garrison.
They were employed in Military Services, for defence of that Casile and the Ho|ly Land, against the Saracens and Pagans; and received for their Habit, Favin, loc. cit. Red short Mantles, and a White Star, with five rayes issuing out of it, fixt upon their breasts. Is. Micheli en Tesoro milit. de Cavalleria. f. 36. b.Others say, the Habit of this Order was White, and the Badge thereof an Octogonal Cross Red (but this might haply be after they left the Holy Land, and settled in Spain.) They vowed And Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Qust. 2. Sect. . Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, and ob|served the Rule of St. Tesoro Milit. de Cavall. loc. cit. Basil.
Pope Mennen. de Delic. Equest. p 86. Alexander the Third, by his Bull approved this Order, and changed their Rule to that of St. Augustine, in the year of our Lord 1180. In this Bull (remain|ing in the Archives of the Order of Calatrava) is mention made of several Vide Fr. Ra|des y Andrada loc. citato. Towns and Castles, which these Knights held in the Holy Land, as also what they possest in Spain.
After the loss of the Holy Land, these Knights retired into Spain, and fought against the Moors, and according to the several names of the places, where they resided, were they denominated, though the general Title was of Equites de Monte Gaudio. Mount-Ioy. In Catalonia and Valentia, they were called Mennen. loc. cit. Equites de Mongoia (which is the same with Mount-Ioy) but in Castile Mennen. loc. cit. Knights of Monfrac, from a Castle so called in that Kingdom, it being their chief place of residence; and after Fr. de Ra|des. loc. cit. when this Order was fallen into great decay, it was given unto Fr. de Ra|des. loc. cit. Don Gonalionez, Master of the Order of Calatrava, by King Ferdinand the Saint, in the year of our Lord 1221. by And. Mendo. loc. praecitato. whose consent they were afterwards incorporated into the Order of Calatrava. Moreover in the Instrument, by which Alphonso the Ninth, King of Castile, gave the Lands to this Order, which the Knights took from the Moors, the Donation saith thus, Maestre de Monfrac de la Orden de Mon|te Gaudio. Fr de Rades loc. cit. To you Don Rodrigo Gonalez Master of Monfrac, of the Order of Mount-Ioy. They were also called (saith En le Thea d' Honneur. loc. cit. Favin) Equites de Truxillo, or de Tru|gillo, from a City of that name, where they sometime resided; but this will ap|pear by and by, to be a distinct Order, united afterward to the Knights of Alcan|tara.



Knights of St. John of Acon, or Acres. (7.)
Under the Patronage of this Saint was this Order erected, but the Original, as to time, uncertain. The Knights thereof Ios. Micheli en Tesoro milit. de Cavalleria. f. 61. a. Gothofrid. Ar|chont. Cosmica. l. 3 p. 5. exercised all Duties of Charity to|wards those who went on Pilgrimage, to visit the Holy Land; and assumed the exercise of Arms, in imitation of the Knights Hospitalars, whence they became ranked amongst the Religious or Sacred Orders: They followed the Rule of St. Augustine, and according to In le Theatre d' Honneur. l. 9. c 11. Favin had a black Habit assigned them, upon which they wore a White Cross Pattee.
After the City of Acon was taken, they removed into Spain, and flourished in that Kingdom, in the Reign of Tesoro mil. de Cavall. f. 61. ex Hieron. Ro|mano. Alfonsus the Astrologer, King of Castile, about which time, Pope Mennen. Deliciae Equest. p. 84. A. Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Q. 2. Sect. 23. Alexander the Fourth approved the Order, under the con|joined Title of St. Thomas and St. Iohn of Acon. This King gave unto them by his Will, all the Furniture of his House, and very much Money, but afterward they by little and lit|tle decayed, until at length they were A. Mendo, loc. cit. united with the Knights Hospitalars.
The Ensign of their Order (saith La Insignia era una Cruz colorada lisa, y en medio san Iuan, y santo Tomas. Tesoro militar. de Cavall. loc. cit. Ios. Micheli Marquez) was a Red Cross (And. Mendo, loco nuper cit. like to that of the Order of Montesa) in the middle whereof stood the Figures of St. Iohn, and St. Thomas, which differs from what Favin hath before assigned; but perhaps the colour of the Cross was changed to Red, after their coming into Spain.


Knights of St. Thomas. (8.)
There was another Order which (as may be collected from Delic. Equest. p. 84. Mennenius, and Tesoro Milit. de Cavall. fol. 61. b. Ios. Micheli) was distinct from the former, bearing the Title of St. Thomas; but De Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Q. 2. sect. 24. A. Mendo supposeth, they were rather some of those which joined themselves to the Knights Hospitalars; and the rather, because they wore the same Habit with the Knights of St. Iohn of Acon; they also made the same Professions, fol|lowed the same Rule, observed the same Constitutions, and were approved and confirmed by Pope Alexander the Fourth and Fifth, and Iohn the 22. Their Badge was a Mennen. De|lic. Equest. p. 263. Saltire gules, yet Micheli makes it the same with that of St. Iohn of Acon, wanting the Figures in the middle. But Theat. d' Hon|neur, l. 9. c. 11. Andr. Favin reports (though we meet with nothing in our English Histories to back him) that this Order was Instituted by our King Richard the First, after the surprisal of Acon, and that these Knights were of the English Nation; who wore a White Habit, and a Red Cross, charged in the middle with a White Escallop: and lastly, that they had for their Patron, St. Thomas Becket.
This gives us occasion to remember here, that we have some more Honor of this kind done our Nation by Strangers (if it can be called an Honor, to report those things of us, which want ground and authority from our own Histories and Chronicles to support them) viz. Ios. Miche|li en Tesoro mi|lit. de Cavall. f. 35. b. That Henry of England (which by the note of time afterwards mentioned, must be understood of our King Henry the Second) vi|siting the Holy places in Ierusalem (but we find not that he was ever there) be|ing moved with a pious zeal, by the example of the Knights of the Sepulchre, Instituted the Order of Iesus Christ of the holy Sepulchre in England, in the year of our Lord 1174. giving to the Knights thereof the same Rules, as had those of the Holy Sepulchre in Ierusalem; which Order (saith the same Author) was con|firm'd by Pope Alexander the Third, under the Rule of St. Basil. Howbeit after the Christians were driven out of the Holy Land, the Knights of this Order were joined to the Knights Hospitalars.
But we give the less credit to this formal account, because we find no mention

made thereof in any of our English Writers or Records: Perhaps the Relator mistook them for the Canons regular (but not Knights) of the Holy Sepulchre, who about that time lived amongst us, and of whom the Pag. 362. Antiquities of Warwick-shire give some account.


Knights of St. Blase. (9.)
These were called also Knights Mennen. Deli|ciae Equest. p. 84 de Sancta Maria, and founded under the Ios. Mich. Te|soro milit. de Cavalleria. fo. 77. b. Rule of St. Basil. They were Fav. Theat. d'Hon. l. 9. c. 11 Officers and Servants to the Kings of Arme|nia, and had assigned them for their Habit Skie-colour, with a Cross gold, worn before their breasts. Others say a Tesoro milit. de Caval. loc. cit. Red Cross, and in the middle thereof the Pi|cture of St. Blase their Patron.
This Order was at the Fav. loc. cit. height, when the Armenian Kings, of the House of Lu|zignam, kept their Court in the City of Acon.


Cavalleros de los Matires en Palestina y Ierusalem. Te|soro milit. de Cavall f. 53. a. Ordo Poentten|iae SS. Marty|rum. Mennen. p. 84. Knights of the Martyrs in Palestine. (10.)
By the pious affection of some Ibid. vide etiam And. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Qust. 2. Sect. 17. Noblemen, there was erected in the Holy Land an Hospital dedicated to the holy Martyrs St. Cosmas, and St. Damianus; where all acts of charity were exercised towards sick strangers. Their professi|on also obliged them to other works of mercy towards the poor, to redeem Captives taken by the Saracens, and to bury the dead.
These Knights followed the Ibid. vide etiam And. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Qust. 2. Sect. 17. Rule of St. Basil, which was confirmed to them by Pope Iohn the 22. They wore for the Badge of their Order, a Mendo ut supra. Red Cross; and in the middle thereof, within a Circle, the Figures of the Saints Cosmas and Damianus were described.
Delic. Equest. p. 84.85. Mennenius informs us, that Hieron. Romanus had seen some of these Knights wearing for their chief Ensign a Red Cross; and professing the Rule of St. Augu|stine; which perhaps was so changed when they retired into Europe.


Knights of St. Katharine at Mount Sinai. (11.)
This Order received its Institution, saith In Tesoro mi|lit. de Caval|leria. f. 18. b. Ios. Micheli, in the Year of our Lord 1063. under the Title and Patronage of St. Katharine, whose body is reported to be deposited in Favin. Theat. d'Hon. l. 9. c. 10 Mount Sinai, and the high Altar in the Church of the Monastery, there (dedicated to her name) erected neer to the place where she was interred.
The end for which these Knights were at first Instituted, and the sum of their profession, was to A. Mend de Ord. Milit. Dis. 1. Qust. 2. Sect. 5. guard and keep safe the Sepulchre of St. Katharine, to secure the ways for Travellers, to defend and protect the Graecian Pilgrims, who came thi|ther for devotions sake, and to relieve and entertain them with convenient Ho|spitality.
Their Habit was A Miraeus in Orig. Ord. E|quest. p. 56. White, and they lived under the Rule of St. Basil the Great; making their Vows of conjugal chastity and obedience to the Abbot of this Mo|nastery, who was their Superiour or Master.
But Mendo oc. cit. when those Countries fell into the hands of the Turks, the Knights of this Order were ill entreated and driven away, and the Order it self almost abolished. Nevertheless, some shadow thereof does still continue; for such as travel to visit the Holy Sepulchre at Ierusalem, do now and then likewise pass to this Monastery at Mount Sinai; where (in imitation of the Padre Guardian of Ierusalem) the Favin, loc. sup ctato. principal of the Monks of this Convent, makes them Knights of the Order of St. Katharine; the Ceremony being performed upon her Sepulchre or Tomb; and the same Questions and Formulary are here used, as are accustomed at the Holy Se|pulchre in Ierusalem.
These Knights do now wear Favin. loc. supra citato. upon the left side of their White Habit, the Cross of Ierusalem, and Instrument of St. Katharines Martyrdom, which I have caused to be engraven, after the form of that Badge bestowed up|on Favin. loc. supra citato. Andr. Favin, by Mesiere Claude Daubray, a Knight both of the Holy Sepulchre, and of St. Katharine: but according to others, the Et in mediam rubei coloris Rotam Gla|dio transfixo pro insignibus praeferre. Men|nen. p. 49. Ac in pectore almidium Rotae rubrae, quam Ensis intersecabat. Mendo loco praecitato. middle of the Wheel is pierced with a Sword.


The Order of Knights of St. Anthony in Aethiopia. (12.)
MS. pe|nes Ioh. Knight Ar. Principal. Chi|rurg. Reg. Car. Secund. vide etiam Ios. Mi|cheli in Tes. mi|lit. de Caval. f. 9. b.  Mendo Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. a. n. 20. Shortly after the death of St. Anthony the Hermite, (which fell out about the years of our Lord 357. or 358.) many of his Disciples remaining in Thebais (a Country bordering upon Aethiopia) followed the Example, Rule, and manner of life which he had left them: and both they and their Successors lived for some time in great austerity and solitariness in the Desart, and therefore called Ancho|rites, until they were at length reduced to a more convenient and rational life, by submitting to the monastical Rule of St. Basil, and cohabiting in Monasteries, but still under the Title and Habit of St. Anthony.
It is said, that about the year of our Lord MS. pe|nes Ioh. Knight Ar. Principal. Chi|rurg. Reg. Car. Secund. vide etiam Ios. Mi|cheli in Tes. mi|lit. de Caval. f. 9. b.  Mendo Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. a. n. 20. 370. Iohn Emperor of Aethiopia (commonly called Prester Iohn) erected these Monks into a Religious Order of Knighthood, under the Title and Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 177. Protection of St. Anthony, Patron of his Empire; and bestowed upon them great Revenues and many Priviledges. And being thus instituted Knights, they received the aforesaid Ios. Mi|cheli Tes. Milit. de Ca|val. fol. 10.20. Rule of St. Basil, and submitted to his Constitutions. The Habit of the Order is Ios. Mi|cheli Tes. Milit. de Ca|val. fol. 10. a. Black, and the Cross, Blue; much like the form of the Latine Letter T, but not like either the Samaritan or Hebrew Letter Tau, (which St. Origen. St. Hierom. some say is like a Cross) for the fashion and shape of either hath no likeness or similitude to a Cross at all, as hath been observed by the Learned Animadv. in Chron. Euseb. p. 109. Ioseph Scaliger.
The chief Seat of this Order is in the Isle of Ex MS. penes eund. Io. Knight,  Tesoro mi|lit. de Cavall. Meroe, where the Abbots both spiritual and temporal have their residence; but in other parts of Aethiopia they have a very great number of Convents and Monasteries, and not less than two Mil|lions of annual Revenue.
The Ex MS. penes eund. Io. Knight,  Tesoro mi|lit. de Cavall. eldest Sons of Noblemen and Gentlemen cannot be admitted into this Or|der, but the second Sons may; and if a man have three Sons, he is bound to as|sign one of them to be of the Order; from which Law none are exempt but Phy|sicians.
The effect of the Vow and Profession which these Knights make, is to observe Ex MS. penes eund. Io. Knight,  Tesoro mi|lit. de Cavall. conjugal chastity, to dye in defence of the Christian Faith, to guard the Con|fines of the Empire, to yield obedience to their natural Laws, and their Superi|ors, and to go to War, whensoever and wheresoever they are commanded. More|over they take an Oath before the spiritual Abbot, Tesoro milit. de Cavall. fol. 11. a. not to fight in Wars between Christians, nor to receive any holy Orders, or to marry without express License first obtained.
There are in this Order, two sorts of Knights; the Ibid. fol. 10. a. one employed in the Wars, the other being old, are exempted from Military services, and retire themselves under the Title and Profession of Monks, to the Abbies where first they took their Habit. Of these there can be no more but five and twenty in one Abbey (albeit while they remain Military Knights they have no certain number) out of whom the most ancient in the Habit is chosen Abbot, by the voices of his Fel|lows, and called the Spiritual Abbot.
The Ibid. fol. 10. a. Novices are taken in about sixteen or seventeen years of age, and imploy|ed nine years in the Wars; to wit, three years in the Garrisons about the Red Sea, against the Arabian Pirats; other three years in the Isle of Meroe, against the incursions of the Turks; and the last three years upon the Borders of Borno, a neighbour Kingdom of the Moors.
These Ibid. fol. 10. a. nine years being compleated, they obtain Letters from their last Cap|tain, testifying the fulfilling those years in the Wars, with honor and worthiness;

wherewith the great Abbot being made acquainted, he directs his Letters to the Abbot, where they are to receive their Habit, to give them admittance accord|ingly. But in case the Certificate of life and services be not sufficient (which sel|dom happens) their admission is prolonged to a further time.
When they come to be admitted into their Abbey, they are introduced in their military Habit, of which being disrobed, and the religious Habit put on, to wit, a Ibid. fo. 11. a. Black Gown reaching down to the ground, lined with Blue (described to be a Garment made with many Plaits in the neck, and large sleeves, such as the Basilians wear) having a Blue Cross fixed to the Breast, and over that a Black Cowle, they then are led to the Church, and before the Altar make their Profession.
Fol. 10. b. Philip the Seventh of that Name, Son to the Founder, very much encreased their Lands and Priviledges; and gave command that the Badge of the Blue Cross should be bordered with Gold, which is observed at this day.
Such as are inquisitive after a further Account of this Order in Aethiopia, may receive it from the afore-cited Author Ios. Micheli Marquez, who is very large and particular upon this Subject.
In Fol. 14. b. Italy, France, and Spain, there are a sort of Monks that from Et quamvis gladio minim accingantur, Equitum tamen numero censen|tur. Mennen. p. 176. some have the Title of Knights of St. Anthony; these were commanded to observe the Rule of Fl. Cherub. in Compend. Bul|lar. Tom. 1 p. 35 Const. 5. St. Augustine by Pope Boniface the Eighth, and appointed to wear a plain Blue Cross like that in Aethiopia; the Principals of these (according to Inle Theat. d' Honn. l. 8. c. 1. Favin) wear a double St. Anthonies Cross of Blue Satin, the one above the other, but the rest of them, only a single Cross.
Their chief Seat is at Inle Theat. d' Honn. l. 8. c. 1. Vienna in Daulphine, of which place the General of the Order beareth the Title of Abbot, the Monastery there having been erected into an Comp. Bullar. loco cit. Abbey, by the said Pope Boniface, anno 1297. in honor of St. Anthony, whose Baron. Annal. Eccl. Tom. 11. Col. mihi 642: sub anno 1084. body is reported to have been translated thither from Constantinople: and all other places, built in honor of his name, were made subject to this Abbot by Pope Compend. Bull. Tom. 1. p. 107. Cons. 2. Clement the Seventh, anno 1523. In Orig. Ord. Equest. p. 45. Aub. Miraeus takes notice of this Order, calling it the Order of Hospitalars of St. Anthony, and to have taken beginning in France, in the year 1121. from one Gaston, a Nobleman of Vienna. But Annal. Eccles. Tom. 11. col. 694. sub anno 1095. Baro|nius saith it was in the year 1095. that this Gaston with his Son Gerin, taking eight other persons to them, instituted this Order; who before they took upon them the Habit of Religion, assumed to themselves, the Letter Thau, for the Badge or Ensign of their Order. Yet In vita Vr|bin. 2. l. 1. p. 355 Alfonsus Ciaconius, makes this Order more ancient, affirming that Gaston and Guind (whom Baronius calls Gerin) instituted it before the year of our Lord 1092.


The Order of the Constantinian Angelick Knights of St. George, in Greece, but now in Italy. (13.)
We shall be somewhat large in the account of this Order, because we have met with little of it besides what is delivered by Ioseph Micheli Marquez a Spanish Wri|ter, in his Tesoro Militar de Cavalleria (from whom And. Mendo hath collected all he saith of it) as also for that it appears he was Vice-Chancellor thereof, which makes us presume, he might be enabled to give a fuller and more particular account of it to the world than others; and to say truth, the History of it, set down by him, is large enough.
Nor do we call in question the authority of his attestations, from the time of Angelus Flavius Comnenus, and the Confirmation given this Order by Pope Leo the First, under the Rule of St. Basil, which perhaps should be understood, as they were Monks, rather than Knights.
But our Author not content with an original of that Age, which if granted to him, will make this Institution elder than either the Knights of the Sepulchre, Ho|spitalars, or Templars, and consequently high enough, to be one of the first milita|ry Orders in Christendom; must needs derive a formal Institution, Rules, and Laws from Constantine the Great, and vouch for it an Inscription (not mentioned

by any other) in the Capitol at Rome. From which account of his, though it ap|pears little better than a fabulous story, grounded, at best, upon some uncertain Tradition, and in several things smelling of novelty, we shall nevertheless ex|tract what is most material to our purpose.
This ancient, and (as our Author calls it) the In Tesoro Mi|lit. de Caval. fol. 1. b. Vide etiam Crescenzi del suo Presidio Romano. part. 3. l. 1. first Military Order in Christen|dom, took beginning from the Emperor Constantine the Great, and from him was entituled, the Military Order of Constantine the Emperor.
It was called also Fol. 2. b. Angelical, because the Cross with this Inscription, In hoc signo vinces, was shewed from Heaven to that Emperor by an Angel; and thence, they of the Family descended from him (among whom were the Great Masters of the Order) took the name de Angelis.
As to the description of this Cross and the form thereof, Lib. 1. c. 22. Eusebius may be con|sulted, who in the Life of Constantine, not only affirms, that this Emperor him|self vouched the truth of this Miracle to him with an Oath, but Cap. 25. describes the Figure thereof, which the Emperor gave Cap. 24. directions to be made of Gold and precious Stones, according to the Pattern he had seen in the Skie, and thence-forward caused the Lib. 4. c. 21. Figure of this Cross to be carried before his Army, instead of the golden Standard, formerly used, and to be engraven upon the Armour of the Legionary Soldiers.
He also reports, that upon Lib. 1 c. 33. Constantines triumphal entrance into Rome, after his Victory over Maxentius, he erected many Crosses with Inscriptions, to indear the Sign thereof, into all mens affections; and amongst the rest, commanded his own Statue to be placed in the chiefest part of the City, holding a Banner of the Cross with the following Inscription, engraven below it.
HOC SALVTARI SIGNO, VERO FOR TITVDINIS INDICIO, CIVITATEM VESTRAM TYRANNIDIS JVGO LIBERAVI. ET S.P.Q.R. IN LIBERTATEM VINDICANS, PRISTIN AE AMPLITVDINI, ET SPLENDORI RESTITVI.
This Order had also the Epithet Ios. Micheli Marquez en Tesoro mil. de Caval fol. 3. Golden adjoin'd, because, that instead of the Collar of Gold, which the ancient Emperors his Predecessors used to give in re|ward of Virtue, and military Service, this Emperor gave a Collar of Gold, com|posed of these three Characters A x , at which was fastned a Cross, like that which appeared to him, and thereunto the Image of St. George; to confirm which (saith our Author) there is to be seen (but we much doubt) in the Capitol at Rome, a Marble, whereon are armed Knights engraven, and an Inscription speaking thus,
Constantine the Great, Emperor, after he was cleansed of his Leprosie, by the means of sacred Baptism; thus created Golden Knights, with the Cross for defence of the Christian name.
He further informs us, that Fol. 79. b. Constantine elected fifty illustrious Grandees of his Empire, to be Knights of this Order, to whom he gave the Standard of the Labarum and likewise a Collar of Gold, to which the Figure of the Labarum, and a Cross were dependant, together with several Constitutions and Laws; and that he instituted this Order, with the Fol. 2. b. consent and approbation of Pope Sylvester.
As also, that it was confirmed by Pope Fol. 4. Leo the First, whose Bull for assigning to the Knights thereof, the Rule of St. Basil, dated the 20. of Iuly anno Domini 456. (Prince Alexius Angelus being then Great Master) he transcribes at large.
That it received further confirmation and approbation, from the Popes Fol. 3. a. Iulius the Third, Calixtus the Third, Pius the Second, Sixtus the Fourth, Innocent the Eighth, Paul the Third, Sixtus the Fifth, Clement the Eighth, Pius the Fifth, Gre|gory the Fifteenth, and Vrban the Eighth. And whilst it flourished in Greece, was confirmed and augmented with large Priviledges by divers succeeding Grecian Emperors, namely Leo the First, Isaac Angelus anno Dom. 1191. whose Fol. 80. a. Diploma this Author also gives us, dated the 13. of Sept. in the year aforesaid, and of his

Empire the Seventh, by Michael Paleologus anno 1294. by Fol. 3. b. Isaac Angelus anno 1295. and lastly, by Ferdinand the Second, Emperor of Germany, at Ratisbone, anno 1630. who recommended to his Catholique Majesty, the restauration of this Order, because those who had been Great Masters thereof, were allied to him, and of the Family of Angelus Flavius Comnenus; which recommendation was sent to that King, by the then Great Master Don Iohn Andrea Angelo Flavio Comneno.
The Great Masters of this Order, have their chief Seat and Convent now at Fol. 3. b. Bri|anno, a Town nigh to Venice, the Dignity yet continuing in the Line of Angelo Flavio Comneno; howbeit among the Priviledges granted by the Emperor Isaac Angelus, one is, Fol. 80. b. That if the Family of Angelus Flavius Comnenus should be extinguished, the Collared Knights may elect from among themselves a Great Master.
Among the many Prerogatives granted to this Order, by the Imperial Privi|ledges and Papal Bulls, we shall mention a few, by which may be understood, something of the grandeur thereof; to wit, that the Great Masters are Fol. 3. b. Commensa|les Pontificum, and have the priviledge of sitting at the Table with the Pope, by whom they are defended and supported, as Benefactors to the Church, and Foun|ders of the Lateran Cathedral in Rome. They are persons of great note and au|thority, in that they are subject to no Prince, and therefore have the power of coining Money. They give titles of Counts, Princes, and such others, and of Reverend to their own Fraternity. They have also the faculty of restoring to Honors, of legitimating Bastards, of giving Degrees with the Title of Doctors, creating Poet Laureats, and making publick Notaries.
This Order is under the protection of the Fol. 6. a. Blessed Virgin, and patronage of St. George, the titulary Saint and Guardian of military men in general, and of these Knights in particular, who profess obedience, and conjugal Chastity.
The Formulary prescribed for entrance into the Order, the manner of receiving the Habit, taking the Oath, the benediction of the Mantle, Cross, and Sword, the admittance of the Knights, Priests, and Novices, are at large laid down by this  fol. 3. us ad 10. Author.
The Habit of this Angelick Order is Fol. 3 b.  Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. sect. 1. n. 17. White, on the left side whereof is sewed a Fol. 3 b.  Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. sect. 1. n. 17. Red or Crimson Velvet Cross Flory, in the middle is the Labarum imbroider|ed after the form of the Letter X, with the Letters A upon the one arm of the Cross, and  on the other: the sides are wrought with Gold and Silk, but the Labarum all with Gold.
Amongst these Knights there are three Degrees, the Tesor. milit. de Cavall. fol. 3. b. first are called Collared, or Grand Crosses; these wear a Collar, formed of Labarums, whereat depends the Figure of the Cross, and St. George: The second are the Knights, and these wear the Cross as is above described: The third are Servants, and they bear the Cross, only wanting the upper arm of it, and the Labarum.
The Priests wear the like Cross with the Knights.
The Ibid. f. 80. Grand Priorates and Promotions, or Commanderies, belonging to this Or|der, shew how great it hath been, and how far its jurisdiction extended; since to them were joined very great Revenues and Rents which the Knights of this Or|der held, and they were these (saith mine Author) though I suppose divers of them are miswritten. The grand Fol. 82. Priorates of Mistra, and of Bosnia, of Cappado|cia, Calcide, Napoles, Antiochia, Constantinople, Ierusalem, Natolia, Iulia Caesaria, and the Priories of Barlada, Scione, Anfiboli, Damascus, Mileto, Pergamo, Sinope, Ephesus, Argo, Odeseo, Egena, Nicepoli, Corinthus, Nicomedia, Apollonia, Erapoli, Engada, together with several Baliato's or Baliwicks.
The Fol. 82. Bulls and Priviledges are to be seen in the Constitutions of the Order, published by the eloquent and learned Knight Majolini Bisachioni, grand Prior of Bosnia, Earl of Galicia, great Chancellor and Administrator of the Order; as also in Malvezzi, and other Authors, Knights of this Order.
To conclude, this Author gives a Fol. 80. Catalogue of the Names of 34 Great Masters (whom he affirms were all true descendants of the Family of Angelus Flavius Com|nenus) beginning with Constantine the Great, but between him and Alexius Ange|lus Flavius (whom he reckons to be the third Great Master, and who was he that drew all the Knights into a Fraternity) is doubtless a very great Chasme: As to

others, either the chain of succession is broken in several places, or the Order hath suffered some discontinuance.


Knights of the Order of St. James in Galicia. (14.)
There were several Orders of Knighthood, to which the Spanish piety gave a being, protection, and support, and amongst them that of St. Iames the Apostle, (commonly called Sanctiago) was the first and principal.
There are some Lucas Tuden|is. Io. Vasaeus. Diegus Valera: Ant. Morales. vide Flav. Che|rub. in Schol. ad Constitut. 30. Gregor. 13. Schol. 2. Spanish Writers (reckoned up by Franciscus Mennenius) that say this Order took beginning in the time of Don Ramiro King of Leon, who be|gan his Reign in the year of our Lord Francisc. de Rades y Andrada en Chro|nic. Sanctiago. fo. 4. b.  fo. 5. 821. and at the Battel of Clavijo, or Clavi|gio, anno Heyl. Cosmog. l. 1. p. 220. 826. (or as some say anno S. Maurolico in Oceano Religion. p. 209. 837.) against the Moors, did by the assi|stance of St. Iames the Apostle (said to have then appeared upon a Sobre une Cavallo blanco, y con una Cruz colorada por senna. Rades in Chronic. hujus Ordin. fol. 5. a. white Horse, bearing a Banner with a Red Cross upon it) gain a mighty Victory over an innumerable mul|titude of them; whereupon in all Battels thenceforth his Sanctiago Sanctiago. Ibid. patronage was implor'd.
That this was the occasion of the Orders Foundation, is not believed or approved of by all, as may be collected from Iohannes Mariana, Franc. Alphon. Venerius, and others of that Country, some of them placing the Institution thereof about the year 1160, and some others up|on a clear mistake, confounding the time of Institution, with that Confirmation, by Pope Alexander the Third, anno 1175. in which the first rule of living is pre|scribed to the Knights of this Order.
But though there be no certainty, that this Order was instituted, in memory of the appearance of St. Iames, after the manner before related, and in the Reign of Don Ramiro; yet, that there was a Fraternity or Military Order in Spain under that Title, at least La Regla y e|stablecimientos de la Cavalle|ria de Sanctia|go del Espada. 145 years before Pope Alexander gave his Confirmation, (though how much elder is hitherto not known) is a thing out of all dispute. For it evidently appears, from the original Priviledge granted to the Ibid. fol. 3. b. vide Fr. de Ra|des en Chron. Sanctiago, fol. 3. b. Nuns of the Monastery of St. Esprit in Salamanca, dated the 15. of Nov. anno Dom. 1030. under the royal hand of Don Fernando the First, who began his Reign anno Dom. 1017. and is therein stiled King of Castile, Leon, Galicia, Portugal, and Lord of Biscay (for in his time were the Kingdoms of Castile and Leon first united) that there was then in being a Fraternity and Order of Knights or Comendadores, as also a Superior, bearing the Title of El Maestre y Governador de la Orden. Ibid. Master and Governor thereof, and that these Knights had then also Castles, Lands, Rents, and Possessions to support them; for of all these is there express mention made in that Grant.
Moreover in an ancient Quae adhuc asservatur in archivo de Veles. Original of a very old Letter, written long before they received any Rule or Form of Religion, and pen'd in corrupt and barba|rous Latine, which contains certain Rules and Orders to be observed by them, as also mulcts and forfeitures, for neglects and offences therein set down; they are called Confrades de la Confra|dia de Sancte Iacobo. Rades en Chron. San|ctiago. f. 5. a. videsis Fr. Caro de Torres en Histor. de las Ord. milit. fo. 1. b. Brothers of the Fraternity of St. Iames.
And albeit the Knights of this Order did at Franc. de Rades y Andrada, en Chron. de Sanctiago. fo. 4. b. first dispose themselves to virtuous courses, and valiantly encountred the Moors, Enemies to the Cross of Christ, that being the chief end of their Foundation; yet in tract of time, they fell from the honor of their first Institution, and grew so strangely debauch'd, and gave so great occa|sion of scandal, that the Order was thereby so much pervert|ed, as it could scarce be accounted an Order.
But afterwards the Knights (being by the divine goodness reclaimed) grew desirous to be reduced to a better life, and to submit themselves to regularity and order, and upon La Regla y e|stablecimientos de la Cavalle|ria de Sanctia|go. fo. 5. b. Cardinal Iacintha's arrival in Spain, and their application to him, he (as much as in him lay) first confirmed their Order, in the year of our Lord Alfon. Ciacon. in vita Alex. 3. l. 1. p. 469. 1170, under the Rule of St. Augustine, and upon his return to Rome, La Regla, c. loc. cit. Fer|nando de Fuente Encalada, and others, Knights and Canons of this Order, attended

him thither, whom he presented to Pope Alexander the Third, and from him obtained approbation and confirmation. He also received this Order under the protection of the Papal See, La Regla de Sanctiago f. 9. prescribed to these Knights, the Rule and manner of living, the form of holding Chapters, of electing their Master, of the Trezes, and thirteen Comendadores of Houses, nd of the Visitors; In brief, this Bull gives them very large Priviledges, is fitted with xceeding good Precepts and Laws, both for Government and Conservation of the Order, and bears date the 13. of Iuly anno Dom. 1175. which hapned in the beginning of the Reigns of Don Alonso the Ninth, King of Castile, of Don Fernando the Second, King of Leon, and Don Alonso the Second, King of Aragon. And hereupon (saith En Chron. Sanctiago, loco rad. Francisc. de Rades y Andrada) do some of the Chronicles of Spain, call this an Institution (which was indeed but a Restauration) because the Knights of that time were the first that en|tred into the Vow of Obedience, poverty of Spirit, and Conjugal Chastity; wherein consisted the substance of this Religious Order.
It being observed out of the Confirmation, that Pope La Regla y Establec. de Sanctiago. fo. 1. b.  f. . b. Alexander the Third, had (among other things) granted to these Knights, the Monastery of Saint Lodium. Loyo, situate in Galicia near Sanctiago, and that the Prior and Canons thereof, (being Fr. de Ra|des en Chronic. Sanctiago fol. 6. b. vide Cas|san. in Catalog, gloriae mundi part 9. Consid. 7. Marian. de reb. Hispan. l. 11. c. 13. Ca|nons Regulars of St. Augustine) were thereby incorporated to the Knights of this Order; it is thence concluded, that this Order was rather founded in the Kingdom of Galicia than Leon.
And though it appears by King Don Fernando's Priviledges to the Monastery of St. Esprit, that there was in ancient time, a Master of this Order, yet is no notice taken either of him, or any of his Successors, till after Pope Alexanders Confir|mation, and then Don Pedro Fernandez de Fuente Encalada (Encalada being a place in the Diocess of Idem de Ra|des fo. 6. a.  11. b. Item Fr. Caro de Torres in Histor. de las Ordin. mi|litares. f. 10. b. Astorga) is reckoned the La Regla de Sanctiago. fol. 16. b. first, in the Catalogue of Masters.
At the beginning, the Knights of this Order were imployed Aub. Miraeus de Orig. Ord. Equest. p. 23. Favin. in le Theat. d'Hon|neur. l. 6. c. 5. to assist the Canons Re|gular of Saint Loyo, who had built Hospitals (the first of which was that of St. Mark in the Suburbs of Leon) for the relief of Pilgrims who daily resorted from all parts to visit the shrine of St. Iames of Compostella; and to guard the high ways, frequented by the concourse of them, against the insolencies of the Moors, and Robbers of Spain.
The Ensign of this Order, is a Chronic. de Sanctiago p. 1. b.  p. 6. b. Su Senal es la Espada Roxa, que el ulgo Llama Lagar|. Lancerote en Nobleza del Andaluzia. l. 1. c. 32. Cross, (which the Knights wore upon their Chronic. de Sanctiago p. 1. b.  p. 6. b. Su Senal es la Espada Roxa, que el ulgo Llama Lagar|. Lancerote en Nobleza del Andaluzia. l. 1. c. 32. Breasts) finishing like the blade of a Sword, the Hilt crosleted, and fashioned af|ter the ancient manner; whereupon it was called Historia de las Ordines Mi|litares. per Fr. Caro de Torres. l. 1. p. 9. b. La Orden de Sanctiago de la Espada, as also Compend. Bull. Tom. 1. p. 7. Const. 5. Schol. 1. videsis Ciacon. de vit. Pontif. l. 1. p. 469. Ordo militaris Sancti Iacobi Ensigeri,  qualitate insignium. And the reason why this Ensign is always painted Red, rather than any other colour; is thus given by En su Chro|nica. l. 17. Don Rodrigo Ximenes, Arch-Bishop of Toledo.
Rubet ensis sanguine Arabum.
But these Knights assumed not only the Sword in form of a Cross, but also the Symbol of St. Iames, which though it cannot be directly determined (saith En Chronic. de Sanctiago. fo. 6. b. Ra|des y Andrada) what it is, yet it seems to be the Escallop shell: For that the Venerea, quae in Hispania pro Tessera D. Iacobi semper est habita. Mennen. De|lic. Equest. p. 97. Escal|lop is generally among the Spaniards taken for the Badge of St. Iames, and worn by Pilgrims, in their Voyages to his Sepulchre at Compostella (the Io. Mariana de reb. Hispan. l. 7. c. 10. pag. 328. place where his body was found about the year of Christ 800.) the day of whose Translation is the La Regla de Sanctiago. fo. 72. b. 30. of December. And in all the ancient Seals of the Order, as well of the Masters, as of the Convent, there is to be seen an Fr. de Rades en Chron. de Sanctiago. fol. 7. a. Escallop shell, placed under the handle of the Sword, at the closing thereof to the Hilt.
But it seems the honor of the Escallop is such,Las Veneros son insignial del Apostol. Lan|cerote. loc. cit. that the use thereof is not permitted to all; for by a Bull of Pope Alex|ander the Fourth, among other things, it is ordained, that Fr. de Rades en Chron. de Sanctiago. fol. 7. a. none of this Order shall wear the Escallop shell for Ensign, but such Knights, Priests, and Nuns as are nobly descended.
In the year of our Lord 1560. King Philip the Second La Regla de Sanctiago. fo. 74. b. de|clared, that the Knights of this Order might wear an Escallop shell (hanging in a Chain of Gold, not a Ribbon or Cordon) made of Gold or Silver, as big as a piece of Eight, but not of Chrystal, or any Stone of what kind soever; and wearing this, they were permitted the use of a Coat, without

the Badge of the Order, nevertheless their upper Robe or Mantle, was not to be worn without it.
The Habit of these Knights is a Ibid. f. 72. b. vide ettam Fr. de Rades, in Chronic. hujus Ordinis. f. 6. b. White Mantle of Cloth or Serge, close before, on the breast whereof is set a Cross of Cloth or Sattin, in the form before de|scribed. The Figure of which Habit, adorning a Knight of this Order, is to be seen in Pag. 521. Iurisprudentia Heroica. This Cs made of Regla de Sanctiago. loc. cit.  f. 74. a. Silk or Cloth, they are obliged to wear upon their Garments, Coats, or Cloaks, though they use Crosses of Gold likewise.
When the Moors were driven out of Spain, the principal end for which this Or|der with those of Calatrava and Alcantara, were instituted, ceased; and there|upon it came to be considered, how the Administration of these Orders might be placed in the Crown of Castile.
Upon the Fr. de Rades y Andrada en su Chronic. Sanctiago. fo. 69. a. death therefore of Don Rodrigo Manrique (elected Master at Vcles in Castile, Competitor to Don Alonso de Cardenas, elected Master at Leon) Queen Isabella came to the Covent of Vcles (whither Don Alonso had drawn a considerable power, to force his Election there also) and commanded to assemble all the Knights of this Order, that then were thereabouts) upon whose appearance she told them, Fol. 69. b. That in regard the Knights of this Order, had many Fortresses upon the Frontires, for which reason her Predecessors had in former times taken the Administration of this Order upon themselves, and given it to their Sons; upon great deliberation therefore was it thought fit, that the King Don Fernando her Husband should now be Administrator; and intimating, that a desire was sent to the Pope for a Grant thereof, she commanded them to surcease in their Election, to which all the Trezes submitted.
Fol. 70. a. Afterwards, the King had the Mastership of this Order, under the Title of Administrator granted him by the Pope, nevertheless finding that Don Alonso de Cardenas had been very faithful to him, and greatly deserving, he waved the Papal Grant, and gave leave for a new Election; whereupon Don Alonso was elect|ed a second time, in the year 1477.
But Fol. 73. a. anno Dom. 1499. the Mastership of this Order becoming again vacant, by the death of this Don Alonso, King Ferdinando and Isabella obtained another Bull from Pope Alexander the Sixth, to hold the Administration thereof during their lives: After their death, Charles the Fifth succeeding, obtained a Quae Bulla incipit, Dum intra nostrae mentis arca|na, c. Et est prima inter Constitutiones Adriani 6. ex|pedita suit anno 1522.  affertur in Iu|risprudentia Heroica. p. 514. Grant from Pope Adrian the Sixth, whereby the perpetuity of the Mastership (together with those others of Calatrava and Alcantara) became annexed to the Crowns of Castile and Leon, and thereunto in most ample manner were transferred all Rights, c. which the Masters of those Orders did formerly enjoy or exercise. Since which time the Kings of Spain have enjoyed the Administration of this Order, and car|ried that title and stile in the Inscription upon the Great Seal thereof, which holds the Fr. de Ra|des en Chronic. de Sanctiago. fo. 10. b. Royal Arms of Spain, upon a Cross that filleth all the Shield, with a Sword at each of the four Corners.
Philip the Third, King of Spain, called a Chapter of this Order in Madrid, the 16. of April, anno 1600. which ended the 30. of November following. In which it was ordained, that the Book Intituled La Regla y Establecimientos de la Cavalle|riae de Santiago del Espadae, c. should be printed. This Book contains the Instituti|ons, whereby the Knights of the Order are to be governed, together with all the Statutes, Laws, Rules, and Ceremonies, appertaining thereunto, and now in use; and at this Chapter, many of the former Laws were abolished, others amended, and some new added.


The Order of Knights of St. Saviour in Aragon. (15.)
About the year of our Lord Mennen. De|lic. Equest. p. 85 1118. was this Order erected by Don Alphonso (called Emperor of Spain, King of Navarr, Aragon, Leon, Castile, and Toledo) who chose out of those Spanish and French Nobility, that assisted him in his Wars against the Moors, a certain number whereof he formed this Society; and to

the end he might be the better enabled to drive the Moors out of Saragosa, and the whole Territory of Aragon, he engaged them by this Honor, to pursue the War against them to the utmost of their power.
Theat. d'Hon|neur. l. 6. c. 14. Favin seems to place the Institution of this Order to the year 1120. but Ios. Mich. Marquez en su Tesoro Miit. de Cavall. f. 24. b. that was the year of King Alphonso's great Expedition against the Moors, whom he vanquished and destroyed, and for which Victory he had the Title of Conqueror given to him: besides, these Knights were Instituted upon design to engage with this King in that War; of whose assistance he had not so great need, as to give Institution to them, if he had before overcome the Moors.
Some may possibly take this Order to be rather Military than Religious: but if it be considered, that these Knights Favin. loco nuper cit. succeeded the Templars in Montreall, being by King Alphonso established in that place, and had a Rule of living somewhat conformable to the Knights Templars (save only the priviledge to marry) which Rule De  cit. Io. Mariana (a Spanish Author of very great credit) saith expresly was the Cistertian, and for that  cit. Ios. Mich. Marquez (another Spanish Writer) informs  that they profest conjugal Chastity and Obedience, and were obliged to sup|port the holy Church and Christian Faith against the Moors, we need not scruple to place them in the ranks of Religious Knights.
Their Habit was a  White Mantle, on the breast whereof they wore a Red Cross Ancree, but  A. Mendo saith, it was the Figure of our Saviour.
At length the like Fate attended this Order, as did the Knights of St. Iames, Al|cantara, and Calatrava; for the Moors being driven out of Spain, and the chief end for which they were instituted ceasing, their rich Commanderies were at length united to the Crown.


The Order of Knights d'Avis in Portugal. (16.)
Fran. de Rades y Andrada en su Chronic. de Ca|latrava. f. 32. b El Conde de Lanceroe en Nobleza del Andaluzia l. 1. c. 32. vide eti|am Rodrig. Lu|sitan. Tom. 1. Quest. Regul. Quest. 6. Art. 6. in principio. Don Alphonso Henriquez first King of Portugal, took from the Moors (in the year of our Lord Fran. de Rades y Andrada en su Chronic. de Ca|latrava. f. 32. b El Conde de Lancerose en Nobleza del Andaluzia l. 1. c. 32. vide eti|am Rodrig. Lu|sitan. Tom. 1. Quest. Regul. Quest. 6. Art. 6. in principio. 1147.) the City of Evora, and to strengthen this Garrison, he sent thither several gallant Commanders, who assumed the Title of Cavalleros de Evora. Ra|des ut supra. Knights of St. Mary of Evora, as well from putting themselves under the protection of our blessed Lady, as from the place where they were first seated. Their first Great Ma|ster was Don Fernando de Monteiro.
Not long after, they came to be called Ibidem eti|am  fol. 32. b. Knights d' Avis, from a Castle of that name, situate on the Frontires of Portugal, which being conquered from the Moors, by the said King Don Alphonso, he gave it to Favin. Theat. d'Honn. l. 6. c. 18. Fernando de Yannes, Master of Evora, in the year 1161. (but Loc. cit. Fr. de Rades saith it was 1181.) to which Castle, he and his Brethren forthwith transplanted themselves from Evora.
This Order was confirmed by Pope Flav. Cherub. in Compend. Bullar. Innocent the Third, anno 1204. in the Reign of Sancho the First, Son to King Don Alphonso, under the Tom. 2. p. 90. Constitut. 32. Innoc. 3. Schol. 2. Rule of St. Be|nedict, and therefore in some Papal Bulls, the Order is called of Ibid. Tom. 3. p. 45. Const. 24. St. Benedict d' Avis, but Ant. Brandon Lusitan. Monarch. par 3. l. 11. c. 1. others say, this Order had con|firmation anno Dom. 1162. by a power which the Bishop of Hostia, Legat in Spain, for Pope Alexander the Third, gave to Io. Zerita Abbot of St. Io. Tarroca. The Knights profess Ios. M. Marquez en Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 25. Conjugal Chastity and Obedience.
In the year of Christ 1213. Fr. de Rades in Chronic. de Calatra|va. f. 32. b.  Ios. Micheli. f. 25. b. vide Favin. in Theat. d'Hon. l. 6. c. 18. Don Rodrigo Garcez de Assa, then seventh Master of Calatrava, gave to the Great Ma|ster and Brethren Knights d' Avis, their two Fortresses in Evora, and some other lands possessed by them in the King|dom of Portugal, upon which Donation they submitted them|selves to the Rule, Statutes, Visitation, and Correction of the Order of Calatrava, and their Successors; but in the time of Fr. de Rades in Chronic. de Calatra|va. f. 32. b.  Ios. Micheli. f. 25. b. vide Favin. in Theat. d'Hon. l. 6. c. 18. Don Iohn of Portugal (natural Son of Pe|dro the Eighth, King of Portugal) seventh Great Master d' Avis (after he had gained the Victory of Aljubarrato, against Don Iohn the First of Castile) he com|manded this Order, to cast off their acknowledgments to that of Calatrava, which

they thereupon did; and afterwards Fr. de Rades in Chronic. de Calatra|va. f. 32. b.  Ios. Micheli. f. 25. b. vide Favin. in Theat. d' Hon. l. 6. c. 18. refused to receive Don Gonsalo Nunez de Guzman Master of Calatrava, who went to visit them. Hereupon the Order of Calatrava complained to the Council of Basil, who decreed that this Order d' Avis should continue subject to that of Calatrava, and receive their Visits and Refor|mation, to which purpose a Bull issued, which yet remains preserved in the Archives of Calatrava, but the Portugueses never submitted to it, albeit those of Calatrava, to preserve their preheminence, have still nominated Visitors. Nay afterwards, Fr. Cares de Tores en la Hi|stor. de las Or|dines milt. f. 83. b. when that Crown fell into the hands of Philip the Second King of Spain, this Order d' Avis did nevertheless remain governed according to the Statutes of Portugal, nor did the Council of the other three Orders of Castile, take upon them to proceed in any Cause where this Order was concern'd.
The Badge of this Order is a Green Cross Flory, Lancerote en Nobleza del Andaluzia. l. 1. c. 32. such as the Knights of Alcan|tara wear, and said to be given them by Tesoro Milit. de Cavall. fo. 25. b. Don Pedro, but before they used the Rades en Chron. de Ca|latrava loco supra cit. like Cross with those of the Order of Calatrava, two Birds being added at the foot thereof, in allusion to the later name given to this Order; as appears from the ancient Seal.
The Royal Council of Portugal make examination of the Extraction of such as are to be admitted into this Order, that is of the Fathers and Grand-fathers Gen|tility, both of the Fathers and Mothers side. The manner of giving the Habit, and making profession, is agreeable to that of the Knights of Calatrava.


The Order of Knights of the Wing of St. Michael in Portugal. (17.)
Ios. Mich. Marquez en Tesoro Militar. f. 35. a vide Ant. Bran|don en la 3. part de la Mo|narch Lusitan. l. 11. c. 22. Don Alphonso Henriquez King of Portugal, (in whose Reign the Order d' Avi was instituted) being very much opprest by Albara the Moor, King of Sevil, raised an Army to free his Country; and being ready to give Battel, he com|manded all his Soldiers in a devout manner to address themselves to their particu|lar Saints, for the obtaining of good success: himself imploring St. Michael the Archangel, to whom he was greatly devoted.
When the Battels were joined, Ios. Mich. Marquez en Tesoro Militar. f. 35. a vide Ant. Bran|don en la 3. part de la Mo|narch Lusitan. l. 11. c. 22. St. Michael the Archangel, appeared on the Kings right side, and fought against the Moors; whence followed a very great and notable Victory over them.
Assoon therefore as the King was returned home, he Ios. Mich. Marquez en Tesoro Militar. f. 35. a vide Ant. Bran|don en la 3. part de la Mo|narch Lusitan. l. 11. c. 22. Instituted this Order of Knighthood, in the year of our Lord 1171. (but De Ordin. Milit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 4. n. 97. Mendo placeth the Institution earlier, to wit, in the year 1165. and Orig. Ord. E|quest. p. 38. Miraeus the year after) which he called the Del Ala de san Migu|el. Tes. Milit. de Cavalleria. Order of St. Michaels Wing: These Knights had for the Badge of their Order a Del Ala de san Migu|el. Tes. Milit. de Cavalleria. Red Sword crost with Flowers de lis, and this Motto, Quis ut Deus? but more agreeable to the Name of the Order is that Badge assigned by Mendo, to wit, Insigne erat Ala (qua S. Michael orna|tus depingitur) purpurea, in|termicantibus radiis cureis. Mend. loc. cit. a Purple Wing, irradiated with beams of Gold.
They were of the Mendo ut supra. Cistertian Order, and followed the Rule of St. Benedict. The manner of their Tes. Milit. de Cavall. p. 35. a. Investiture was the same as is used in the Order d' Avis. Their Obligation was chiefly to Tes. Milit. de Cavall. p. 35. a. defend the Christian Religion, to secure the Borders of the Country against the inrodes of the Moors, and to relieve the Widows and the Fatherless.
This Order is now grown out of use, but the Mastership thereof hath since re|mained with the Kings of Portugal.


Knights of St. Gereon. (18.)
This Order was instituted by Favin. Theat. d' Hon. l. 9. c. 11 Frederick Barbarossa the Emperor (others say by Frederick the Second) and consisted only of Gentlemen of the German Nation, who followed the Rule of St. Augustine, and wore a White Habit, whereon was sewed a Menn. Delic. Equest. p. 263. Black Patriarchal Cross set on a little green Hill.



The Order of St. Julian de Pereyro, or of Alcantara. (19.)
This Order of Knighthood hath assumed two appellations, upon what occasion we shall here shew.
The first and ancient Title was of Fr. de Radis y Andrada in su Chronic. de Alcantara, fo. 1. a. Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 102. Favin. in le Theat. d' Honn. l. 6. c. 5. St. Iulian de Pereyro, because at a Town so called in the Kingdom of Leon, in the Fr. Caro de Torres en Hi|stor. de las Ord. milit. f. 51. b. Diocess of Cividad Rodrigo, upon a small branch of the River Coa, a Monastery was built for these Knights by the favour of Don Fernando the Second, King of Leon and Galicia, who in his Diploma of Priviledges granted thereunto, dated in December the Aera of Caesar 1214. (which agrees with the year of our Lord 1176.) stiled himself Protector of this Frater|nity and Society of Knights.
An approbation thereof was obtained from Pope Rades en Chronic. de Al|cantara. fo. 2. a. Alexander the Third, the following year being the 18. of his Popedom, at the supplication of Don Gomez Fernandez, therein called Prior; but Pope Lucius the Third (confirming this Order anno Dom. 1183.) stiled him Master of Pereyro.
This Bull of Pope Alexander the Third makes not any mention of the Habit, these Knights of St. Iulian should wear, nor is it known what it was, more than that they used a Ibid. f. 2. b.  f. 6. b. secular Habit, modest and grave, and the Ecclesiasticks a cleri|cal Habit: Only to make a difference of these Knights from other Seculars, and the Clergy from other Ecclesiasticks, they wore a Chias de pa|no. Ibid. shred of Cloth, and a Sca|pulary.
Nor doth the said Bull take notice of the Rule they were obliged to observe, but by several other Bulls it appears, that from the beginning of this Orders Foundation, it was of the A. Miraeus, Orig. Ord. E|quest. p. 31. Fr. Caro de Torres, loc. cit.  inf. 52. b. Cistertian Order, and the Knights thereof observed the Rule of St. Benedict, moderated and limited as it was convenient for the exer|cise of Arms against the Moors, for which end it was instituted.
The ancient Badge of this Order was a VnPeral ver|de, Lancerote l. 1. c. 23. Pear-tree vert, assumed in allusion to the Name of the Order.
The occasion of altering the first appellation, was upon changing their place of habitation: For when Fr. de Rade en Chronic de Alcantara, fol. 5. a. Don Alphonso the Ninth, King of Leon, had taken from the Moors, Alcantara, a Town in Castile, anno Dom. 1213. he afterwards gave it to Don Martin Fernandez de Quintana, the twelfth Great Master of the Order of Calatrava, which Town Idem de Ra|des en Chro|nic. de Cala|trava. f. 33. b. anno 1218. (with the consent of the said King) was given to Don Nunno Fernandez, the third Master of St. Iulian de Pereyro, and his Fellows, as well Knights as Ecclesiasticks; and to the end there might follow an union of these Societies, (in like manner as was between Calatrava and the Order d' Avis in Portugal, some few years before) they consented to become subject to the Order of Calatrava, under the agreement and conditions following.
Ibid. f 33. b.  f. 34. a. First, that the Master and Convent of Pereyro should receive with all obedi|ence the Visitation which the Master of Calatrava should make according to the Cistertian Order.
That they should not be obliged to receive a Monk for their Prior, against their consent and will, but rather when they were to chuse one, it should be of their own House, or of that of Calatrava, or of any other Houses, Daughters to Calatrava, provided he were not a Monk.
That the Master and Convent of Calatrava should give to the Master of Pe|reyro the Town of Alcantara, and all its Possessions, with all their Charters and Priviledges, and all the moveable Goods which they held in the Kingdom of Leon, as well by royal gift, as any other way.
That when it should happen, that the Master of Calatrava should dye, or be removed, the Master of Pereyro should be called to the Election of the future Master.
Lastly, that the Master of Calatrava should not have power to give away any thing belonging to Pereyro, without consent of the Master and Convent

thereof; and in case he did, then the King of Leon should have power to va|cate such Donation.
These Conditions and Capitulations were made, en Cividad de Rodrigo, the 16. of Iuly anno Dom. 1218. and confirmed by King Don Alphonso, and the Ma|sters of both Orders.
Hereupon the Convent of St. Iulian, transferred their Seat from Pereyro to Al|cantara, and Don Diego Sanchio the fourth Master of Pereyro, assumed the Title of Master of Pereyro and Alcantara, Rades Chro|nic. Alcantara. f. 8. a. which Title his Successors held until the Church of St. Iulian de Pereyro was made an Encomienda; and thenceforward, the Ma|sters used only the Title of Alcantara, and the Fraternity in like manner relin|quishing their ancient Name, were afterwards called Flav. Cheru|bin. in Com|pend. Bull. Tom. 2. p. 105. Con|stit. 44. Schol. 1. vide Sansovin. Orig. de Caval. f. 22. Knights of Alcantara, from this their new place of abode. And whereas the Masters of Pereyro did formerly bear for the Ensign of the Order a Pear-tree only, they after this Union Fr. de Rades en Chronic. de Alcantara. f. 6. b. added two Travas to the Pear-tree.
But albeit this Order of Alcantara, was by this agreement, put under the subje|ction of that of Calatrava, and accordingly visited and corrected by them; yet nevertheless, they have since pretended to be Ibid. in Chronic. f. 7. a. freed therefrom, for that the Ma|sters of Calatrava broke the agreement made between them, by not admitting the Master of Pereyro to the Election of their Master, as was contained in their Ar|ticles.
Whereupon this Order of Alcantara obtained a Bull from Pope Ibid. in Chronic. f. 7. a. Iulius the Se|cond, by which they pretend to be freed from that ancient subjection: Though this Bull was given without knowledge of any cause, or making any necessary mention of the subjection. And therefore Ibid. in Chronic. f. 7. a. notwithstanding this Bull, the Order of Calatrava doth still in all general Chapters, nominate Visitors of their own Order to visit that of Alcantara, as well as that of Montesia, according to their ancient Capitulations; but they of Alcantara make always their protestation against it, and so this matter rests still undecided.
After this pretension of being exempted from obedience to the Order of Calatra|va, Io. Mariana de reb. Hisp. l. 12. c. 3. p. 569. Portano la Croce verde. Sansovin. fol. 21. b. Benedict the Thirteenth (one of the Anti-Popes) changed their Badge into a Cross Flory vert, in the year of our Lord 1411. and this they wore upon the left shoulder of their Scapulary, for the Badge of their Order.
The Examination of the Candidates, and in what manner they receive the Habit; is related at full by Tesoro milit. de Cavall. fol. 22. a. Ioseph Micheli Marquez.
The Catholick Kings Don Fernando and Donna Isabella, having about three years before obtained the Administration of the Order of Calatrava for their lives, had an eye also upon this of Alcantara; and therefore Fr. Rades en Chron. de Alcanta|ra fo. 54. b. vide Fr. de Torres in Hist. de las Ord. mi|lit. f. 83. endeavoured, that at the first time the Mastership thereof should fall vacant, to gain it likewise, with the like Title of Administrator; to avoid several inconveniences that had hap|ned to the Crown of Castile, when the Master of Alcantara did confederate with the King of Portugal.
Hereupon Fr. Rades en Chron. de Alcanta|ra fo. 14. b. vide Fr. de Torres in Hist. de las Ord. mi|lit. f. 83. in the year of our Lord 1492. they made their address to Pope Inno|cent the Eighth, that he would reserve to himself the provision of the supreme Dignity of this Order, whensoever it became vacant, either by the death or re|nunciation of the then Master, Don Iohn de Cuniga; or after any other manner.
Upon this address the Pope did Fr. Rades en Chron. de Alcanta|ra fo. 54. b. vide Fr. de Torres in Hist. de las Ord. mi|lit. f. 83. accordingly reserve the disposing thereof as was desired, and then gave it in Administration to the said Kings; that they two should govern this Order under that Title, until such time as his Holiness should provide a Master.
A little after Pope Innocent dyed, and Alexander the Sixth succeeded, who at the like supplication of these Kings, I. Fo. 55. a. confirmed and of new granted, what his Predecessor had granted them before. Upon which (anno 1494.) they treated with Don Iohn de Cuniga, for the renunciation of his Mastership, yet with condi|tion to reserve to himself all the Rents of the Masters Table, that he held in that part of Serena, to which he consented. Whereupon he resigned and surrendred his Dignity of Master of this Order into the hands of the Pope, which the Bishop of Valencia received by Commission back from him, and gave the Possession thereof in administration to the said Catholick Kings. After

Fol. 55. b. this manner it was that these Kings succeeded in the Administration of the Ma|stership of Alcantara, in the year of our Lord 1494. which they held during their lives.
But it was not long e're Pope Adrian the Sixth, annexed this Mastership, to|gether with those other of St. Iames and Calatrava, to the Royal Crown of Castile, for ever, as hath been before observed.


Knights of Trugillo or Truxillo in Spain. (20.)
En Tesoro mi|lit. de Cavall. f. 73. a. Ioseph Micheli Marquez professeth, that it had been his great endeavour, to sa|tisfie himself about the Foundation of this Order; notwithstanding which, nei|ther by information from the Natives of the City of Trugillo (a Town situate in Estremadura in Spain) nor otherwise from History, could he understand when, or by whom it was erected.
Evident it is, these Knights were in being in the year of our Lord 1227. though it be unknown how long before they had their beginning: But because it is found in some slight memorials of the Order of Alcantara, That Fr. Rades y Andrada en Chron. de Al|cantara. f. 9. a. Don Arias Perez Gal|lego, elected Master of that Order, in the year before mentioned, took Trugillo from the Moors, and there placed a Fraternity or Brotherhood of Knights and Priests, who lived after the manner of a Convent; therefore it is presumed, that they were no other than of the Order of Alcantara.
Now it is certain, that there was a Convent and Order of the Fraternity of Trugillo; but it is not so certain, that these were of Alcantara. It rather seems to be the opinion of Ibid. Vide Hieron. Romanum in Republica sua. Fr. Rades y Andrada that these had been some other, and a distinct Order of Knighthood by it self; which he collects from a Donation of Lands, that King Don Alonso the Ninth gave them some years after (viz. in the Aera of Caesar 1233.) of the Towns of Trugillo, Sancta Cruz, Zuferola, Canaba, and Albala: in which it appears, that several years before the time of Don Arias there were Freyles Tru|gillensis. Bro|thers or Knights of Trugillo.
It is not unlikely therefore, that this Order might be incorporated into that of St. Iulian de Pereyro, and by this means the Order of Alcantara pretend these Towns to be theirs, which in the Reign of King Don Alonso the Ninth, of Castile, and King Don Fernando of Leon, were taken by force of Arms from the Moors, and given to the Fraternity of Knights who kept their Convent in Trugillo.
Apud Mar|quez. Hieronymus Romanus saith, that these Knights were of noble descent, and that no man was admitted into this Order, unless he first made proof of his Genti|lity. But there is not any Writer that gives an account what was the Ensign or Badge of their Order. It is guessed by Loc. cit. Marquez, that their Institution obliged them to be neer the person of the King, and upon every martial Expedition, that he undertook, to attend him armed and well provided; maintaining always two Horses and Servants to be in readiness such for services.


The Order of Knights of Calatrava in Castile. (21.)
This ancient Order of Knighthood, was instituted in Castile, and took En Conde de Lance|rote in Nobleza del Andaluzia l. 1. c. 32. beginning under the Reign of Don Sanchio the Third, and En Conde de Lance|rote in Nobleza del Andaluzia l. 1. c. 32. appellation from the Castle Calatrava, being a Frontire both of Castile and Toledo; which Castle the Fr. de Ra|des y Andrada en Chronic: de Calatrava. fol. 2. a. Moors took upon their Victory over Don Rodrigo King of Spain, anno Dom. 714.
The word is compounded of Cala, signifying in Arabick Lancerote en Nobleza del Andaluzia loc. cit. a Castle, and of the Spanish word Travas, which signifies Manacles, Gives, or Irons, to fasten about the feet and wrists of Captives;Favin, in le Theat. d' Honneur. l. 6. c. 10 for with such as these the Moors lockt up and fettered the Christians, whom they held Prisoners in that Castle.
After its recovery from the Moors (who had held it above 400 years) it was gi|ven by Rades y An|drada, fo. 3. b. Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 99. Don Alphonso, surnamed the Emperor of Spain, to the Knights Templars (of whose virtue that Age had a great opinion) to be made a Bulwark against the Inrodes of the Moors, being the very Ibid. in Chro|nic fo. 5. a. Key into the Kingdom of Toledo; but they no way able to hold it, withdrew their Garrison; and what with the Knights Tem|plars deserting it, and the approach of the Moors, all others were disheartned from accepting the place, although the foresaid King Ibid. f. 4. b. Sanchio (Son of Don Alphonso the Emperor) had caused it to be proclaimed at his Court, that whosoe|ver would take upon them the defence thereof, to them he would freely give it, and to their Heirs for ever.
At length one Don Raymond (native Ibid. f. 8. b. Io. Mariana de reb. Hispania. l. 11. c. 6. of Barcelona) formerly a Knight of great renown, then Abbot of the Monastery of St. Mary de Fitero (of the Cistertian Order) in the Kingdom of Navarr (by the advice of Diego Velasquez, of the same Order, being then at Court) accepted of the Kings proffer, and took upon him the fortifying and maintaining this Castle; and hereupon the De Rades en Chron. f. 5. Io. Mariana loc. cit. King made his Charter of Donation, dated at Almason in Ianuary, in the Aera of Caesar 1196. (to wit of Christ 1158.) whereby he gave to God, to the blessed Virgin Mary, to the Congregation of Cistertians, and to Don Raymond, and all his Brethren, as well present as future, the Village called Calatrava, with all its Bounds and Territories, (particularly described in the Grant) to possess and enjoy by right of inheritance for ever.
This Don Raymond (after he had received possession according to the tenor of the Charter) together with his Associates, and other Idem de Ra|des, f. 6. b. Io. Mariana, ut supra. assistance from Castile and Toledo, fell to fortifying of the Castle; and hence arose the Order of Knights of Calatrava, Instituyola el dicho Rey Don Sancho. Rades f. 6. b. vide Lan|cerote, l. 1. c. 32. instituted by King Don Sanchio in the year of our Lord 1158. in the Town of Calatrava, and therefore called at first De Rades. loc. cit. Militia de Calatrava: the foresaid Don Raymond and Don Velasquez, being the first movers of this excellent work; of whom the former is in another place called also a Ibid. f. 8. b. joint Founder with King Sanchio.
After this Fol. 6. b. vide Mennen. p. 100.  Favin. l. 6. c. 10. Don Raymond considering the richness and fertility of the Soil, re|turned to his Monastery, and from its neighbouring Countries drew 20000 men, with their Families and Goods, to plant in and about Calatrava; which so greatly strengthened the Country, that the Moors durst never after attempt besieging of the Castle.
This Order was approved by Pope Idem de Ra|des, fo. 13. b. Alexander the Third, the 25. of Septem|ber, anno Dom. 1164. under the Discipline of the Cistertian Order. It was con|firmed afterwards by Pope Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 6. c. 10. Innocent the Third, in the year 1199. and at length grew on, till it gained exceeding great reputation in Spain.
At the first Institution, the Knights wore their Robes and Scapulars, of a Aub. Miraeus, Orig. Ord. Equest. p. 30. Favin. Theat. d' Houn. l. 6. c. 10. White Colour (Vanno vestiti de Nero,  partano la Croce rosa nel petto. f. 21. d. Sansovin, and Chron. p. 614. Genebrand saith Black) as did the Cistertian Monks; and on the breast thereof a plain Red Cross, but Pope Benedict the Thirteenth, anno 1396. dispensed with that Monastick Habit, and assigned them a Aub. Miraeus Orig. loc. cit. Cross Flory: So anciently they were prohibited Marriage, yet Paul the Third permitted them Mennen. De|lic. Equest. p. 101. one Wife, but not a second.
Fr. de Rades en Chron. de Calatr. f. 82. b. After the death of the last Master Don Lopez de Padilla, anno 1487. Don Diego Garcia de Castillo (being the Commendador Major) caused a general Chapter to be summoned in the Convent of Calatrava, for the Election of another Master; in which there fell out great contest among the Electors, and the chief that stood, was the said Commendador Major, and Don Alonso Pacheco, Commendador de Villa Franca.
Upon notice of this, the Catholick Kings, Don Ferdinando and Donna Isabella, sent to the Convent a Knight of their Court, with a Bull from Pope Innocent the Eighth, wherein he declared that he had reserved to himself the providing of a Master; and therewith Ibid. f. 83. a. required them not to proceed in the Election, until his further Commands were made known: in obedience to which the Election ceased.
Afterwards (Mennen.  Favin. locis supracitatis. anno Dom. 1489.) the Rades, fol. 3. b. Pope gave the Mastership of this Order in Administration to King Don Ferdinando during life; but he did not give it

with the Title of Master, Ibid. because the King had never received the Habit of this Order, neither was he capable of it, being a married man; but Ibid. chiefly be|cause the King then endeavoured to obtain the other two Masterships of St. Iames and Alcantara, and he could not hold them all three with the Title of Master.
Ibid. King Don Ferdinando and Isabella his Wife governed this Order with the Title of Administrators very worthily, and reformed the stare thereof; visiting it by the Abbot of Claravalle of the Cistertian Order, then called Don Pedro, who came on that imployment with a Commission from Pope Innocent (at the desire of the said Kings) and of the general Chapter, in the year of our Lord 1491.
Upon the death of King Don Ferdinando (anno 1516.) the Ibid. f. 84. l. Chapter of this Order met at Guadalupe, with intention to elect a new Master, of which Cardinal Adrian having notice (who then governed the Kingdoms) first sent, then went to the Electors, to desire they would not proceed, because the Pope had given the Administration of the Order to Prince Charles (afterwards Emperor by the name of Charles the Fifth) but they seemed unwilling to depart, before they had made an Election, and thereupon  elected that Prince, Master, or Administrator of their Order, which was afterwards confirmed by Pope Leo the Tenth.
But it seemed much for the interest of the Crowns of Castile and Leon to have the Mastership or Administration of this Order, and those other of St. Iames, and Alcantara for life, made perpetual, and annexed to them for ever; hereupon, great suit was made to the Pope by the Emperor for obtaining thereof: and among the inducements some of them were these.
 That great alteration often hapned in those Kingdoms upon the Election of these Masters, to the damage of persons of all sorts relating to those Orders.
That in regard the Masters were so powerful in those Kingdoms, they several times, gave aid and assistance to particular Factions that arose; so that Civil War often followed.
That the Peace and Quiet since the Administration was in the hands of the King, much exceeded that which was in the times of the Masters. These and other things being considered of, Pope  Adrian the Sixth granted the Emperors desire, and annexed the Mastership of these three Orders perpetually to the Crowns of Castile and Leon.
The form of admittance into this Order, and manner of their profession, is set down at large by Tesoro Milit. de Cavall fo. 28. c. Marquez.


The Order of the Holy Ghost in Saxia, at Rome. (22.)
They are called by En Tesoro Mi|lit. de Cavall. f. 61. b. Marquez, the Brothers of the Hospital of the Holy Ghost; who though not invested with Sword and Spurs, as other Knights be, are ne|vertheless reckoned among the Military Orders, because bound to bring Certifi|cate of their Gentility, before they can be accepted or admitted.
Their chief Seat is the sumptuous Hospital of the Holy Ghost, founded neer the Church of St. Mary in Saxia by the River Tyber in Rome (a place so called from the F. Lud. Go|thosrid. Ar|chont. Cosmica. l. 3. p. 51. Saxons, a People of Germany, who anciently inhabited there) by Pope Platina in ejusd. Papa vita. In|nocent the Third, in the year of our Lord 1198. or S. Maurolico in Oceano Religionum. p. 233. 1201. But it appears by A. Miraeus O|rig. Ord. Equest. p. 43. ano|ther of this Popes Bulls, dated anno 1204. for uniting of the Hospital of the Holy Ghost at Montpelier in France, unto this at Rome, that the ancient Foundation was at Montpelier, though in process of time this other became the principal.
They of this Fraternity profess Tesoro Milit. de Cavall. loc. supra cit. Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience, as also the service of the Poor; living under the Rule of St. Augustine, and have a Praeceptor or Master.
The Ensign of this Order, is a La Insignia es une Cruz blanca Patriarcal, y los bracos Otogo|nodos. Ibid. White Patriarchal Cross, with twelve points, sewed to their Breast, and on the left side of their Black Mantle.
The manner of giving the Habit, and making their Profession, is recorded by Ibid. fol. 62. Ios. Mich. Marquez.
In this Hospital care is taken for the S. Maurolico, p. 234. nursing and bringing up exposed Children,

the curing of all manner of Infirmities, entertainment of Strangers for three days with meat and lodging, relieving the Poor, and other works of the like kind.
The Ibid. Revenue belonging thereto, is about 24000 Duckets every day; it having great Commanderies in Italy, Sicily, Spain, France, Burgundy, Germany, and elsewhere.


The Order of St. George d' Alfama. (23.)
We are informed from In Mare O|ceano di tutte le Religioni del Mundo. p. 229. Sylvester Maurolico, that there was an Order of Knights called the Order of St. George d' Alfama, instituted in the year of our Lord 1201. in a Town of that name situate in the Diocess of Tortosa, which afterwards in the year 1363. received approbation from the Papal See, but we find no other men|tion thereof, save that it was united to the Order of our Lady of Montesa, anno Dom. 1399.


The Order of Knights of Christ in Livonia, or of the Portglave and Sword. Heyl. Cosmogr. l. 2. p. 168. Sword-Bearers. (24.)
In the year of our Lord Munster. Chron. Vnivers. l. 3 p. 423. de Germania. 1186. one Meinardus a holy and devout man, began to preach the Gospel in Livonia, and erected the Bishoprick of Riga. But this good man and his Successors met with great difficulties and opposition, in the propaga|tion of Christianity, until the year 1200. about which time many of that Coun|try embraced the Christian Faith; and one Ibid. l. 3. p. 785.  786. de Gem. Men|nen. Deliciae Equest. p. 89. Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 7. c. 14. p. 272. Albert, being then Bishop of Li|vonia, instituted this Order, in imitation of the Knights Teutonicks, with design to extirpate Idolatry, and propagate the Christian Religion in those Territories, as the other had undertaken to do in Prussia.
He prescribed to the Knights the Cistertian Rule and Habit, namely, a long White Mantle and Black Hood, on the breast was sewed the Figure of a Functius in Chronolog. sua. Red Sword, or rather Aut verius binos Gladios formae Crucis decussatim po|sitae rubescen|tes. Mennen. p. 89. videsis Mendo Disq. 1. Quest. 2. sect 14 two Red Swords, crossing one another in form of a Saltire, whence they had the Title Munster. l. 3. p. 423.  785. de German. Ensiferi, vel Ibid. l. 3. p. 778. Gladiferi Fratres, or Brethren Sword-Bearers.
This Order had their Tesoro Milit. de Cavall. f. 52. b. Statutes something like those of the Knights Templars, and the Knights thereof took on them the Favin.  Mennen. in lo|cis praed. Vow both of Obedience and Chastity.
Pope I. Lud. Go|thofrid. Ar|chont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 5. Innocent the Third gave approbation and confirmation to this Order, which became fully Instituted in the year of our Lord 1203.
And Munst. Chron. l. 3. p. 423.  778. because they could not of themselves accomplish the end for which they were instituted, they in the year Functius Chron. ut supra. 1237. or 1239. united to the Teutonick Order, and submitted to their Rule and Habit, by whose help and assistance, they af|terwards overcame the Idolatrous Livonians, and brought them to submit to the Christian Faith: thenceforward the Heyl. Cosmogr. l. 2. p. 168. Great Master of Livonia acknowledged him of Prussia for his Superior; and so continued until Mennen. de Delic. Equest. p. 91. Walter de Pletemberg their Great Master, contemporary with Albert of Brandenburg, Great Master of Prussia, separated this Order from its obedience to the Teutonick.
Finally, in the year 1561. Gothard de Ketler, the last Great Master of this Order, following the example of Albert Great Master of Prussia, became a Subject to the Crown of Poland; for on the Heyl. Cosmogr. l. 2. p. 169. 5. of March in the year aforesaid, he (in the Ca|stle of Riga) surrendred to the use of King Sigismund the Second (surnamed Au|gustus) all the Lands belonging to this Order, together with his Cross, the Seal of the Order, the Charters and Grants of several Popes and Emperors, which concern'd the same; the Keys of the City and Castle of Riga, the Office of Great Master, the rights of Coynage, and all the Powers and Priviledges appertaining to it; receiving back again from Radzevill the Kings Commissioner, the Duke|dom of Curland to him and his Heirs for ever.
In this manner this Order became extinguisht, after it had flourished 357 years.



The Knights of Jesus Christ, in Italy and France, or Brothers of the Militia of St. Dominick. (25.)
St. Dominick (descended of the Nich. Iansse|nius in vita ipsius S. Dominici Edit. Antu|erp. 1622. p. 1. Family of the Guzmans in Spain) was Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 6. c. 8. Foun|der of this Order, which he instituted in the year Briet. Anal. Mundi pars 3. Tom. 2. p. 93. 1206. principally to fight against the Albigenses then called Hereticks, and the Knights thereof were stiled Fratres de Militia B. Dominici.
He prescribed to them a Habitus erat albus,  insigne Crux par|tm nigra, partm alba liliata; qua nune Ministri Tribunalium Sancta Fidei utuntur. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quzst. 2. Sect. 13. White Habit, and for the Badge of their Order a Cross Flory quarterly Sable and Argent, to be worn upon their Breasts.
Pope Ios. Mich. Marquez in Tes. Milit. f. 47. b. Innocent the Third approved of this Order Briet. Annal. Mundi pars 3. Tom. 2. p. 101. anno Dom. 1215. under the Rule of the said St. Dominick, and gave priviledge, that the Knights from among themselves should elect a Master. They professed Obedience and conjugal Chastity.
The work being done for which these Knights were in|stituted, they laid aside their Arms, and devoted themselves wholly to the A. Miraeus, p. 46. spiritual warfare.
Afterwards there were Widows and Virgins joined to this Order, and thereupon they became called Fratres seu Sorores de Paenitentia B. Dominici; whose Rule was approved by Pope Mennen. p. 106. Innocent the Sixth, about the year of our Lord 1360.


The Order of Knights of St. Mary de Merced in Aragon. (26.)
Alonso Re|mon. Historia General de la Orden de la Merced; l. 1. c. 4 f. 10. vide etiam Marquez en Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 58. a.  Mennen. Delic. E|quest. p. 107. Iames the First of Aragon surnamed the Invincible (who conquered from the Moors the Kingdom of Murcia, Valentia, and the Baliares) was sometime Priso|ner to Simon Earl of Montfort in France, where he suffered much hardship and many troubles; and being throughly moved with the insufferable miseries the Christians indured, under the slavery of the Moors; made a Vow to the blessed Virgin, that when he should be delivered from his Captivity, he would endeavour the redemption of such Christians as the Moors had made Captives. Thus far his Vow: but it extended not to the Alon. Remon. in Histor. praed. l. 1. f. 11. a. erecting of an Order, which should oblige the Companions thereof, to engage in that affair, as some would have it.
This King being freed from his Imprisonment, laid up great sums of money to be imployed in performance of his Vow; and afterwards by the advice and counsel of Raymond de Penafort his Confessor (a Dominican Friar) and of Pedro Nolasco, a noble Cavalier, (Ibidem l. 2. c. 1. f. 37. descended from the ancient Family of Nolasco in France, resident at a Town called les Saintas Pucelles, in the Diocess of St. Paul, under the Arch-Bishop of Arles) he Ibid. l. 1. c. 6. p. 17. Fl. Cherub. in Compend. Bul|lar Tom. 1. p. 15 Constitut. 9. Schol. 2. founded an Order of Knights, in the City of Barcelona, called La Nueva Merced, so named (saith our Author) by the blessed Virgin, who in a Vision Ibid. l. 1. c. 6. p. 17. Fl. Cherub. in Compend. Bul|lar Tom. 1. p. 15 Constitut. 9. Schol. 2. appeared to this King, and to Raymond and Nolasco one night, in one and the same hour, directing the whole Institution, and giving it that Name, because of the mercy and liberty which the Christian Captives should receive by this means.
But it appears by the Bulls of Popes Alon. Remon. l. 1. c. 8. f. 21. b. Gregory the Ninth, and Lib 2. c. 18. f. 84. b. Alexander the Fourth, as also by a Charter made by Don Pedro King of Aragon, dated the eleventh of Ianuary, anno 1358. to have been likewise called Ordo beatae Eulaliae from Ibid. l. 9. c. 5. f. 426. St. Eulalia the Virgin and Martyr, buried at Barcelona, in the Church there dedicated to her name.
There are various opinions concerning the year wherein this Order was foun|ded; but it is with certainty determined to have been anno Dom. Lib. 1. c. 8. p. vide Tesoro mi|lit. de Cavall. f. 8. a. 1218. on the Feast-day of St. Laurence the Martyr in August (on which day annually the commemoration of the Foundation of this Order is commanded to be celebrated

by theCompend. Ballar. Tem. 3. p. 21. Const. 68. Bull of Pope Clement the Eighth) in the fifth year of the Reign of this King Iames; as is manifest from several authentick testimonies, collected and alledged by Alphonsus Remon, in his Alon Remon. l. 1. c. 8. History of this Order.
The end of its Institution, and the Profession and Obligation of the Knights, was in effect the same with that vowed by King Iames in his Captivity, to wit, to gather Alms, and to go in person to redeem Christian Slaves, who either by Piracy, the chance of War, or other sad accident, had fallen into the hands of the Moors. This work prospered so well, that Lib. 2. c. 8. f. 54. b. Pedro Nolasco (being first sent into the Kingdom of Valentia, to make redemption of Captives) redeemed four hun|dred within the space of six years after the Foundation of the Order.
This Pedro Nolasco was by the Founder constituted the first General or Head of the Order; but as concerning the person that gave the Habit to him, there are these three opinions.
First, That it was by the hands of King Iames the Founder. Secondly, That Rerengario Pallovasino, Bishop of Barcelona gave it. Thirdly, That he received it from Raymond de Penafort; all which ourLib. 1. c. 10. fo. 29. b. Author sets down, but there deter|mines nothing; only seems inclinable to the first opinion, as most rational, be|cause the King was Founder, and was so called by the blessed Virgin in the Vision, and for that the Order it self was at first composed meerly ofLib. 5. c. 6. f. 238. b. Laymen, and whol|ly military, and so declared by the PopesLib. 7. c. 8. f. 328.b. Boniface the Eighth, and Clement the Fifth: Besides their Laws are in favour of those that are of this opinion, and ex|clude out of this Act, judicially Kingly, all Ecclesiastical ones, and by the same reason the Bishop: for saith the Canon of their Law, Otto si el Clerigo un home de reli|gion, non tu|vieron que podrian sazer Cavalleros. l. 11. tit. 21. partida 2. A Priest ought not to make Knights. But afterwards Alon. Remon. l. 5. c. 6. f. 237. b.  f. 238. in another place, he absolutely concludes, that the King himself gave the Habit to Nolasco, from the evidence he exhibits out of a Letter which King Don Pedro the Fourth sent to Pope Innocent the Sixth.
Such a like Habit as was given to Nolasco, was also prescribed to the first Knights, viz. a Coat and Scapular of a Ib. f. 236. Sansov. f. 21. b. common sort of coarse White Cloth. Their Coat was garnished with Cordons and Ribbons, wherewith they fastned it about their necks, and from the upper end thereof issued a Cap that covered half their head. The Monks wore theirIb. f. 236. Sansov. f. 21. b. Coats and Scapulars reaching down to their feet (but those of the Knights were much Ib. f. 236. Sansov. f. 21. b. shorter) and the form of their Coat (or rather Mantle) and Cap, was the same as they now wear.
When the Government of the Order became both spiritual and temporal, as well the Ib. f. 236. Sansov. f. 21. b. Knights as Monks, were commanded by order of Chapter to keep the manner and form of their Habit apart, according to the intention of the first appointment.
In the time, and upon request of Gulielmo de Bas, the second General of this Order, See the Di|ploma in Alon. Re|mon. l. 1. c. 12. fol. 177. b. Scutm cum Crce alba in Campo rube, in parte supe|riori, cum in|signiis Regni Aragonis in inferiori. F. Cherub. in Compend. Bullar. Tom. 1. p. 34. Con|stit. 6. Schol. 2. King Iames the Founder, by his Diploma, dated at Saragosa the 15. of Iuly anno 1251. granted unto him, and all the Fraternity of the Order, That they should wear upon their Scapulars anSee the Di|ploma in Alon. Re|mon. l. 1. c. 12. fol. 177. b. Scutm cum Crce alba in Campo rube, in parte supe|riori, cum in|signiis Regni Aragonis in inferiori. F. Cherub. in Compend. Bullar. Tom. 1. p. 34. Con|stit. 6. Schol. 2. Escotcheon of See the Di|ploma in Alon. Re|mon. l. 1. c. 12. fol. 177. b. Scutm cum Crce alba in Campo rube, in parte supe|riori, cum in|signiis Regni Aragonis in inferiori. F. Cherub. in Compend. Bullar. Tom. 1. p. 34. Con|stit. 6. Schol. 2. Aragon, viz. Or, four Pales Gules, and above that, the Remon. hstor. General hujus Ord. l. 1. c. 9. f. 29. White Cross of the Church of Barcelona, in a Red Field; which two Coats being joined together, per Fess, in one shield, were so born for sometime, but afterwards came to be encompassed with a Border. The Lib. 5 c. 6 f. 236. Knights wore their Escotcheon of Arms, sixt on their Scapulars, but the Monks on their Mantles, and both before upon their Breasts.
The Founder by his Lib. 4. c. 12. f. 179. Diploma dated at Valentia the 14. of March, anno Dom. 1254. granted particular Priviledges to the Order, which he Lib. 4. c. 12. f. 179. confirmed by ano|ther royal Instrument, dated at Lirida the third of March, anno 1275.
Besides these Royal Grants, this Order received approbation from the Papal See, namely, from Pope Lib. 1. c. 8. f. 22. b. vide Ciacon. in vi|ta hujus Ponif. l. 1. p. 558. Gregory the Ninth, in the eighth year of his Papacy (on the day of St. Anthony the Abbot) who prescribed to the Master and Fraternity the Rule of St. Augustine. It was afterwards confirmed by Alon. Remon. l. 2. c. 18. fol. 84. b. Alexander the Fourth, as appears by a Bull of his, wherein he granted them several Indulgences, and dated at Naples the 10. of April in the first year of his Papacy. These Knights professed Marquez en Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 58. a. con|jugal Chastity, and Obedience to their Superiors.
In time this Order also, which was at first solely under the Government of Knights, came to be as well Spiritual as Temporal, and at length fell into the power of the Monks and Priests.
For, the Knights and Priests falling at variance about the election of a General of their Order, (upon the death ofAlon. Remon. l. 6. c. 20. f. 312. Arnoldo Rosiniol, their seventh General, who died anno 1317.) the Knights having chosen Berengario Hostales, and the Priests Raimundo Alberto, they appealed to the Pope (Iohn the 22. then holding the Chair) who it seems the 17. of November, in the year aforesaid, declared,Lib. 7. c. 7. f. 328. b. That (the Order seeming inclinable to be governed after the manner of Monks) he thought it convenient for them to have a Master General, which should be a Priest, and that for the future no Lay-man should be elected General; and so determined the controversie on the behalf of the Priests.
This Judgment gave the Knights so great discontent, that Lib. 6. c. 20. f. 313. one of them, being Kinsman to the Governor of the new erected Order of Montesa, offered to bring over to that Society, all the Knights of Merced, being then threescore in number, which being accepted of, he did so, and from henceforth they became incorpo|rated with the Knights of Montesa: So that ever since, the whole Fraternity have been only Priests, and no Lay or Military person among them, and therefore De Ord. Mi|lit. Disq. 1. Qust. 4 n 99. Andr. Mendo reckons this Order among those that are extinct. The Master Ge|neral is also a Priest, and hath his residence at Barcelona, by the Decrees of Popes Clement the Fifth, and Iohn the 22.
Remon en Hist. de la Mer|ced. l. 1. c. 5. f. 15. b. c. 8. f. 25. Raymond de Penasort, the Founder's Confessor (called also Raymond of Barce|lona, because it was the place of his Birth) who had a powerful hand in the Insti|tution of this Order, and Fr. Cherub. Comp. Bul|lar. Tom. 3. p. 24.  25. Constit. 77. devised the Statutes, lived neer to the age of an hun|dred years; he was Fr. Cherub. Comp. Bul|lar. Tom. 3. p. 24.  25. Constit. 77. canonized for a Saint, and the Fr. Cherub. Comp. Bul|lar. Tom. 3. p. 24.  25. Constit. 77. 7. of Ianuary appointed for his Anniversary, by the Expedita suit 3. Kal. Mail, anno 1601. Bull of Pope Clement the Eighth.
On the 12. of Iuly, anno 1664. the approbation of the Colledge passed, for making the 29. of Ianuary, the Anniversary of Petro Nolasco Confessor, the other great assister, and first General of the Order. The Office appointed for that day, may be seen in the Missale Romamum, printed lately at Paris, in the large Volume.
This way of Canonizing holy men by the Popes, is said to have been first used by Compend. Bull. Tom. 3. p. 25. Const. 77. Scbol. 1. Bellarmine de Sanct. Beatis. l. 1. c. 8. Leo the Third, anno Dom. 803. who then solemnly Canonized Suibert Bishop of Werden.
To conclude, the charitable and pious work, for which this Order was erected, hath been carried on from the time of its Institution, and managed by the Frater|nity thereof, with all religious care and faithfulness; very great sums of Money being yearly collected and put into their hands, for that use and purpose, in man|ner following. They send their Agents yearly abroad, chiefly to Algiers and Fess, to return them an account of the age, quality, and number of those who are in Captivity; and upon consideration had thereof, order them to contract for their redemption: the general course being to ransom the religious persons first, next the Laiety; and among them the young, and such as appear most likely to do service before others.
Few dye in Spain, who bequeath not some Legacy to this Order, which great|ly encreafeth its Revenue: and here, though she was no Benefactress to this Order, nor left her Legacy to be disposed of by that Fraternity, most deservedly may be recorded, of our Nation, the illustrious Lady Alice Dutchess Dudley, created into that Dignity by his late Majesty, of ever blessed memory, King Charles the First, by See a Copy of the Patent en|tred in the Earl Marshal's Book in the Office of Arms. fol. 80. Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at Oxford the 23. of May, in the twentieth year of his Reign; who dyed the 22. day of Ianuary in the year of our Lord 1668/9. being the 90. year of her age, and bequeathed by her last Will and Testament, one hundred pounds per annum for ever, to be im|ployed for redemption of Captives of the English Nation.



Knights of the Rosary in Toledo. (27.)
Ios. Mich. Marquez Tes. Milit. de Ca|vall. f. 58. b. Roderick Arch-Bishop of Toledo in Spain, seeing the Country sore oppressed by the Moors, called the Nobless of the City together, and propounded the great necessity of their appearance and assistance in its defence, and extirpation of the Moors; whereto they being unanimously inclined, he gave beginning to this Or|der of the Rosary, into which entred many of the Nobless.
This Order had Statutes, which chiefly obliged them to the defence of the Ca|tholick Religion, to fight against the Moors, and to say continually a Rosary of our blessed Lady: Our Author finds not that it had been approved by any of the Popes, but conceives the Arch-Bishop, being Metropolitan of Spain, was of suffi|cient power to give it approbation; besides, he framed the Statutes for the Knights, and prescribed to them the Rule of living, to wit, that of St. Dominick.
The Tessera fuit effigie B. Ma|riae del Rosa|rio,  infra ipsam Cruz al|ba,  nigra; instar ejus, quam gestant Ministri Tribu|nalium Sanctae Fidei. Mendo Disq. 1. Quaest. 4. Sect. 100. Ensign of this Order was the Figure of our Lady of the Rosary, upon a Cross Flory, quarterly Argent and Sable.


Knights of St. Mary the Glorious in Italy. (28.)
The Author of this Institution, was Carol. Sigo|nius de regno Italiae. l. 17. p. 45. Bartolemeo de Vincenza, of the Order of Friers Preachers or Dominicans, afterwards made Bishop of that City, a man that did much both in word and example: and the end he chiefly design'd, was to procure peace to the Cities of Italy,Sylv. Mauro|lico in Oceano Religionum. p. 232. then much disquieted by Civil Wars, among the Princes thereof.
This Order received Institution anno Dom. Ios. M. Mar|quez en Tesoro milit. de Ca|vall. f. 37. b. 1233. a year famous and renown|ed in that Age, for very great piety, and therefore called Brietii Anna|les Mandi, pars 3. Tom. 2. p. 118 generalis devotionis Annus. It was approved and confirmed by Sigon. in regno Italiae. l. 19. p. 97. Pope Vrban the Fourth, anno 1262. and the Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 8. c. 1. Rule of St. Dominick prescribed to the Knights, who are obliged Sigonius  Marquez, locis cit. to take into their care and protection Widows and Orphans, and use their endeavour to beget concord among such as are at variance.
The Habit is a Gothofrid. in Archont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 7. White Tunick or Cassock, and a Mantle of Russet Colour; but there is some difference among those that mention the Badge, Orig. de Cavaleri. f. 22. Sansovin and In Mare Oceano Relig. p. 232. Mau|rolico say, they wore before their breasts a purple Cross patee, bordered with Gold; Loco cit. Gothofridus saith, it is a purple Cross patee, with two Stars in chief; but Loco supra cit. Marquez gives it an Octogonal Cross, like that of Malta, and four Stars, to wit, one at every side thereof.
The Marquez in Tesoro Milit. de Cavall. fol. 38. b. manner of giving the Habit, and making Profession, is with the Ceremony used by the Knights of Malta. The Knights profess Ibid. f. 37. b. Obedience to their Great Master, and con|jugal Chastity, but are S. Maurolico, loco cit. forbid to wear Spurs or Bridles of Gold. They are commonly called Cavaleri de Madona, and reside at Bolonia, Modena, and other Cities of Italy: and because they have no Monasteries, but dwell in their own Houses, together with their Wives and Children, at ease and in plenty, they were called Menenn. De|lic. Equest. p. 111. Fratres Gau|dentes, or Archont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 7. Hilares.


The Order of Knights of St. James in Portugal. (29.)
We have not met with any who make mention of this Order as distinct from that of St. Iames in Galicia, save only I. Mich. Marquez, but such as rather take it to have been sometime a member thereof; and that the Knights of St. Iames in Galicia, who had anciently Commanderies in Portugal, were only exempted from

obedience and subjection to their Great Master, and not received upon the ac|count of a new Institution, for so much doth Andrew Favin affirm; but Ios. Micheli, from Portugal, Writers, reports the contrary, and gives this further account of the Order, to wit En su Teso|ro milit. de Cavall. f. 48. a. That the troubles the Moors gave daily to Portugal, and the great zeal of their Kings, seeing their Subjects so exceedingly opprest by them, was such, that they endeavoured by all means to cut off those mischiefs, and to secure and quiet the Consines of their Kingdom.
Among whom King Don Denys the Sixth, moved with a like tender regard towards his People, did in the year of our Lord En su Teso|ro milit. de Cavall. f. 48.a. 1310. institute this Order of St. Iames, under whose protection he became victorious in divers Battels against the Moors, and at length quieted his Kingdom, by the assistance of these Knights. And it was not long after the Institution, e're this Order flourished, through the favour of those Priviledges bestowed on it by the Founder.
It received approbation first, from Pope En su Teso|ro milit. de Cavall. f. 48. a. Nicholas the Fourth, after from Pope Celestine the Fifth, and again from other of his Successors.
The Knights profess conjugal Chastity, Hospitality and Obedience, and none are admitted before they make proof of their Gentility by blood.
The Ensign of this Order is a Ibid. Red Sword, formed like that of St. Iames in Galicia, the Habit White: only the difference between them lies in a little Twist of Gold, which these of Portugal draw about their Sword.
At the Town of Ibid. Alcasar de Sul, was the principal Convent of this Order first seated, afterward removed to Palmela, where it yet continues: and whiles Por|tugal remained under the Crown of Spain, and the Administration of this Order under that King, it was no less illustrious, than whilst their own Kings go|verned.
The Statutes Ibid. are much the same with those of St. Iames in Galicia, so also is the manner of giving the Habit, Benediction, and Profession.


The Order of our Lady, and of St. George of Montesa in Valentia. (30.)
This Order did Menen. De|lic. Equest. p. 112. succeed into the Lands and Possessions of the Knights Tem|plars in Valentia, as the Knights Hospitalars did into those of the Templars in France, Italy, and other places. For Tes. milit. de Caval. f. 2. a. after the Templars were dissolved, Iames the Se|cond, King of Aragon and Valentia, refused to grant their Revenues (lying in his Kingdom) to the Order of St. Iohn of Ierusalem, as other Princes had done; ne|vertheless within few years sent an Embassy to Pope Iohn the 22. to give him his reasons why he did not.
These the Pope considering of, as also that the Moors were very neer to Ara|gon, gave way that these Revenues of the exauterated Templars should be appli|ed to the Convent of Montesa, where had been placed both Knights and Friars of the Order of Calatrava.
Hereupon this King, in the year of our Lord Io. Mariana de reb. Hisp. l. 15. c. 16. vide Fr. de Rades y Andrada en Chron. de Ca|larava. f. 49. b. 1317. Instituted this Order, in the City of Valentia (Idem de Ra|des. nevertheless subject to that of Calatrava, as a member there|of) and made choice of the Town of Montesa, to give the Knights both name and habitation: whom he obliged to defend his Kingdoms, against the incursi|ons of the Moors.
Their Ibidem. Colledge (dedicated to the honor of St. George) was built in the fol|lowing year by the Pope at Montesa, at the instance of King Iames, Menenn. p. 113. Culielmus de Eril, a valiant Soldier being constituted the first Master in the Convent of St Mary and St. George.
TheFavin. en le Teat. d'Hon|neur. l. 6 c. 15. Statutes of the Order (almost the same with those of Calatrava) were confirmed by the said Pope Iohn, who gave to these Knights thSansov. Orig. de Cavalieri. f 21 b. Cistertian Rule. They vowed conjugal Chastity, and the manner of their Investiture is as in the Order of Calatrava.
Their Habit is Sovin ut supra.  Go|thfrid. Ar|chont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 7. White, and the Badge of the Order a Una Crux Llana Roxa, Lancerote l. 1. c. 32. plain Red Cross, that is, the Cross of St. George, Favin l. 6. c. 16. Patron of the Kingdoms of Navarr and

Aragon. This Cross was worn upon the breast, by a priviledge granted to the Knights from Pope Benedict the Thirteenth.
To this Order of Montesa was incorporated that ofSilv. Mauro|lio in Mare Oceano Relig. p. 29.St. George d' Alfama, anno Dom. 1399. which union received confirmation from the Council of Constance.
A Catalogue of the Masters are recorded by En Tesoro mi|lit. de Caval. loc. cit. Io. Micheli; which great Office continues to this time in the King of Spain; so doth the Revenue of thirteen Commanderies belonging thereunto, amounting to 23000 Duckets per annum.


The Order of Knights of Christ in Portugal. (31.)
As the Knights of Montesa sprung from the ruine of the Knights Templars in Valentia, so did this Order of Christ (or of the Alex. Ross his continuation of Sir W. Raw|leighs Hist. sub sinem.Warfare of Christ) succeed them in the Kingdom of Portugal. For the Knights Templars having been very ser|viceable to the Kings of Portugal, in their Wars against the Moors, the Kings gave unto them divers Lands and Revenues, which when their Order came to be dis|solved, and their Estates confiscate, King Ios. Micheli en Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 63. b. Pantaleon de Ord. Ioannit. reb. gest. l. 1. p. 95. Mennen. p. 114. Don Denys, surnamed Perioca, sent to Pope Iohn the 22. (then at Avignion) to desire that the Knights Templars Lands might not be disposed of, out of his Kingdom; which though he did not readily grant, yet he gave way for the King, to render him he reasons of his request.
Hereupon King Denys sent his Embassadors to the Pope, in the year 1316. not only to back his desire, but withal to declare to his Holiness the great vexations and evils, the neighbouring Moors in Algarves did to his Kingdom. And foras|much as the Town of Castro Marin was a Frontler of the Enemy, and the site thereof very commodious for the building of a Fort to resist them, he farther moved the Pope for Licence, that an Order of Knights might be Instituted in that Town, and withal offered to him the Rents and Jurisdiction thereof, and all Dominion over it.
This request being thought just, and the remedy so necessary, the Pope did afterwards (namely in the year of our Lord 1319.) give Foundation to this new Order, dedicating it to the honor of God, and the exaltation of the Catholick Faith, under the Title of the Military Order of our Lord Iesus Christ, because of the miraculous apparition, which this King had seen of Christ crucified, when he went out to fight against the Moors.
He further commanded, that the Knights of this Order should observe the same Rule, with those of the Order of Calatrava, which was Cistertian, and enjoy the same. Piviledges and Indulgences, formerly granted to their Great Master and Knights.Aegidius Mar|tinius. In which respect he nominated Don Gil. Martinez, for their first Master, because he was a Knight profest, and Master of the Order of St. Bene|dict d' Avis; and appointed for their Visitor, the Abbot of Alcobaza, of the Ci|stertian Order.
This Ibid. f. 64.. Abbot or his Lieutenant in succession was impowred to receive of the Master of this Order, in the name of the Pope and Church of Rome, the Oath of fide|lity; it being directed to be taken in the presence of the Kings of Portugal, before he should enter upon the administration of his Mastership, and the King was ob|liged to receive this Oath within ten days, after the Master should tender it to him, and in case the King did not in that time receive it from the Master, then he might take on him the administration of his Office without it: and further that each Knight before his admittance should take the same Oath of Fidelity, before the Master of this Order.
All the Platina in vitae Iob. 25. p. 220. Goods and Possessions formerly belonging to the Knights Templars, within the Kingdom of Portugal, were hereupon granted unto this Order, and the Knights thereof particularly obliged to make War against theGothofrid. Archont. Cos|mica. l. 3. p. 7. Heyl. Cosmogr. l. 1. p. 244.Moors in Baetica, next neighbour to Portugal. They had appointed to them for their chief Seat, Io Mariana. l. 15. c. 16. Tesoro milit. de Cav. f. 63. b. In Sylvensi Diaecesi. Castro Marin, where their first Convent was erected, but afterwards it was re|moved into the City of Tomar.
They went clothed in Favin. l. 6. c. 8. ide Iu|risprud. Heroi. p. 563.  A. Mendo. Dis. 1. Quaest. 11. n. 196.Black, wearing upon their breasts a Cross Pate of Red Silk, and upon that another of White.
This Order (as that d'Avis) became at length annexed to the Crown of Portu|gal; whose Kings have ever since taken upon them the title of perpetual Admi|nistrators of both.


The Order of Knights of the Passion of Jesus Christ. (32.)
Some years after the Institution of the precedent Order, and towards the latter end of the thirteenth Century, there was erected a religious Order of Knighthood, by Charles King of France, and our King Richard the Second, which bore the Title of the Order of the Passion of Iesus Christ. And though we do not find any further progress thereof, after it had received its Foundation, yet considering the grounds whereon it was instituted, and the nobleness and largeness of the de|sign (exceeding all other Religious Orders of Knighthood, except those of the Knights of St. Iohn of Ierusalem, and Knights Templars) as also because one of our English Kings was a Co-founder thereof; we conceived it worthy our pains to make an extract, particularly relating to the causes why it was erected, the frame of its Constitution, its principal Structures, and the Habit and Ensigns thereof, out of an old French Manuscript, written by Philip de Maisiere Chancellor of Cyprus, wherein it is thus prefaced.
Ex vet. MS. in Bibliotheca Arundeliana. f. 1.2.3. Forasmuch as by reason of the three deadly sins, which began to reign among the Christians, namely, Pride, Covetousness, and Luxury, God permitted the Sara|cens, Enemies of the Faith, to overcome Ierusalem and the Holy Land, to the shame and disgrace of Christendom; therefore to renew the memory of the Passion of Christ, thereby to extirpate those deadly sins, and to make way for the re-con|quest of Ierusalem, and the Holy places, the overthrow and confusion of the Ene|mies of the Faith, this Order was erected.
There are Ibidem. sol. 3. a.twenty causes reckoned up by this Author, for the necessity of In|stituting this Order of the Passion.

1. To stir up the Soldiery to amendment of life, by the example of so new and solemn a devotion.
2. To renew the memory of the Passion of Christ among Christians, by the ex|ample of this holy Order.
3. For the speedy sending of relief and succour to the Christians of the East, that stood in great need of it.
4. For the regaining of the Holy Land, out of the hands of the Enemies of the Faith.
5. For the propagation of the holy Catholick Faith, among the people of the East.
6. For resisting of those that were disturbers of the Catholick Faith; as Here|ticks, Tyrants, and Schismaticks.
7. That the rents and divisions of the Church through Italy, might by the pas|sage of this holy Order be healed and reunited, under one universal Shepherd of Souls.
8. Fol. 4. That when the Kings of France and England should arrive in the Continent, this Order might go before them, as a valiant precursor, to make way for, and at|tend them in all things.
9. To serve as a Life-Guard, for the defence of the two Kings persons, and a forlorn hope, to give example and encouragement to the whole Army.
10. That those Voluntiers that served in the Army, being without head, and not under Rule (if they should venture extravagantly and rashly into the Battel with|out Guide) might be regulated by the Cavaliers of this holy Order.
11. That if the Victory should at any time incline to the adverse party, these Cavaliers, by reason of their expertness in the feats of Arms, might serve for a reserve to recover the declining Fortune of the day, and to rescue the dead and wounded out of the hands of the Enemy.
12. That if at any time either of the two Kings should be left destitute of a Guard to their persons, they might be attended by some of the most valiant of this Order.
13. That if any Towns or Fortresses taken by either of the two Kings, should be found dangerous and difficult to be kept; that such should be committed to the Cavaliers of this Order, who were to be ready to undergo all kind of dangers and difficulties.
14. That by the vigilance and industry of these Cavaliers (if they should be set as Spies upon the Enemies actions) the two Kings might be informed of the secrets of the Enemies Camp.
15. Fol. 5. That if a Treaty should happen to be between the two Kings and the Ene|my, the Prince of the Chevalry in person, or some of his chosen Cavaliers in his stead, should labour indefatigably in this affair, especially either of the Kings so commanding.
16. That if either of the Kings should be at any Siege, within the Enemies Territories, certain of the Chevalry ought humbly to visit the Host, to be watch|ful over it, and to guard it by night from the attempts and Spies of the Enemy, or of false brethren.
17. That if any false rumors or tales should be spred in the Army of the Ca|tholick Kings, with design to raise dissentions or debates; the Prince of the Che|valry in person, or any of his grand Officers for him (according to the dig|nity of the persons at odds) should labour to the utmost of their power to take up the Controversie, and bring the persons to a reconciliation.
18. That if any of the Christians of the West, should have any obligation to take upon them a passage into the Holy Land, a certain number of the Che|valry might be ready to accompany them to the performance of their Vows or Obligations.
19. That if any of the younger Sons or Brothers of Noblemen, having little or no portions of their own, should be willing to serve in the Chevalry; they might so long as they behaved themselves well, be nobly and handsomely provided for.
20. That if either of the Kings should be hindred from passing into the Holy Land, about the performance of any Vow or Obligation from their Forefathers, the Chevalry might be ready at a speedy warning to perform whatsoever was committed to their charge, in behalf of the Kings.

Fol. 16. b. And although this Order was principally dedicated to the honor of our blessed Saviour, yet saith our Author, the blessed Virgin Mary was lookt upon as a principal Mediatress and Advocate of this holy Chevalry; representing the pas|sion of her Son, and also guarding and defending the Cavaliers, against the Ene|mies of the Faith, as a Mother doth a Child.
Pol. 19. b. As to the Government of this Order, it is to be noted, that in the principal Convent of the holy Chevalry, all things of publick concernment were to be de|bated by five authentick Councils in the presence of the Prince.
The first was to be called the Quotidian Council, consisting of four and twenty Councellors. The second was the Particular, or Singular Council, consisting of about forty persons, to wit, four and twenty grand Councellors, eight Execu|tors of Justice, four Commissaries of Trespasses, and three or four Doctors of Divinity and Law. The third the Grand Council, consisting of fourscore persons, viz. forty such as were mentioned in the second Council, and other authentick Officers, and a certain number of Brothers, valiant and sage persons, amount|ing in all to the abovesaid number. The fourth Council was to be called the General Chapter, and held every year; consisting of all the above-named Of|ficers, with the Presidents and Deputies of Provinces. The fifth Council was the Vniversal Chapter, to be held from four to six years; consisting of a thousand Knights of the Chevalry, by which Universal Chapter, any of the Chevalry, or grand Officers were to be reformed, or, if occasion required, punished according to the Statutes of the Chevalry.
The principal Officer of the Chevalry, was the Grand Iusticiary, to whom belonged the Judgment of all the criminal Affairs, and the disposal of all chief Offices and Places.
The next chief Officer was called the Grand Bailiff; that is to say, only in the principal Convent, to administer Justice both Civil and Criminal in that Con|vent to all sorts of persons.
Fol. 20. .In the principal City, as also in every City and Castle belonging to the Che|valry, one of the Order was to be chosen to administer all sorts of Justice in that place; who was to go under the name of Potestate.
Also in the General Chapter, there was to be chosen every year one of the Or|der, who should be called the Senator of the General Chapter, and four and twenty discreet persons of the Chevalry with him, who should hold a general Chapter, or principal Convent, upon any Expedition of War.
In the Universal Chapter, there was to be chosen one of the Order, who should be called Dictator of the Vniversal Chapter; and with him twelve Fathers Con|script, with twelve Coadjutors, who should hold an universal Chapter, from four years to six.
Also in the principal Convent, there were to be chosen ten of the Chevalry, couragious and of holy life, who should be called the TenFol. 20. b. Executors of Iustice, which should be decreed by the Grand Justiciary upon the persons of the chief Officers being delinquent; they were also to be called the Conservators of the holy Rule of the Chevalry, and also to be assistant to the grand Advocate, and the grand Protectors and Promoters of Divine Charity.
Also in the principal Convent there were to be chosen four of the Chevalry, devout and good men, who should be called the Charitable Commissaries of the  whose Office it was to provide for the Widows and Or|phans, committed to their care.
And whereas this Order was made up of eight several Languages, there was to be always appointed in the principal Convent, eight Notaries using the Habit of the Brothers, and also for every language a several Notary, and so the like in the Convents of other Regions and Cities.
Also, to the end the Knights of this Order might live according to the Rules of the Order, in the perfection of their Estates and Degree, they were to bind themselves by Oath to three things, viz. Obedience to their Sovereigns, poverty of Spirit, and conjugal Chastity.
Fol. 21. b. Also the Chevalry were to have for their sustentation, the possession of Cities, Castles, Fortresses, Gold, Silver, and all kind of moveables, as God should be|stow upon them; nevertheless all to be in common among them, that they might the better intend the exercise of their Arms and other Duties.
Also to the end that any of the Chevalry, having possessions in the West, might not return thither, to the personal enjoyment of them, thereby leaving the duties that belonged to their Order in the East; such possesions were appointed to be managed by certain Merchants and honest Citizens, deputed to that purpose.
Also the holy Chevalry, were to observe Justice, both Civil and Criminal, ren|dring to every one according to his deserts, whether reward or punishment.
Fol. 22. . Also the Prince of the Chevalry was to summon the principal Convent, at the Castle of the principal City; where he should assemble the President of the City and of the Convent, and three or four other Presidents, each having under them four and twenty Knights, and four and twenty Brothers of the Chevalry, with fifty Serjeants, so as to make up in the whole, with Officers and others, to the number of about 500 or 600 Combatants to be ready upon all occasions.
Moreover there was to belong to the principal Convent, a Church of so marve|lous a structure, that the like hath not been seen or known: it was designed to be 50 Cubits in breadth, without any Pillars, 100 Cubits long, and in height 25.
Also in the Castle and principal Convent, there was to be an Hospital, in which the Widows of the holy Chevalry, should attend upon the sick and infirm, Fol. 2. b. still imploying themselves in the holy work of Charity, which also was to be the bu|siness of the Prince, the Grand Officers and all the Knights.
Also there should belong to the Convent a Baptistery or Font, round, large, and curiously made for the baptizing of the Sons and Daughters of the Knights.
Also there was appointed to belong to the principal Convent, a large and

stately Palace, with a great Hall, and large Consistories, to contain the Prince and Council with their Retinue, and for a habitation for the Prince, with his Princess and Family.
Also in the Convent there was to be a Cloister, for the Canons and Clerks, large and delightful, and a great Hall with Galleries; which habitation should be neer the Church, and inclosed with high Walls.
Also there was to belong to the said Castle a very fair Palace, to entertain the Princes of the West, when at any time they came that way, either to Wa, or up|on Pilgrimage.
Also in the said Castle there were to be distinct lodgings and habitations for the grand Officers of the Chevalry, as well Natives as Foreigners, for the Knights Companions, and Serjeants of the Chevalry, and for their Wives.
Also there were to be in the said Castle, Wine-Cellars, Granges, Granaries, Stables for Horses and Cattel, Easements, Mills, Cisterns, Baths, and all other necessaries for the Chevalry.
Fol. 23. a. Also in the principal Convent there were to be three chief Halls; first the great Hall of the Prince, where he and all the Knights and Brothers of the Chevalry were to dine on Festival days: The second, where the Canons should daily sit at meat with the Forreign Prelates and Clerks, and also all the Knights and Brothers of the Chevalry that were unmarried: The third, for the grand Commandor of the Horse to eat in, and with him all the lesser Officers of the principal Convent, all the Valets of the Horse, and the Servitors belonging to the said Commandor.
The Habit of the holy Chevalry of the Passion of Iesus Christ, was to be esta|blisht according to the intention of the holy Rule; that is to say, representing in its Vestments the Passion of Iesus.
The Knights were appointed to wear a handsom cloth Coat, of a civil colour, reaching down half way the leg, which should be called the principal Coat of the Chevalry; this was to be girt with a large Girdle of Silk or Leather, two fingers broad, the Buckle round, of black Horn, as also the Tongue and the garnishing of the holes were to be of Tin. They should also wear Red Chape|rons or Caps, representing the blood of Iesus Christ, and over the principal Coat Fol. 23. b. a Mantle of white Cloth or Serge, which Mantle from the shoulders downward, was to be open on both sides along the arms; and in that part be|tween the two openings before the breast, there was to be a Cross of Cloth or Serge, two fingers broad; this Cross was to proceed in traverse as far as the open|ings of the Mantle, only the Cross upon the Prince his Mantle was to be edg'd round about with a Gold Fringe, half an Inch broad, or thereabout: Some small difference also there was to be between the Habits of the Knights, the Brothers and the Serjeants; that of the Knights was to be a little more solemn, and more cleerly representing the Passion of the holy Jesus, than either that of the Brothers or Serjeants; but the Habit of them all was to be White, only in the Cross, and in the shape there was to be some difference.
Ibid. The Arms of the holy Chevalry were these, the field of the Banner (following the description in the Constitution) was to be White, in the midst of it a Red Cross four fingers broad, or thereabouts, extending along the field: in the mid|dle of the Cross there was to be a compass with four rounds and four little angles between the rounds, this compass was to be filled with a black colour, represent|ing the agony and passion of our Lord, which compass in the middle of the Cross was to be four inches about, and within it an Agnus Dei, well shapt, and of a re|splendent golden colour, representing the glory of Iesus after his resurrection: the Cross and Compass was to be edged about with a bordure of Gold, one finger broad, or a little less, and about the sides there was to be a little red bordure of the breadth of half a finger.
There was also to belong to this holy Chevalry, another singular and solemn Banner, yet not to be born, but at great Battels, and in times of extraordi|nary danger and difficulty. The Cross and Agnus Dei, was to be born by the Prince armed, the armed Chevaliers and the Brothers, upon their great White Gippos or loose Coats, both before and behind; excepting that in lieu of the


Habits and Ensignes belonging to the Order of the Passion of Ihesus Christ.



Gold bordure about the Cross, the Brothers were to have a bordure of black Silk.
Fol. 24. a. Every Knight was to have his Esquire armed at all points, and a little Valet to carry his Launce and Helmet, beside another bigger Valet habited in a loose Coat, to carry his Mail, and a third on foot, to lead his Sumpter. For any warlike Expedition, he was to have his five Horses and four Servants, and in all times of peace, two or three Horses, according as the means of the Chevalry should be able to allow.
Also each Brother of the Chevalry was to have toward warlike Expeditions three Horses or four, according as his merits and abilities were, and three Servants, whereof one or two were to be fighting men; and in times of peace, one or two according to the Chevalry's ability of allowance.
The number of Knights of the Holy Chevalry, was a thousand; or a thousand, one hundred, or thereabouts.


The Order of the Cavalleros Bricianos en Suecia. Io. Mi|cheli Marquez en Tesoro milit. de Cavall. p. 57. b. Brician Knights in Sweden. (33.)
Ibid. Ios. Micheli Marquez from Marcus Ant. Vianus, in his Description of Sweden, in|forms us, that a holy and famous Queen of that Kingdom, (whom De Ord. Mi|lit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. 20. Andr. Mendo saith, was St. Should not the Knights then be rather called of St. Bridget. Bridget) being very zealous for the honor of our Saviour Iesus Christ, Instituted this Order in the year of our Lord 1396. which we rather think is mistaken for 1366. because he saith it was approved by Pope Vrban the Fifth, who then possest the Roman Chair, and gave to the Knights the Rule of St. Augu|stine, beside St. Bridget dyed the Io. Bapt. Ric|ciolus Chrono|log. reformat. Tom. 4. Index 2. p. 208. 23. of Iuly 1373.
The sum of their Profession was to defend Christian Religion against Hereticks, to secure the Confines of that Kingdom, to bury the dead, to succour the Widows and Fatherless, and to keep up Hospitality; to which end the Queen endowed this Order with large Possessions; so that during her Reign, it exceed|ingly flourished.
The chief Ensign of this Order, was Cruz Octo|gona, abaxo una lingua de suego colora|da. Tes. milit. loco cit. Tessara Cruz Caerulea ad in|star Militensis, sub qua lingua ignea jacet. Mend. loc. cit. a Blue Octogonal Cross, and under it a Tongue of Fire, this being accounted the Symbol of Love and Charity; in re|gard they were to be zealous in defence of the holy Faith, and in maintaining the Statutes of the Order.
The manner observed at the Investiture of the Knights, as also the Benedictions and Professions, were the same with those of Malta.
But one thing is observable in this Order above others, that after admission thereinto all were advanced according to their seniority: so that there was a possibility for the junior Knight to arrive at the dignity of Master of the Order.


The Order of Knights of St. Maurice in Savoy. (34.)
The Sam. Gui|chenon in le Histor. Genea|log. de la royal Mason. de Sa|voy. l. 1. p. 113. Crescenzi Pre|sid. Rom. par. 3. l. 1. Order of Knights Hermits of St. Maurice, had their beginning upon the retreat of Amadis the Eighth, Duke of Savoy, into the desart of Ripaille, neer the Lake of Geneva, and was bestowed by him, in the year of our Lord Sam. Gui|chenon in le Histor. Genea|log. de la royal Mason. de Sa|voy. l. 1. p. 113. Crescenzi Pre|sid. Rom. par. 3. l. 1. 1434. on those ten Knights of his Court, who had retired with him thither; as well to preserve the memory of St. Maurice, honored as titular Patron of Savoy, for ma|ny Ages past, as of his Launce (some say Mennen. De|lic. Equest. p. 54. Sword) and Ring, the essential Sym|bols of Knighthood, passing from hand to hand, from the Kings of Burgoigne to the Princes of Savoy; by whom they have been preserved, with great honor and veneration: and are as a pledge of Dominion, delivered to them with great so|lemnity, at their Inauguration.
Nine years after the Institution of this Order, the Founder was prevailed with, to accept of the Popedom, after the deposition of Pope Eugenius the Fourth: and the Council of Basil sitting, he was elected Pope, the Alfon. Cla|con. l. 2. p. 910. 5. of No|vember,

anno 1439. by the name of Felix the Fifth: Nine years after he freely resigned the Chair, the Instrument of Renunciation, bearing date at Lausanna, the Guichenon en mesme Hist. Genealog. de la Maison de Sa|voy. l. 6. p. 322. sixth day of April, anno 1449. to whom succeeded Nicholas the Fourth, and immediately he Ibid. p. 333. retired again to his solitude in Ripaille, where he dyed the Ibid. p. 333. se|venth of Ianuary anno 1451. and lies buried in the Ciacon. l. 2. p. 916. Cathedral Church of Lau|sanna.
This Order of St. Maurice was made subject to the Rule of St. Augustine: and the Knights had assigned them for their Habit, a Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 8. c. 6. Grey or Ash-colour Gown and Chaperon, a Vest of the same, girded with a golden Girdle, the Chaperon and Sleeves faced with Red Chamlet, and on the breast of the Mantle Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 8. c. 6. a White Cross Pommette of Taffaty or Cloth; but the Cross which the Master or Chief of the Order wore, was made of Gold, or rich Embrodery.
This Guichenon. Hist. Genealog. l. 1. p. 114. Order continued not long after the death of the Founder. But Duke Emanuel Philibert to renew the devotion, which his Predecessors always bore to St. Maurice, restored the same, and obtained a Bull from Pope Gregory the Thir|teenth, dated the 17. of October 1572. for erecting and instituting thereof, under the Cistertian Rule, and the perpetual protection of the Duke of Savoy, its Grand Master; which Bull is set forth by In Origin. Or|dinum Eque|strium p. 51.52 53. vide porro Guichenon. l. 6. p. 524.  Che|rub. in Com|pend. Bull. Tom. 2. p. 80. Consti|tut. 6. Albertus Miraeus, who thence collects that this Order was then first Instituted, and not by Count Amadis the Eighth, as is before noted.


Knights of the Holy Ghost at Rome. (35.)
This Order was Instituted by Pope Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 8. c. 1. Paul the Second, anno Dom. 1468. under the Title of Brethren of the Hospital of the Holy Ghost: The Knights wore upon their Habits a Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 8. c. 1. White Cross Forme.


The Order of Knights of St. George in Austria and Carinthia. (36.)
Lib. 3. de re|bus Viennens. Wolfangus Lazius informs us, that Frederick the Third, Emperor of Germany (Gotofrid. Ar|chont. Cosmica. l. 3. p. 13. others that Rudolphus of Hapsburgh, first raiser of the House of Austria) insti|tuted this Order of Knights of St. George, in the year of our Lord 1470. chiefly to Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 3. guard the Frontiers of Germany, Hungary, Austria, Stiria, Carinthia, and to suppress the insolency of the Turks, by whose Incursions the Marches of these Countries were (about that time) miserably wasted: since which, these Knights have so gallantly behaved themselves, that they have often born away great Tro|phies and Ensigns of Victory from their Enemies.
The Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 3. Great Master of this Order was advanced to the Title and Honor of a Prince, and for a Seat and Residence to him and his Successors, the Castle of Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 3. Mildstad in the Dukedom of Carinthia was appointed, where also was founded a Cathedral Church of Canons, under the Rule of St. Augustine.
The Knights bear for the Ensign of their Order the Arms of St. George, viz. Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 3. a plain Red Cross. Their A. Mendo de Ord. Mi|lit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. 27. Habit is White, they profess A. Mendo de Ord. Mi|lit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. 27. conjugal Chastity, and Obe|dience to their Master, and have the A. Mendo de Ord. Mi|lit. Disq. 1. Quest. 2. Sect. 27. Emperors for their Protectors.
But there is mention made by In Delic. E|quest. p. 173. Fr. Mennenius (from Bernardus Luceburgius, in his Book De Ordinibus Militaribus) as also by Origin. Ord. Equest. p 47. Alb. Miraeus, of an Order of Knights of St. George (which Tesoro Milit. de Cavall. f. 59. b. Ios. Micheli calls Cavalleros de San Iorge en Alemania) erect|ed by Maximilian the Emperor, upon the like design with the former, he being greatly devoted to that Patron of all military Professors.
This Order was confirmed by Ibid. f. 60. a. Pope Alexander the Sixth, under the same Rule and Profession as the other, having the Emperors also their Protectors, though it be not much extended. The Knights elect their Master from among themselves, and the Ensigns of the Order is a Menn. Delic. Equest. p. 173. A. Miraeus, loco cit. Red Cross, with a Crown of Gold on the top of it.
We observe elsewhere, that this Order runs under the Title of Iurispru|dent. He|roica. p. 373 Crowned Knights, and is said to have been instituted among the Iurispru|dent. He|roica. p. 373 Austrians, by the said Em|peror Maximilian, anno 1494. in which respect the Iurispru|dent. He|roica. p. 373 Knights, after they have serv|ed their Prince for a year, do enjoy a peculiar right (which is transmitted to their Heirs) of adorning their Shields and Helms with a Crown.
Ios. Micheli writeth, that this Emperor Mximilian joining in Battel with these Knights against the Turks, obtained a notable Victory; and that the Y confessa|uan los Tur|cos, que un Cavallero solo a Cavallero, Idem Micheli p. 60. Turks con|fest, that a man on Horseback (supposed to be St. George, Patron of this Order) put them into so great fear, that they longed for the hour to flye and leave the Field.


The Order of Knights of St. George at Rome. (37.)
Mennen. apud Iuce|burgium, in lib. de Armorum militar. Myste|rius. Vide Fa|vin. in le  d'  and  Alexander the Sixth, anno Dom. 1498. Instituted the Knights of St. George, who wore a Mennen. apud Iuce|burgium, in lib. de Armorum militar. Myste|rius. Vide Fa|vin. in le  d'  Cross of Gold, entowred with a circle of the same, made in the form of a Crown.
But Elosoro mi|lit. de Cavall. f. 62. Micheli saith, that the Order of St. George, which had the foresaid Cross for Ensign assigned to it, was instituted by Pope Paul the Third, at whose death it became extinct, and that the Knights of this Order dwelt at Ravenna, and were obliged to secure the Confines of the Adriatic Sea from Pyrats. But that the Order, which Pope Alexander the Sixth erected, had for Ensign the Figure of St. George hanging at a Collar.


Knights of St. Peter at Rome. (38.)
Favin, loco naper cit. Pope Leo the Tenth, anno 1520. Instituted this Order to fight against the Turks, and to guard and defend the Sea-Coasts. The number of these Knights at first was Alph. Ciacon. in vit. Pont. l. 2. p. 1070. 400.
They wore the Image of St. Peter within an Oval of Gold, hanging at a Gold Chain: This Order was A. Mendo de Ord. Mil. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. 26. n. 53. confirmed by Paul the Third.


Knights of St. Paul at Rome. (39.)
They were Instituted by Pope A. Miraeus O|rig. Equest. p. 84. Paul the Third, anno 1540. and while he sat in the Papal Chair (which was about ten years after) he made Palliot en la science des Ar|moiries. p. 5041 200 of these Knights.
The Ensign of this Order is the Image of St. Paul, hanging at a Chain of Gold.


The Order of Knights called Pios at Rome. (40.)
In the year of our Lord Menn. de De|lic. Equest. p. 779. 1560. Pope Pius the Fourth, erected this Order, and gave to the Knights thereof the Title of Pios. He created of them at first 375. but they encreased to the number of 535. Ciacon. de vit. Pontif. l. . p. 1179. Ciaconius stiles them Imperiales, but they were more usually called Commensales.
Tesoro mil. de Caval. p. 74. b. Ios. Micheli Marquez calls them Knights of the Golden Spur in Italy, and not getting any certain knowledge of the original of this Order, under that Title, he is content to believe a Relation of some of the Roman Courtiers, who told him that it took beginning in the time of Constantine the Great, and that the Knights had their Title from the nature of their Office, which was to take off the Emperors Spurs; they were also employed neer his Person, in the quality of a Life-Guard.
This Pope endowed them very considerably, and gave them Favin, lib. 8. c. 1. precedence be|fore the Knights of the Empire, and of Malta, because they were his Courtiers, and had the care and charge of carrying the Popes Chair on their shoulders, at such times as he went abroad in publick.
De Orig. Equest. p. 84. Miraeus saith, the Ensign of this Order is the Figure of St. Ambrose, hanging at a Chain of Gold about their necks; ut Tesoro mil. de Caval. lo|co cit. Marquez will have it a Cross of Cloth of Gold, of eight points, like that of Malta, and a little Spur linkt to the foot of it.


The Order of Knights of St. Stephen at Florence. (41.)
This Order was founded in the year of our Lord 1561. by Scipio Am|mirato in Istorie Florent. pars 2. p. 531. Sansovin Orig. de Cavaller. f. 92. b. Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 8. c. 7. Cosmo de Medicis, second Duke of Florence (created afterwards first Great Duke of Tuscany) in Scipio Am|mirato in Istorie Florent. pars 2. p. 531. Sansovin Orig. de Cavaller. f. 92. b. Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 8. c. 7. ho|nor of St. Stephen, Pope and Martyr (of that name the Ninth) Patron and Prote|ctor of the City of Florence, to Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 184. Histoire de Mons. de Thou. Tom. 2. l. 26. p. 203. revive and continue the memory of that fortu|nate Battel at Marciano, at which, overthrowing the assertors of Liberty, he laid the foundation of his grandeur. This Battel was fought on the sixth of August, being the Feast-day of the said St. Stephen.
Pope Pius the Fourth Statut dell' Ord. de Cavalier. S. Stef|fan. p. 6. edit. in Firenza 1620. approved and confirmed this Order, under the Rule of Ibid. p. 8. St. Benedict (his Bull to that effect, be|ing dated at Rome the first of February next following the Institution) which was afterwards enlarged with many Pri|viledges, by another Bull of the said Pag. 14. Pope Pius, as also by the Bulls of Pag. 39.44.  52. Sixtus the Fifth, and Pag. 62. Paul the Fifth.
The Institution of these Knights much resembles those of the Knights of Malta, and was erected in Histoire de Monsieur de Thou. loco cit. imitation of that Order; they having the same Priviledges granted unto them. They vow Scip. Ammirato, loco nuper relato. Chastity, but conjugal (for they have li|berty to marry) Charity in relieving their neighbour and afflicted, and Obedi|ence to the Commands of their Grand Master: which Dignity was vested in the Founder, and descends to his Successors, Great Dukes of Tuscany.
The principal Seat of this Order was setled at Pisa, where the Founder Mennen. De|lic. Equest. p. 185. built a Church and a Convent, designing it for a Nursery, to breed up persons skilful in Maritime Affairs; that City having a commodious Haven for the Gallies, wherein the Knights of this Order are to serve, either in checking the Inrodes of the Turkish Pirats, or seting forth a Navy on any other Expedition, if occasion require it. But since, it hath been transferr'd to Heylins Cos|mogr. l 1. p. 113 Cosmopoli, in the Isle of Ilva; a place where the Founder, it seems, designed and intended it to have been first setled; for which A. Miraeus cites Onuphrius Panvinius.
The Habit of this Order, is a long Mantle of White Chamlet, beautified with Red Trimming, and on the left part of the breast a Crux rubra cum Limbo aureo. And. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quest. 2. Sect. 19. n. 44. Cross (like that of Mal|ta) of Red or Crimson Satin, bordered with Gold. This Favin. in le Theat. d' Honneur. l. 8. c. 7. Cross is daily worn by the Knights on their Cloaks, as also on their military Garments, and about their necks in a Ribbon on Festival days.
Moreover this Order (like that of Malt) consists of Knights, Priests, and Servants; the Favin. in le Theat. d' Honneur. l. 8. c. 7. Priests wear the Cross of Red Taffaty without a border; and the Servants the Cross of St. Anthony only.
The Statutes and Constitutions were reformed by Ferdinand Great Duke of Tus|cany, Son to the Founder, and approved in a Chapter of the Order, anno 1590. and since printed at Florence, anno 1628.


The Order of Knights of St. Maurice, and St. Lazarus in Savoy. (42.)
Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, having at the sollicitation of Emanuel Philibert Duke of Savoy, restored and instituted anew the Order of St. Lazarus, as also

the Order of St. Maurice, anno 1572. and constituted this Duke Grand Master of both; shortly after, by his Bull dated the Guichenon in Hist. Geneal. de la Maison de Savoy. l. 6. p. 526.  Com|pend. Bull. Tom. 2. p. 81. Gonst. 7. 13. of November in the same year, he united the Order of St. Lazarus to that of St. Maurice, for their greater honor: and thereby ordained, that this new Institution should be thenceforth called the Order of St. Maurice and St. Lazarus. He also constituted the said Duke and his Successors Dukes of Savoy, Grand Masters thereof; and obliged them to furnish out two Gallies, for the service of the Papal See, to be imployed against Pyrats.
Upon this Union (permission being given by the last mentioned Bull, to as|sume a new Habit) the Knights of this Order had assigned them a Ex relatio|ne Com de Monroux hujus Ordinis Can|cellar. Gown of Crim|son Tabby, with wide sleeves, a long train, and edg'd about with White Taffaty, as also a Cordon, having a Tassel of White and Green, fixed to the Collar thereof.
The Badge of this Order is agreeable to the form engraved in the Plate set be|fore this Chapter, to wit, the Ex relatio|ne Com de Monroux hujus Ordinis Can|cellar. Green Cross of St. Lazarus, charged in the heart with the White Cross of St. Maurice, which the Knights wear either in a Gold Chain or Silk Ribbon, the Colour being at their own choice. This double Cross was granted to be the Ensign of this new Order, by another Idem Gui|chenon. l. 6. p. 529. Bull of the said Pope Gre|gory, given at Rome the 15. of Ianuary 1573.
In which year, to wit, in the Month of Favin. l. 8. c. 6 April, Duke Emanuel, in pursuance of this Union and new Foundation, assembled all the Knights, in the City of Nice; where meeting, he was by them received and acknowledged for their Grand Master, and took the Oath, recorded by Lib. 6. p. 529. Sam. Guichenon.
Afterwards this Duke did erect Guichenon. l. 1. p. 114. two fair Houses or Convents, for the Knights of this new Order to inhabit in, the one at Nice, and the other at Turin; and with the Popes approbation, bestowed all the Lands and Revenues formerly belong|ing to the Order of St. Lazarus (lying within his Territories) upon them.
So that at this day, both the Orders of St. Lazarus and St. Maurice, being unit|ed, rest under the Patronage of one Grand Master, and chief of the Order, namely the Duke of Savoy; whose title used in all Affairs, relating to this new instituted Order, is as followeth.
Ibid. Totius Religionis  Militiae Sanctorum Mauritii  Lazari, Betleem, Nazareth, Hierosolymitan, Ordinis Sancti Augustini, Conventuum, Hospitalium, Domorum, Prae|ceptoriarum at piorum locorum omnium, citra  ultra Mare, cis  trans Alpes, per universum Orbem, Humilis  Generalis Magnus Magister.


Knights of Loretto. (43.)
Ciacon. de vit. Pontif. l. 2. p. 1243. Sixtus Quintus instituted this Order, anno Dom. Theat. de Hon. l. 8. c. 1. 1587. but Tes. milit. de Caval. f. 62. a. Ios. Micheli placeth it in the year before; for which he erected the Church of our Lady at Loretto into a Cathedral and a Bishops See: and gave the Knights for Ensign the Image of our Lady of Loretto, hung in a golden Chain.
The Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. sect. 26. n. 56. splendor of this Order continued but a while, yet is it not quite extin|guished.


The Order of Knights of the blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel. (44.)
Though the Grand Mastership of St. Lazarus, and the Commanderies thereun|to belonging, lying within the Dominions of all Christian Princes, were con|ferr'd upon Emanuel Philebert Duke of Savoy, by Pope Gregory the Thirteenth (as hath been Pag. 58. before remembred) yet the Duke did not gain the investiture of the Commanderies lying in France, being opposed by King Henry the Third; whereupon Favin Theat. d' Honn. l. 9. c. 9. Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 55. some Knights of that Order, refusing to join with their Fellows, un|der the obedience of the Duke, maintained themselves in that Kingdom, until the Reign of King Henry the Fourth; who being desirous to have a Fl. Cherub. in Compend. Bull. Tom. 3. p. 50. Const. 41. new Order

of Knighthood instituted, under the Rule and denomination of the blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel, applied himself to Pope Paul the Fifth for that purpose.
Hereupon the Pope (the Ibid. 7. of February 1608.) confirmed the same, and pre|scribed several things necessary to the Institution, according to the mind of the King, ordaining also Pensions to the Great Master and Knights of this Order, out of certain Ecclesiastical Benefices, in several places, within the Kingdom of France.
After this the Favin. l. 3. c. 10. vide tem Briet. An|nal mundi, pars 4. Tom. 2. p. 263  p. 403. Commanderies and Hospitals of St. Lazarus, lying in France, were disposed of likewise for the support of the Knights of this new Order; and the Knights of St. Lazarus that remained in that Kingdom, were joined to these of the new Institution; thus they became acknowledged to be one Body, under two Titles, which we find inscribed round the Seal of their Order, viz. Idem Fa|vin. Ibid. Sigillum Ordinis  Militiae beatae Mariae Virginis de Monte Carmeli,  Sancti Lazari in Hierusalem.
So that at this time, we find the Order of St. Lazarus to be divided between two other Societies; namely the Order of St. Maurice in Savoy, and of St. Mary of Mount Carmel in France.
This Order consists of Idem Fa|vin. Ibid. one hundred choice Gentlemen of France, and all ap|pointed to attend on the Kings person, upon every warlike Expedition. They vow Compend. Bull. loc. praed. Obedience and Chastity, and profess to fight against the Enemies of the Roman Church. The Feast of their Patroness is annually celebrated on the Idem Favin. 16. of Iuly. Their first Master was Philibert Nerestang, sometimes one of the Mendo. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. 21. n. 46. Knights of St. Lazarus, a valiant Gentleman, and famous in all military Discipline; for which cause he was thought worthy to be prefer'd to this Dignity, and according|ly nominated by Henry the Fourth, in April 1608. The 30. of October following he took the Oath as Great Master, and of Fidelity to the French King.
The Badge of this Order is a Cross of eight points, of Favin. ut su|pra. Tawney Velvet or Satin (but some say of a Mennen p. 56. Miraeus p. 34. Insigne est Crux violacea simul cum effi|gie Virginis Mariae deMon|te Carmelo intra illam in|clusa. Mendo loco praed. Violet colour) with a white Bordure, sewed on the left side of their Cloaks, and the Image of the Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel, placed in the mid|dle within a Rundle encompassed with beams or rays of Gold, all wrought in cu|rious Imbrodery: besides this, the Knights wear about their necks, in a Tawny Silk Ribbon, the like Favin. lo|co cit. Cross of Gold, but the Image of the said Virgin is enameled on both sides.
The Statutes of this Order are exhibited by Favin. lo|co cit. A. Favin, and the Miraeus, p. 55. solemn Rites used at the investiture of these Knights, are much after the manner of those of Malta.


Knights of the Order of the most glorious Virgin Mary of Rome. (45.)
It was but of late years, viz. Andr. Fa|vin en le Theat. d' Honn. l. 8. c. 2. 1618. that three Brethren of Spella in Italy, name|ly Pedro, Iohn Baptista, and Bernardo, surnamed Petrignanoes, invented this Order of Knighthood, to which was given the Rule of St. Francis d' Assise, and whereof the Pope and his Successors are Great Masters.
Andr. Fa|vin en le Theat. d' Honn. l. 8. c. 2. Paul the Fifth approved this Order, and gave these Knights the Palace of St. Iohn de Laterane, for their Convent, the City and Port of Civita Vechia, to make their Arsenal of Gallies; as also an Island adjacent to that Port, together with the Government of his Gallies.
The cause of its Institution, was for the Ibid. exaltation of the Roman Church, and to repress the insolence of the Turks, roving on the Mediterranean Sea.
In this Institution there are Ibid. three kinds of Knights, who are differenced by their Habits: The first are Knights Gentlemen Laicks, who wear a Mantle of White double Taffaty, having great sleeves and a long train, the Cordons of White Silk, with Knots and Tassels of White and Blue Silk; the second are Knights Gentlemen Priests, and beneficed, who wear the like Mantle, but something shorter; and both these wear about their necks in a Blue Ribbon, a Cross of Gold, enameled Blue: The third are Knights Chaplains, or Servants of Arms, and their Mantle is of White

Serge, with strait long sleeves, reaching down to the ground, and Cordons of Blue Silk.
All these Degrees wear on the Ibid. left side of their Mantles, the Cross of the Or|der, as is here described; to wit, of Blue Satin embrodered with Silver, and bor|dered with Gold; in the middle is a round Circle, wherein is this Motto, In hoc Signo vincam, and within that is composed a Cipher of the Letters M and S, (the initial Letters of Sancta Maria) crowned with a Chaplet of Flowers, and Stars of Gold set over the Chaplet; from the round Circle issue twelve rays, or beams of Silver, representing the twelve Apostles: the finishings of the Cross are fashioned like Flowers de Lis, and at the end of each Flower is a Star, set to signifie the four Evangelists.
The Statutes and Rules of this Order are recorded by Andrew Favin in his Ibid. Thea|ter of Honor.


The Order of the Annunciade and St. Michael the Arch-Angel, or of the Christian Militia in Moravia. (46.)
In the year of our Lord Ios. Micheli Marquez en l Tesoro milit de Cavalliera. f. 71. a. Miraeus Orig. Ord. E|quest. p. 85. 1618. Charles Gonzaga Duke of Maniua and Nevers, together with Adolph Count of Altham, his Brother, and Iohn Baptist Petrig|nan Sfortia, did contrive the Institution of ths Order; and to extend and am|plifie the same, divided the World amongst them. For Duke Charles took the North and West parts, his Brother the Eastern part, and to the other was given the South; where, in their own persons they were bound to found Convents, and invest Knights: And in prosecution of this design, we find, that Duke Charles be|gan his Institution of this Order under the Miraeus. loc cit. Rule of St. Francis, in the Monastery of the Capuchins in Olmuntz, the Metropolis of Moravia, on A. Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 1..2. Sect. 30. n. 63. Saturday the 17. of November, in the foresaid year; and dedicated the same to the honor of the blessed Virgin, and St. Michael: But what th other two did in the Eastern or Southern parts of the world, we have not heard.
Ioh. Ludov. Gothofridus gives this Title to the Order, to wit, Archon. Cosin. l. 3. p. 16. Ordo Equilum Mi|litiae Christianae. Philip Brietius calls it Annal. mun|di pars 4. Tonr. 2. p. 440. Conceptionis Ordo. Andr. Mendo, Loco nuper cit. Mi|litia Virginis Annuntiatae, and the Knights thereof are called by Ios. Micheli Mar|quez, Tesoro mil. de Cavall. f. 71. a. Cavalleros de la Anunciada, y San Miguel Archangel en Mantua.
This Order was afterwards (viz. the Mellis. Hist. par. 4. p. 1189. 8. of March 1619.) received at Vienna, by many Princes of divers Countries, whose names, together with the Statutes of the Order, are set down by the said Gothofridus, in the Lib. 3. p. 15.16.17. work above cited. I was approved by Pope Tes. mil. loc. cit. Paul the Fifth, and the Briet. Annal. mundi loc. cit. 6. of February 1624. it received confirmation from Pope Urban the Eighth.
From the preamble of the Statutes of this Order, it appears, that it had for its Basis, the Art. 1. two chief Precepts of the Divine Law, to wit, to love God with our whole hearts, and with all our souls, and our Neighbour as our selves; and the end of its Institution, was to establish Peace and Concord between Christian Prin|ces and their Subjects, to release Captives, and to deliver the oppressed out of the hands of the Infidels.
The Art. 15. Habit assigned to the Knights was White; upon which they wore a long White Mantle, and over that a shorter of Blue Silk, their Buskins were of Blue, and their Caps of Black Silk.
They bore Art. 12. two Crosses for the Ensign of this Order, the one of Gold of eight points enamel'd Blue, on the one side thereof was the Figure of the blessed Virgin, bearing our Saviour in her arms, and on the other the Portraicture of St. Michael, treading the Dragon under his Feet: This they wore about their necks in a Blue Ribbon.
The other Ibid. Cross was made of Blue Silk and Gold, in the middle whereof was the Image of the blessed Virgin, surrounded with rays of the Sun, holding Christ in her left arm, and a Scepter in her right hand, crowned with 12 Stars, a Crescent

placed under her feet; all which were encompassed with the Cord of St. Francis, and the four angles of the Cross, cast forth four golden flames. This Cross was embrodered on the left side of their white Mantles.
Touching the Art. 13. great Collar of this Order, it was composed of fifteen Cords of St. Francis, joined together with as many Stars; at the lower part whereof hung, at three Chainets, the golden Cross above described.
But it seems, that in the height and glory of this Order, there grew some Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 71. b. diffe|rence between the Founders, insomuch that in a short time it became ruined thereby; as if that notable Comet, which appeared within four days after it was instituted, shewed its sudden splendor and decay: which occasioned Brietius to say of it, Loco supra|dicto. That the Mahumetans, for whose destruction it was instituted, heard only the name and report of it.




CHAP. III.
A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE Orders absolutely Military.

SECT. I.
The Order of Knights of the Round Table. (1.)
HAving thus given some account of the Religious Orders of Knight|hood, that is, of such whose Knights live under an Ecclesiastick Rule, and according to some Religious Profession or solemn Vows; we shall next proceed to those that are accounted purely and com|pletely Military, among which that of the Knights of the Round Table may (for its Antiquity) challenge the first place.
And though we are not ignorant that the story of this Orders Institution (as al|so its Founders famous Exploits beyond Sea) is lookt upon as the issue of uncertain



The Severall ENSIGNES of the ORDERS absolutely MILITARY, mentioned in the third Chapter






Tradition; yet considering, that not only the Gesf. Mon|mout. British Histories, but some of our Leland. As|sertio Arturi, and White of Basing stoke. English defend it, and many as well Harding. Robert of Glo. Iohn Lidgate. Poets, as Lilly Cambden. Heylin. Historians make mention thereof, we judge it may deserve room among the Military Orders.
The Founder of this most ancient Order, was Arthurus, militaris disci|plinae  Or|bicularis Mensae fundator. Geo. Lilius in Chron. Angl. Regum. p. 44. vide Priseum Hi|stor. Brit. Defensi, edit. Lond. 1573. p. 139. Segar, Honor Milit.  Civil. l. 2. c. 5. Arthur King of Britain, Crown|ed in the year of our Lord 516. at the age of Math. Westminst. p. 185. Edit. Lond. 1570. 15 years, concerning whom, though some with unbounded fancies have strained too far, in setting down his famous actions, insomuch, as that what really is true of him can hardly be known; yet all allow him to have been a stout and successful Martialist, of incredible courage and gallantry, the most famous and renowned of all the British Kings, and as De gestis reg. Anglor. l. 1. p. 4. William of Malmsbury judges, right worthy to have been celebrated by true story, not false Tales; seeing it was he that long upheld his de|clining Country, and even inspired martial courage into his Country-men, having overcome the Saxons in Hen. Huntingd. l. 2. f. 180. Edit. Lond. 1596. I. Anglicus, pars 2. l. 17. f. 89. MS. Polycronicon. l. 5. c. 6. twelve seve|ral pitch'd Battels.
I have by me an old Chronicle in Manuscript, Entituled Brute, or the Chronicles of England, beginning at Brute, and ending the sixth year of King Henry the Fifth, wherein it is noted, That after King Cap. 76. Arthur had conquered divers Coun|tries, he lived in so great renown, that many worthy Knights came from all parts to his Court, as to a Seminary of military Discipline, to give evidence of their valour, in the exercise of Arms.
This gave him occasion to select out of these, and his own Subjects, a certain number (some say Ios. Micheli Marquez en Te|soro milit. de Cavall. f. 52. b. Iean Boisseau in le Promptu|aire Armorial. 24.) of the most valiant Knights, whom (himself being chief) he united into a Fellowship or Order; and to avoid controversie about priority of place, when they met together at meat, he caused a Round Table to be made, whereat none could be thought to sit higher or lower than another; and thence they were called, Knights of the Round Table.
At the upper end of the great Hall in Winchester Castle, I remember to have seen a large Round Table hang against the wall, called King Arthurs Round Table, and affirmed by the Inhabitants (who had taken up the report upon vulgar Tradi|tion) to have been as ancient as that Kings time; but it carried no very great show of antiquity to a judicious eye; however it seemed to have been set up, either in the room of one more ancient, or else by some who were perswaded, there was once such an Order of Knights, which had been denominated thence. This old Monument was broken to pieces (being before half ruined through age) by the Parliaments Soldiers, in the beginning of the late unhappy War, because looked upon as a relique of Superstition (as were those little gilded Coffers with Inscriptions, that did preserve the bones of some of the Cambd. Brit. in Hants. p. 19. Saxon Kings and Bishops, deposited by Bishop Fox in the top of the Walls on both sides the upper part of the Quire of the Cathedral Church of that City) though guilty of nothing but the crime of reverend Antiquity.
Into this noble Society of Knights, were admitted not only Enderbies Cambria Tri|umphans. part 2. p. 199. Britains, but also Strangers of other Nations, who out of a desire of glory, came over hither, to make proof of their sufficiency in the exercise of Arms with the British Knights; and the general qualifications for Election were, that they should be persons of Nobility and Dignity, renowned for Virtue and Valour, and admirably well skill'd in the knowledge and use of Arms.
The place where the Founder first Instituted this Order, saith Sir Iohn Froisard, was at Chron. l. 1. c. 100. Windsor, and those other of note where he and his Knights usually assem|bled, were Leland. As|sertio Arturi. f. 10. Selden notes upon Po|lialb. Song. 4. Carleon in Monmouthshire, Winchester and Camelot in Somersetshire; and the time of the year for their meeting was Whitsontide.
The Articles of their profession are set down by Honor Milit.  Civil. l. 2. c. 5. Sir William Segar, which are in number twelve; and if any be desirous to read the Names of the first twenty four Knights, he shall not only have them from Monsieur Boisseau in his In l' Institu|tion de L'ordre de la Iartire. Promptuaire Armorial, but of 129 more of this Order, elected in seven following Chapters; nay more then that, the formal blazon of all their Arms: but these particulars may be justly ranked with what is fabulous in King Arthurs story.
We read not of any Badge peculiarly assigned to these Knights, though En Tes. milit. de Cava. f., 2. b. Ios.

Micheli, in allusion to their Title, takes upon him to give the Figure of a Round Table, furnished with Cloth, Bread, Salt, Knives, Bottle and Bowl, but we have not authority enough to follow him: However it gives us occasion here to ac|quaint our Reader, that King Arthur himself is reported to bear a Shield called Hen. Hunting|do. l. 2. p. 180. Mat. West|minst. p. 186. Fabians Chron. p. 93. Pridwen, whereon was painted the Image of the blessed Virgin; his Sword and Launce also, were not without their names, for the one it seems was called Cali|burn, the other Irone or Rone.
It is not remembred by any, that this Order survived its Founder, but rather that it extinguished at his death; for it is related that Chronic. of Engl. cap. 88. M S. most of those Knights, whom he had drawn from several Countries, and advanced to a Companionship with himself, bore him company in death, and perished in that fatal Battel of Kamblan, or Cambula (now Cambd. Brit. in Cornwall. Camelsford) in Cornwal; where though he killed Mordred his Enemy upon the place, yet, being sorely wounded, he survived him but a short time, and dyed in the year of our Lord Malmesb. an|tiq. Glaston. vi|desi Math. Westminst. p. 192.  Speeds Chron. l. 7 c. 12. f. 334. Anno 542. Inclytus Arthurus obiit  se|pultus in Insul Avaloni in Domino re|quiescit. Malmesb. antiq. Glaston. 542.
It may add some reputation to King Arthurs Round Table, if we here note, that the like Round Table, grew into great estimation and request, shortly after the Norman Conquest, and continued long with us; being ordinarily set up at the grand martial Exercises, called Hastiludium quod vulgariter Tornea|mentum dicitur, sed potius Ludus milita|ris, qui Mensa rotunda dicitur. Math. Paris. p. 846. Hastiludes, Tilts, or Turneaments, permitted by King Stephen, and much encouraged by King Ex lib. Rubro in Scaccar. fol. 122. b.  ex Registro Priorat. de Dunstaple, f. 8. a. vide Lamb. Peramb. p. 448. Richard the First (for the delight of men inclined to military actions, and increase of their skill in the management of Arms) and for the same end and purpose, as King Arthur made use of it; no less than in memorial and remembrance, that he had erected an Order of Knighthood, denominated therefrom: those times being throughly perswaded of the truth of that story.
Besides, it is recorded, that Tho. Walsingh. sub an. 1280. Roger Mortimer Earl of March, held the celebra|tion of the Round Table (consisting of an hundred Knights, and as many Ladies) with Tilting and Turneaments, at Kenelworth Castle in Warwick-shire, anno 7. E. 1. and that King Edward the Third having designed to Ut Arturi memoriam re|fricaret. Vin|cen. Lupani de Magistratib. Francor. l. 1. restore the Honor of the Round Table, held a Juste at Windsor, in the Tho. Walsing. sub an. 1344. 18. year of his Reign (but there is an old Manuscript Chronicle that hath these words, King Edward in hisCap. 226. nineteenth year first began his Round Table, and ordain'd the day annually to be kept there at Whitsontide) and this meeting in truth occasioned the Foundation of the most noble Order of the Garter, as shall be noted by and by.
But it was thought fit sometimes, and upon divers accounts, to forbid these kind of Assemblies, upon very great penalties; as in particular Rot. Pat. de eodem an. m. 3. anno 16. H. 3. at Shrewsbury, when the King went to meet Llewalyn Prince of Wales (called in the Record Prince of Aberfraw and Snowden) and afterwards at Walden, in the Claus. de ed. anno m. s. Dors. 36. year of the said Kings Reign, and at many other times.

The Order of the Oak in Navarre. (2.)
The Ios. Micheli Marquez in Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 16. a.  Hier. Blancus, in Regum Ara|gon. Serie. Kingdom of Navarre being opprest by the Moors, the Inhabitants were forced to seek deliverance by Arms, to which end, though they had raised a great Army, yet were they destitute of an experienced Commander; at length, Don Garcia Ximenes, of the blood of the Gothes, who had formerly retired from the world, to a solitary and religious life, was perswaded to relinquish the same, and take upon him the Command of the Army.
As he was marching out of the City to encounter the Moors (in the year of our Lord Ios. Micheli Marquez in Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 16. a.  Hier. Blancus, in Regum Ara|gon. Serie. 722.) there appeared to him from the top of an Oak, the sign of the Holy Cross, adored by an infinite number of Angels. Proceeding on, he gave battel to the Moors, and having gained a remarkable Victory, the people elected him their King; and upon this occasion he became the first King of that Country.
Some few days after, in thankfulness to God for this great Victory, he Ios. Micheli Marquez in Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 16. a.  Hier. Blancus, in Regum Ara|gon. Serie. insti|tuted

this Order, investing therewith even all the Nobles of his Kingdom; whom he obliged to defend the Christian Faith, and acknowledge Obedience to his Successors Kings of Navarre.
He ordained the Habit of the Order to be White, and the Ensign thereof a Tessera suit haec ipsa Ar|bor,  supra am Crux ru|bra, instar Crucis de Montesa. Men|d Dis. 1. Quaest. 4. n. 94. plain Red Cross, set on the top of a green Oak (which gave the Title) after the same manner as it appeared to him: but time hath darkned this Order, not on|ly in its heroick actions, but laudable Foundation, since we find no further me|morial of it.


The Order of the Gennet in France. (3.)
To Favin. Theat.  Henn. l. 3. c. 1. preserve the memory of that famous Battel fought neer Tours, anno Christi 726. (or as Mennenius margins it, about the year 738.) where 385000 Sarcens and Moors, together with their General Abdiramo, fell by the conquering Sword of Charles Martel; and to reward those who had behaved themselves valiantly in that action; the said Charles instituted an Order of Knighthood, under the Title of the Gennet. The great Favin. Theat.  Henn. l. 3. c. 1. number of rich Gennet Furs (anciently esteemed among them the most excellent, though since the Ermine hath gained a better value) as also of the Creatures themselves alive, taken among the Spoils of that Victory; giving him occasion to bestow that name upon his new erected Order.
But Mennen. De|lic. Equest. p. 56. others, not improperly, impute the reason of this appellation to a kind of neat shap'd Horses; of which not unlikely, a great part of the Founders Cavalry might consist.
The Knights, saith Favin, were Loco cit. sixteen, whose Collars were made of three Chains of Gold, interwoven or linked with Red Roses, at the end of which Col|lar hung a Gennet of Gold, Black and Red; sitting on a flowry bank, all en|amell'd with variety of Colour and Art.
And in further honor of this Institution, the Founder not only Sic Mennen. p. 63. renewed the se of Gold Rings (so peculiar of old, to the Equestrian Order among the Romans) but caused them, and all other Ornaments of this Order, to be engraven and wrought with the Effigies of a Gennet.
This is accounted by Loco supra cit. Favin, the first Order of Knighthood among the French; which is to be understood of a distinct Order, acknowledged by a par|ticular and peculiar Title; and continued in glory, until the institution of the Or|der of the Star, (Gotofrid. Ar|chont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 3. Heyl. Cosmogy. l. 1. p. 204. some say but till the Reign of St. Lewis) after which time it was laid aside.
But though Favin be thus particular, as to the Institution of this Order, and the occasion thereof, the exact number of Knights, and especially in assigning a Collar, with the Ensign hanging at it, sutable to the mode of later times; yet some other of his Scevol.  Lovis de sain Marthe en le Histor. Genea|lg. de la Ma|sn de France. Tom. 1. c. 13. p. 58. Countrymen, wanting the assurance and authority of ancient Writers to back them, are not confident enough to perswade the world, that there was ever any such.


The Order of the Crown Royal among the Frizons. (4.)
The erection of this Order is referred to Charles the Great, Son of King Pepin, in the year of Christ Mart. Ha|con. de rebu Frisae. 802. (which more fully appears in his pragmatical Sanction, then dated at the Lateran Palace in Rome) and instituted out of a design to Favin en Theat. d' Hon|neur, l. 3. c. 1. And. Mendo de Ordin. Militar. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. 4. honor and reward those among the Frizons, who had behaved themselves valiantly in his Armies, against the Sesnes or ancient Saxons; or as Tesoro milit. de Cavalle. f. 16. t. others say, against the Lombards, in subduing that Kingdom, and to stir up and encourage others to emu|late their virtue.
This Order was so called, Favin. loc. cit. from the Ensign appointed to the same, namely an Im|perial Crown, embroidered with Gold, which the Knights used to wear upon the breasts of their Habit: and to perpetuate this Militia, he ordained, that the Governor of that Country (whom they then called Potestat) should confer the same upon such as had followed the Armies of France, as well in Italy as Germa|ny, for five years together at their own expence; by which means the Emperor was served at a less charge.
The Knights were invested with the Military Belt, and a box on the Ear; of which we have spoken in the Sect. IX. first Chapter.


The Order of the Dog and Cock in France. (5.)
The Institution of this Order of the Dog and Cock, is generally attributed to the Family of Mennen. De|lic. Equest. p. 57 Seld. Titles of Honor. p. 554. Montmorency in France, and it is more particularly affirmed by Rober|tus Caenalis, to have been erected by the first Christian of that Family, called Protochristianus  Archibaro, which causeth us to bring in this Order here, neer to the Age he lived in; but to say truth, as to the Institution it self, or to the time thereof, there is not any more certain, or more satisfactory account, than that anciently this Family carried a Idem Menn. p. 58. Dog (the Embleme of fidelity and sincerity) upon their Helmet for a Crest; and that Ibid. p. 59. Peter Montmorency was a Knight of the Order of the Cock, which Bird was called by the Ancients the Bird of Mars.
But some make two distinct Orders of this, and after that of the Dog, they say, another Order, viz. of the Ita Ios. Mi|cheli en Tesoro milit. de Caval. f. 89. b.  A. Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Q. 2. Sect. 31. n. 88. Cock, was also Instituted, whose Collar had the Comb of a Cock pendent thereat, the Motto being Vigiles; howbeit after|wards, both these Orders came to be united, and hereupon the Ensign was then, the Effigies both of a Dog and Cock joined together.
Apud Men|nen. p. 58. Moraeus relates, that Burchard Montmorency, appeared at the Court of Philip the First, King of France, attended with many Knights, and all of them (like him|self) adorned with Collars of Gold, composed of Stag-heads, whereat hung the Figure of a Dog: whence we may presume, that it had some relation to the more ancient Order, of which this was the Badge or Ensign.


The Order of the Thistle in Scotland. (6.)
Iohn Lesley Bishop of Ross, reports that a bright Crux in quam divus Andreas sub|latus mortem oppetivit, in Coelo vivis quasi colori|bus effecta, quam primum omnibus apparuit. De rebus Gestis Scotor. l. 5 p. 177. Edit. Romae, anno 1578. 4^o. Cross appeared from Heaven, in fashion of that whereon St. Andrew suffered Martyrdom, to Hungus King of the Picts (but Theat. d' Honneur, l. 5. c. 3. Favin saith to the Scots, whom Achaius King of Scotland sent to his assistance) the night preceding the Battel with Athelstan King of England, (or rather of G. Buchanan. Rerum Scot. l. 5. c. 56. Denmark, to whom King Alured had given the Kingdom of Northumberland) over whom Hungus prevailing, At ut tantae victoriae memoria nulla unquam vetustate deleatur, effigiem Cru|cis (cui D. 'Andreas affixus est) in armis  insignibus efformatam, cum Hostibus con|gressurus, semper postea gestabat, id quod Scoti omnes in memoriam victoriae  Pi|ctis divi Andreae auxilio reportatae, etiam|num religiosissime observant. Lesleus in loco supra cit. bore the Figure of that Cross at all times after in his Ensigns and Banners: and from this time and occasion hath the like bearing thereof been religi|ously observed by all succeeding Kings of Scotland.
Hence also it is believed (saith In Delic. Equest. p. 146. Heyl. Cosmogr. l. 1. p. 306. Mennenius) that the Equestrian Order of St. Andrew, vulgarly called of the Thistle, took beginning. To this agrees the relation which I received from Sir Charles Areskin, now Lyon, King of Arms in Scotland, through the favour of the Right Honorable the Earl of Lauderdail, who adds, that after this Victory ob|tained, which was as he saith, anno 819. (but according to Vbi supr. George Buchanan, Achains dyed 9 years before) King Hungius and Achaius (Confederates against Athelstan) went

in solemn Procession bare-footed, to the Kirk of St. Andrew, to thank God and his Apostle for their Victory, promising that they and their Posterity in time coming, would ever use in their Ensigns the Cross of St. Andrew, whensoever they undertook any warlike Expedition; which custom not only remained among the Picts, but is still among the Scots to this day: And both these Kings, after their solemn Procession, presently instituted an Order, naming it the Or|der of St. Andrew.
But Theat. d'Honne l. 5. c. 3. Andr. Favin reporteth the occasion to be otherwise, to wit, that Achaius King of Scotland, having made that famous League offensive and defen|sive, with Charlemain King of France, towards all and against all other Princes (to preserve the memory of which alliance to posterity, the Scotch Lyon Theat. d'Honne l. 5. c. 3. assum|ed before by King Fergus, became then enclosed with a Theat. d'Honne l. 5. c. 3. Tresure of Flowers de Lis) he found himself thereby so strong and mighty, that he took for device the Theat. d'Honne l. 5. c. 3. Thi|stle and the Rue, which he composed into a Theat. d'Honne l. 5. c. 3. Collar of his Order, and for his Motto Pour ma defence: giving intimation thereby, that he feared not the powers of Foreign Princes, seeing he leaned on the succour and alliance of the French.
And though hence may be inferr'd, that these two Plants, were the united Sym|bols, but of one Order of Knighthood, yet doth In Delic. Equest. p. 146. Mennenius divide them into two, making one, whose chief Badge was the Thistle, (whence the Knights were so stiled) and the Motto, Nemo me impune lacessit: and another vulgarly called Ibid. p. 147. Sertum Rutae, or the Garland of Rue, whose Collar was composed of two Branches or Sprigs thereof, or else many of its leaves: Nevertheless, that at both these Col|lars hung one and the same Jewel, to wit, the Figure of In cujus pa|trocinio gens Scotiae acqui|escit. Lesleus, l. 5. p. 177. St. Andrew Patron of that Kingdom, bearing before him the Cross of his Martyrdom.
But there are some (saith the same Mennen. ubi nu|per. Author) who refer the Institution of the Order of the Thistle, to later times, (albeit the Thistle Mennen. ubi nu|per. from the Reign of Ahai|us, had been acknowledged for the Badge and Symbol of the Kingdom of Scot|land, in like manner as the Rose was of England, the Lilly of France, the Pome|granate of Spain, c.) to wit, in the Reign of Mennen. ubi nu|per. Charles the Seventh of France; when as the League of amity was renewed between those two Kingdoms, and especially for the succour and aid which France then received from Scotland, it being in a time of so extraordinary distress: and, last of all, others place the Foundation yet later, viz. in the year of our Lord A. Miraeu d Orig. Equest. p. 78. 1500.
I have done with what can be said as to the Foundation of this Order, and the time thereof; and shall now pass on to some other particulars, relating to the Or|der it self.
The chief and principal Ensign of this Order is a Gold Collar, composed of Thistles, interlink'd with anulets of Gold, and pendant thereunto the Image of St. Andrew with his Cross, and this Epigraph, Nemo me impune lacessit: the Figure whereof may be seen in a Picture of Iames the Fifth King of Scotland, now hang|ing in his Majesty's Gallery at Whitehall, on several great Seals of that Kingdom, on some Coyns and Medals, and lastly among the representations of the Military Ensigns, placed at the beginning of this Chapter.
The Ex re|latione praef. C Areskin mil. time of this Societies meeting, was heretofore very religiously observed and celebrated, upon the Feast day of St. Andrew the Apostle annually, in the Church of the Town dedicated to his name, and in testimony of the high esteem and reverence they bore unto him as their titular Saint and Patron: During the Ex re|latione praef. C Areskin mil. solemnity of the Feast, the Knights of this Order were habited in rich and costly Apparel, and wore their Parliament Robes, having fixt on their left shoulders, an Ex re|latione praef. C Areskin mil. azure Rundle, on which was embroidered St. Andrews Cross, environed in Center with a Crown composed of Flowers de Lis, Or.
For the Ex re|latione praef. C Areskin mil. ordinary and common Ensign, the Knights used a Green Ribbon, whereat hung a Thistle of Gold, crowned with an Imperial Crown, within a Circle of Gold, containing also the foresaid Epigraph; but for more satisfa|ction, we have caused the Figures of these two to be here exactly represented, from the draughts of them sent me from the before-mentioned Sir Charles Are|skin.


As to the number of the Knights, there is nothing remembred by any Author we have seen, but herein I was supplyed by the Right Honorable the Earl of Lau|derdale, who assured me he had met with (among his readings) from good autho|rity, a memorial, that this Order consisted of 13 Knights, in allusion to the number of our blessed Saviour, and his twelve Apostles.


The Order of Knights of our Lady of the Star in France. (7.)
The Institution of this Order is by Andrew Favin derived from Theat. d' Honneur. l. 3. c. 2. Robert King of France, surnamed the Devout, who, to manifest his particular devotion to the blessed Virgin Mary, and in her honor, gave Being thereunto, in the Theat. d' Honneur. l. 3. c. 2. Month of August, Anno Domini 1022.
The Knights were in number Theat. d' Honneur. l. 3. c. 2. thirty, comprehending the King of France, the Chief or Soveraign; they had appointed for their Habit, Theat. d' Honneur. l. 3. c. 2. Mantles of White Da|mask; their Mantlets and Lining, were of light Carnation Damask, their Sur|coats of the same, and on their Mantles, as also on their Surcoats, to wit, upon the left side of the breast, was embroidered a Star, wrought in pure Gold, with five rays or pointed beams.
The great Collar (Loco dicto. saith he) was formed of three round Chains of Gold, much like that of the Order of the Gennet, and united at little distances, with en|amelled Roses, interchangeably White and Red, at the end whereof hung the Fi|gure of a Star. The Loco dicto. Ceremonies of the Order began on the day of the Nativi|ty of the blessed Virgin Mary, Patroness thereof, in the year before-mentioned.
In the Loco dicto. Reign of Philip de Valois, this Order began to be intermitted by reason of the Wars, nevertheless it was restored by King Iohn his Son, the eighth of Sep|tember, anno 1356.
But albeit Favin hath thus formally set down the Institution of this Order, and assign'd it to King Robert, adding moreover Habit, Collar, and other specious circumstances thereunto, yet theHistor. Ge|nealog. de la Maison de France. Tom. 1. c. 13. p. 58.  59. Sancte Marthe's (his Countrymen) are not per|swaded of the truth thereof, but ingeniously acknowledge, that there is not any thing of it mentioned by their ancient Writers, and coming to speak of the Order in particular, Histor. Ge|nealog. de la Maison de France. Tom. 1. c. 13. p. 58.  59. they refer its first Institution (not renovation) so do Delic. Equest. p. 129.  130. Mennenius, Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 71. b. Ios. Micheli, and others) to King Iohn Son of Philip de Valois, in the Month of October, anno 1352. in commemoration of that Star which directed the Wisemen, who came from far, to adore the Saviour of the World at his Nativity; the S. Marthe de la Maison de France  Men|nen. locis cit. Fi|gure whereof crowned, King Iohn caused to be embroidered on the Mantle or upper Garment of the Order, as also this Motto, Monstrant Regibus Astra viam.
The Seat of this Order (thus instituted by King Iohn) and where the first Cere|monies were kept, was in the noble and ancient House ofIo. Tilly Com|mentar. de rebus Gall. l. 2. p. 181. Cujus nunc tantm ruinosa muro|rum vegi apparent. Vinc. Lupan. l. 1. d Magistrat. Fracr.St. Owen, called de Clichy, neer St. Denys in France; and by an ancient Tresor ds Chart. d France tit. Ct|tez. Beau|mont. 52. deed of Exchange of Lands, situate in the Earldom of Alanon, in lieu of the House of St. Owen (made by King Iohn to the Countess of Alanon, and dated at St. Cler de Gomets the 6. day of Iune 1356.) is the King called Instituteur de la Congre|gation mile|taire de l'E|stoile. Institutor of the military Fraternity of the Star; which sufficiently contradicts the fair-spun relation of Favin, who bestows the honor of Foundation upon King Robert, as before hath been said. To which

we may add, that the day assigned by Favin for holding the Chapter of Election of the first Knights, to wit, the eighth of September 1356 and at Clichy aforesaid, was (in all probability) too neer the day of the Battel of Foicters, (that being but eleven days after) and King Iohn not only then at a great distance from Clichy, but on a Frois. Chron. l. 1. c. 15. hasty March to engage the Black Prince, and consequently too little at leisure to enter upon the Formalities of such an Institution.
This Order was of no long continuance, for being much S. Mar|the en mse Histor. Genealog. loco citato. videsis Seld. T. of Honor. p. 552. violated and disho|noured (during the confusion of the Civil and Foreign War) by the admission into it of mean and undeserving persons; it gave a fair occasion to King Charles the Seventh to take off the pretence of honor supposed in it, and to extinguish it.
Whereupon, in the year S. Mar|the en mse Histor. Genealog. loco citato. videsis Seld. T. of Honor. p. 552. 1455. he contrived the holding of a Chapter, for giving away that Ensign thereof, which himself wore, to the Chevalier du Guet, Captain of the Night-watch in Paris, after whose example the Princes and Lords left the Order, thus disgraced, to the said Captain, and never after wore it.
This Story as to the time, though not the manner, doth Theat. d' Hon. l. 3. c. 2. Favin contradict, and renders his reasons for it: howbeit, upon what occasion soever, the Order became relinquished or dismist, certain it is, that Ibid. c. 3. c. 5. vide Men|nen. ubi supra. p. 130. upon (if not some time before) the Foun|dation of the Order of St. Michael, it grew out of request; as did that of the Gennet upon the erection of the Star.


The Order of the Lilly in Navarre. (8.)
Andr. Fa|vin. in Theat. de d' Honneur. l. 6. c. 3. Garcius King of Navarre, the Sixth of that name, lying under the extremity of a languishing sickness, sent to divers places of Devotion, to the end, that Prayers might be offered up for the recovery of his health. In which season there hapned to be found in the City of Nagera, where he kept his Court, an Andr. Fa|vin. in Theat. de d' Honneur. l. 6. c. 3. Image of the blessed Virgin Mary, issuing forth of a Lilly, and holding her Son between her arms, upon finding of which (if we may credit the story) he im|mediately recovered, and (to perpetuate his devotion to the said Virgin) Andr. Fa|vin. in Theat. de d' Honneur. l. 6. c. 3. in|stituted an Order of Knighthood, in the year of our Lord 1048. which consisted of 38 Knights, drawn out of the ancientest Families in Navarre, Biscay, and old Ca|stile, and Entituled it, the Order of Knights of St. Mary of the Lilly.
But Ios. Mich. Marquez gives foundation to this Orderesor mi|lit. de Cvall. f. 1. b. 25 years before Favin, and draws the Institution from another ground. For esor mi|lit. de Cvall. f. 1. b. whereas Don Garcias had succeeded his Father, King Zanchy the Fourth, in the Kingdom of Navarre, the Moors made War against him, and he prevailing, made a Feast in honor of the blessed Virgin Mary, at which he instituted this Order, and adorned many Knights with the Ensign thereof, beginning with his Brothers and Sons.
Of this Order (Mennen. p. 6 esteemed the most illustrious of all Spain) King Garcias Favin. loco i|tato. or|dained himself, and after him his Successors Kings of Navarre, the Chiefs and So|vereigns. The Knights promised at their entrance into this Order, to Favin. loco i|tato.expose their lives and fortunes in defence of the Christian Faith, conservation of the Crown of Navarre, and expulsion of the Moors.
The Badge or Symbol which the Knights wore daily on their breast, was a Favin. loco itato. Lil|ly embroidered in Silver; but on solemn days, a double Chain of Gold, inter|laced with the letter M. made after the fashion of a Saxon Capital; at the end whereof did hang a Flower de Lis of Gold, enamelled White, bearing the fore|said Letter M. crowned upon the head of its Flower. The Habit was White, wrought all over in Needle-work, with White Lillies.
But Ios. Micheli differs in this also from Favin, for heTes. milit. de Cavall. loc. cit. Tessera suit supra Togam albam effigies Annuntiatio|nis Deiparae intra duo Li|lia. A. Mendo Disq 1. Quaest. 4. n. 95. assigns for the Badge, two Branches of Skie-coloured Lillies, one crossing another, and in the middle of them the Figure of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin, but agrees that the Habit was White.



The Order of the Sword in Cyprus. (9.)
Andr. Favin. Theat. d' Hon. l. 9. c. 2.Guy of Lusignan, (and according to this Author, King of Ierusalem and Cyprus in right of his Wife Sibilla, Sister to Baldwin the Leper) shortly after his setlement in the Isle of Cyprus (which he had bought of Richard the First, King of England, for one hundred thousand Crowns of Gold) Instituted this Order in the year of our Lord 1195. in remembrance of so fortunate a Plantation of 15000 persons, whom he had brought thither.
But De Deli. E|quest. p. 153. Gotofrid. Archont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 11. Mennenius, and some others, are so far from being of this opinion, as to affirm, that neither the name of the Founder, nor the time of this Order's Foun|dation are certainly known; though it be conceived he was one of the Family of Lusignan, who gave beginning unto it.
The Theat. d' Hon. loc. cit. Collar of the Order (called a Collar of Esses by Vide eum lo|co praed. Mennenius) was com|posed (as Favin reports) of round Cordons of White Silk, woven into Love|knots, interlaced with the Letters S and R. Beneath this Collar hung an Oval of Gold, wherein was figured a Sword, the Blade enamelled Silver, and the Hilt Gold; and about the Oval was engraven this Motto, Securitas Regni, Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 87. b.Micheli saith it was, Pro fide servanda; and Loco cit. Gothofridus, Pro integritate tuend.
TheTheat. d' Hon|neur, ut supra.day appointed for holding of the solemn Ceremonies of this Order, was Ascension-day, whereon the Founder gave it (in the Church of St. Sophia the Ca|thedral of Nicosia in Cyprus) to his Brother Amaury, Constable of Ierusalem and Cyprus, and to 300 Barons, which he had established in that his new Kingdom.
There were Tesoro mi|lit. loco relato. eight Kings of Cyprus, of this House of Lusignan, Great Masters or Chiefs of this Order; and Tesoro mi|lit. loco relato. when the Isle fell into the hands of the Turks, this noble Institution ceased.


The Order of the Bear in Switzerland. (10.)
The Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 7. c. 14. vide Mi|raeum in Orig. Equest. p. 79. Emperor Frederick the Second (in favour of the Abbot of St. Gall in Swaben, and several Noblemen of that Country, who had been active in his as|sistance for gaining to him the Empire) instituted this Order, in the year of our LordFavin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 7. c. 14. vide Mi|raeum in Orig. Equest. p. 79. 1213. and bestowed upon the elect Knights Collars of Gold, at the end whereof hung the Figure of a Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 7. c. 14. vide Mi|raeum in Orig. Equest. p. 79. Bear, Gold, mounted on an Hillock enamelled with Black.
He ordained, Idem Favin. loco nuper cit. that this Honor should be conferr'd by the Abbot of St. Gall, for the time being, and that on the Anniversary of their Patron St. Gall (a Gentle|man of Scotland, and the Apostle of Swaben) being the 16. day of October, the Knights of this Order should assemble at the Abbey; on which day, such Candi|dates as were Miraeus. p. 79. designed to receive the Honor, were girded with the military Belt (the Sword being first consecrated at the Altar) and adorned with the Collar of the Order; having kept their Vigils the preceding night, according to the an|cient and accustomed manner.
But it carried the Title of the Favin, ut supra. Order of the Bear, in memory of St. Vrsus, of the Theban Legion, who was martyr'd before the Temple of the Sun, at Soleurre in Switzerland; as also of St. Gall, from the name of the Patron of the place, where it received Institution.
This Order continued among the Switzers, till they became a Common-wealth, and then the Castles and strong holds of the Noblemen and Gentry of the Coun|try being dismantled, the use thereof was wholly laid aside.



The Order of the Broom Flower in France. (11.)
E Teat. d' Hon|neur, l. 3. c. 3.Saint Lewis King of France (saith Favin) instituted this Order, to honor the Coronation of Margaret his Queen, eldest Daughter of Berengrius Count of Provence, anno Dom. 1234.
The E Teat. d' Hon|neur, l. 3. c. 3. Habit appointed for the Knights, were Cassocks of White Damask, and Violet Chaperons; the Collar was composed of Broom Flowers, of the native co|lours, interlaced with Flowers de Lis, hanging thereat a Cross Florence Gold, to which was added this Inscription, Exaltat humiles, the Founder accounting it the Symbol of humility.
As to the E Teat. d' Hon|neur, l. 3. c. 3. number of the Knights, it was not made certain by the Founder, but wholly depended on the will of the Sovereign. This Order E Teat. d' Hon|neur, l. 3. c. 3. continued to the death of King Charles the Fifth.
Notwithstanding all that Favin thus relates, the En le Hist. Geneal. de la Maison de France, Tom. 1. p. 58. Saincte Marthe's are of opinion (for the reason before noted) that neither this St. Lewis, nor the before mentioned King Robert, nor King Charlemain, did ever institute any Military Order of Chevalry: And Delic. Equest. p. 64. Mennenius reports, that Charles the Sixth is said to have been the Founder of the Knights of the Broom Flower: if this be true, the Order will want many years of that antiquity which Favin bestows upon it.
Apud Menn. loco cit. Peter Bellay rather thinks this later Institution not to have been any Order of Knighthood, but a Company of young Esquires, the Sons of Noblemen, who attended King Charle's person as a Life-Guard, or as Esquires of the Body, and were oftentimes imployed to interpret the messages of Embassadors from foreign parts.


The Order of the Ship, and double Crescent in France. (12.)
In Delic. E|quest. p. 166. Mennenius acknowledgeth, that of old, there was such an Order in France, erected in honor of the great atchievements that Nation did by Sea; but by whom it was founded, or at what time, doth not appear from him. Yet Theat: d' Honn. l. 3. c. 4. Favin is full in both, for he affirms, that the before mentioned St. Lewis, after the Institution of the Broom Flower, erected this likewise: for animating the Nobility of France, by this new prize of honor, to accompany him in his Voyage into Africa, 1269.
The Theat: d' Honn. l. 3. c. 4. Collar was interlaced with double Escallops of Gold, and double Crescents of Silver, interwoven and fastned together with double Gold Chains, at which the Figure of a Ship was pendent in an Oval of Gold.
ThisTheat: d' Honn. l. 3. c. 4.Order continued in France (after the death of St. Lewis) no longer than those Knights lived, who were admitted thereinto by him: but it was retained by Theat: d' Honn. l. 3. c. 4.Charles, Brother of the said St. Lewis, and by him setled in Sicily, where it re|mained in request with his Successors, until the Kings of Aragon gained that Kingdom.


Knights of St. James in Holland. (13.)
Orig Ord. E|quest. p 81. See Grimstons general History of the Nether|lands. p. 66. Albertus Miraeus, from an old Dutch Register, called Register der Ridderscap, or the Register of the Order of Knighthood, informs us, That Florentius Earl of Holland and Zeland, and Lord of Friseland, in the year 1290. bestowed the En|signs of his Order of St. Iames, in the Hall of his Palace at the Hague, upon twelve of his principal Nobility, whose names he sets down: among whom, the second in rank, is Lancelot Lord Hamilton, then Embassador from the King of Scots.
The Knights of this Order were invested with a Ibid. p. 82. Collar of Gold, or military Belt of Silver and gilt; adorned with six Escallops, whereat was appended the Picture of St. Iames the Apostle.
All the Ibid. p. 82. Knights Shields (whereon were painted their proper Arms) were de|livered to Iohn Paypaert, Herald of Holland, and by him hung up in the great Hall of the Palace, at the Hague, in perpetual memory and testimony of this Insti|tution.


Order of the Swan in Cleveland. (14.)
If ever there was an Order there, under that Title, it hath been very anci|ent, and long since laid aside; yet Theat. d' Hon|neur. l. 7. c. 11. Favin says, the Princes of Cleve have born the Swan for their Order, Devise, Crest, and Supporters, to preserve the memo|ry of the Knight of the Swan, the Romance of whose Adventures he also sets down; and further reports, that Idem. l. 9. c. 5. Charles Gonzaga of Cleve, Duke of Nivers and Retelois, had it in design to re-establish this Order, peculiar to the House of Cleve.


The Knights of Jesus at Rome. (15.)
The Popes of Rome, as they are Lords Paramount of St. Peters Patrimony, are Temporal Princes; upon which account to Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 8. c. 1. honor the Nobles, principally of that Territory and others, they have erected and established certain Orders of Knighthood, as well Religious as Military, but all of them Stipendaries to the Pa|pal See: Of the former sort we have spoken before in the last Chapter, but this being esteemed a Military Order, we therefore place it here.
It was instituted by Pope Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 8. c. 1. Iohn the 22. at Avignon in France, anno 1320. and much augmented by Paul the Fifth. The Knights wear for the Badge of this Order, a plain Cross gules, inclosed within a Cross Patee Or, hanging at a Gold Chain.
In the Month of Ianuary 1668/9. Pope Clement the Ninth, created three of the Ambassadors from the Catholick Cantons in Switzerland, with the accustomed Ceremony; himself putting on their Gold Chains, with the Ensigns appendant, and the Captain of his Guards, girding their Swords about them.


Order of the White Eagle in Poland. (16.)
The information we have of this Order, is from Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 6. Favin also, who saith, that Ladislas the Fifth, King of Poland, instituted the same, to honor the marriage of his Son Casimire the Great, with Anne Daughter of Gedimir, Duke of Lithua|nia, in the Month of February, in the year of our Lord 1325.
The Ensign hereof was a Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 6. White Eagle, crowned.


The Order of Knights de la Banda in Castile. (17.)
This Order of Knights called Banda, vul|gare Hispano|rum lingua lnia es Io Mariana de reb. Hisp. l. 16. c. 2. de la Banda, was erected by Alphonsus the Eleventh, King of Leon and Castile, in the Ibid. City of Victoria, anno 1332. (but In le Theat. d' Honneur. l. 6. c. 11. Favin from Antonio de Guevara, saith it was in the City of Palencia, anno 1330. and Orig. de Ca|val. p. 37. b. Sansovin in Burgos, anno 1368.) For this King considering, that he had to do with many Enemies, could find no better way to secure himself, than by

erecting this Order, and constituting himself Master thereof, which he did a lit|tle before his Coronation.
Shortly after (saith Mennenius) to wit, anno 1332. the Solemnity of this Order was celebrated in the Mennen. p. 116. City of Burgos, where, on the Eve thereof, in the Monastery of St. Mary Royal, each of the Candidates was conducted by the King to the Altar, and having there laid down his Arms, spent the whole night in watching and Prayer.
The next day after Mass, he was invested with a Io. Mariana, loco supra cit. Red military Belt, or a Ribband of four fingers broad, which came across the body, over the right shoulder, and so under the left arm; And was the Ensign from whence the Knights took their denomination.
This Order was instituted chiefly to honor the Nobility, and therefore at first, none were admitted, but the Mennen loc citato. younger Sons of Noblemen (excluding elder Bro|thers) or persons descended of the most noble Families in Spain; or else Esquires, who had served in the Court or Camp, ten years at the least: and to the end that greater honor might the more inflame them to valiant Exploits, Kings them|selves, sometimes, vouchsafed to take the Ensign of this Order upon them.
Mariana, loco cit. It was anciently of very great esteem, but (such is the vicissitude of humane Affairs) at length it grew out of use.
The Laws and Constitutions are recorded by Epist. ad Perum Pimentelium, Com. Beneventanum. Anth. de Guevera (who also gives a Catalogue of the first Knights) Tesoro milit. de Caval. f. 50. Ios. Micheli, Orig. de Cavaliere, p. 38. Sansovin, Theat. d' Honneur, loco supra cit. Favin, and Honor Milit.  Civil. lib. 2. cap. 22. Segar; to whom we refer those that are desirous to be informed of them.


The Order de la Calza in Venice. (18)
From the Mennen De|lic. Equest. p. 118. videsi Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Qust. 2. Sect. 2. example of the Knights de la Banda in Castile, and about the year 1400. was instituted a Society at Venice, bearing the Title de la Calza, in honor of the Inauguration of Duke Michele Steno.
Meeting with but a slender account hereof, among those Authors who have handled Military Orders, and some confounding it with that of St. Mark; I was at length, by the friendship of the deservedly honored Sir Charles Cotterel Knight, Master of the Ceremonies to his Majesty, furnished with better satisfaction, which he obtained for me from Signre Pietro Moccinigo, the late Venetian Ambassador, at his Residence here in England; and from Signre Aberti the present Resident for that State.
This Order consisted of a Society of particular Noblemen and Gentlemen, who at their voluntary choice met together, and entred into a Fellowship (a|mong whom, some person of Eminence was elected their Chief) Nevertheless, upon the recommendation of their intention and design to the Council of Ten, who confirmed their Institution, and granted them Priviledges.
It hath appeared with so much the more reputation to the world, by having had the honor to receive into it several Princes of Italy, especially the Family of Este Dukes of Ferara, of Gonzaga then Marquesses, now Dukes of Mantua, of the Rovere, Vrbino, Mirandula, and others of the most conspicuous Families of that Country, namely, Colonna, Vrsini, Sanseverini, Visconti, and others.
They were distinguished by wearing a Stocking quartered into different co|lours, embroidered with gold, and enriched with Jewels, which they at pleasure altered from the right to the left Leg; and in particular it is remembred, that an. 1529. the right Stocking then worn, was half the inside of Scarlet, and half the outside of Purple, and the other half gray, but the left Stocking was all green: and as were the Husbands Stockings, such were the Wives Sleeves in all par|ticulars.
On their solemn days, they first went to Church, and at Mass, took an Oath to observe the Articles of their Order. Among other things which this Society (for the honor of the City) was obliged to, splendid and noble Entertainments were part; at which were exhibited Musick, Dancings, and Theatral Representati|ons:

And with such magnificent and sumptuous Divertisements, have they given reception to divers foreign Princes, in particular to Henry the Third of France, when he past by Venice in his way from Poland to France.
They wore for their Habit a Crimson Senators Vest, appearing therein very splendid, and reserved for solemn days; at which times the Foreign Princes, that had been admitted into this Order, appeared clad after the same manner.
These Knights had for their Ensign a Sun on a Shield painted in their Banners, which they used also for a Seal; perhaps as a happy Omen and Presage, that the Order (being laid aside about the year 1590. for the excess it was growing into) should like the Sun from under a Cloud, rise again in after times (when better opportunity offered it self) in greater splendor than ever.


The Order of St. Mark in Venice. (19.)
In this Seigniory there is another Degree or Dignity of Knighthood, commonly called the Order of St. Mark; and because it is generally reckoned among the Orders of Knighthood, and differs from the Milites Simplices by wearing a peculiar Title, and being invested with a particular Ensign of Honor at their Creation, we have thought good rather to discourse of it here, though the Ceremony of Crea|tion is performed after the manner of Knights Batchellors, viz. by Dubbing with a Sword, and their Title a bare mark of Honor only; being by our Learned Selden affirmed to be, Additions to the Titles of Honor, p 935. the known Degree of Knighthood given by Supreme Princes, or such as have a like power with them.
Besides, we have been informed thence, that those Knights are not governed by any Laws or Statutes, and are without any Revenue or Indowment of Lands: That they are not under any particular obligation or tye, except what is common to them with other Subjects, namely that of Fidelity to the Prince, being in all things else left to their own liberty. To this we add, that the Honor is also bestowed on absent persons, by Letters Patent or Codicils (as is the Knightly Dignity sometimes) among some of which, that to the learned Sir Daniel Heinsius, is given us by Ibid. Mr. Selden.
It had its Title from St. Mark the Evangelist, whose Plaina in vita Greg. 4. pag. 114. Body was translated to Ve|nice, from Alexandria in Aegypt, in the year of our Lord Alphons. Cia|conius de Vita  Gestis Pon|tif. l. 1. p. 234. 828. in the time of Iusti|nianus Patritius Duke of Venice, ever since which time this Saint hath been assumed and taken for the Plat. loco nu|per cit. titular Angel and Guardian of this noble City, and his Picture very anciently painted upon their Banners and Ensigns; but as to the Institution, it is not certainly determined, when, or by whom, it was first brought in use.
The Badge of Honor, wherewith these Knights are adorned, is a Gold Chain, put over their shoulders, at the instant of their Creation, whereat depends a Medal; on the one side is represented the Symbol of St. Mark, to wit, the Andr. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Qust. 2. Sect. 28. Figure of a Lyon, having wings, holding in his right Paw a drawn Sword, and in his left a Book, spread open, in which, this Motto, Pax tibi Marce Evangelista mens; on the other, the name of the Duke then living, beautified with a particular Impress; but in the other, he is represented on his Knee, receiving a Standard from the hands of St. Mark: and sometimes this Medal is worn on a Cross enamel'd blue.
I was further informed from the hand of the noble Signre Pietro Moccinigo, that the Duke of Venice bestows this Honor, either privately in his Chamber, or publick|ly in a full Colledge: Some also are made Knights by the Senate, and those of the Venetian Nobility, at least persons of very eminent Quality and Character, who have merited well of this Common-wealth, by some extraordinary piece of service, either at home or abroad, or upon whatever occasion the Senate sees fitting: and for asmuch as the Senate is a representation of the whole Common-wealth, and that the Creations of these Knights are confirmed by publick Decrees; it is taken, that the Knights of their creating are of greater Dignity, than those made by the Duke. When the Creation is in a full Colledge, whether it be by the Senate or the Duke only, the Collar and Medal is bestowed at the publick Charge; but when by the Duke privately, then upon his particular expence.
These Knights wear the Honor among other Titles of Dignity, as I have seen

it inscribed about the Effigies of Sir Daniel Heinsius, thus, DANIEL HEINSIVS D. MARCI EQVES ILLVSTR. HOLLANDIAE ORDINVM HISTORI|CVS, POLITICVS, ET HISTORIARVM PROFESSOR BIBLIOTHE|CARIVS ACADEMIAE ET SECRETARIVS. And among those other Titles given to that famous Mathematician and Astrologer Sir Andrew Argoll, that of his Knighthood by this Title, is also thus inserted, ANDREAS ARGOLVS D. MARCI EQVES, ET IN CELEBERRIMO LYCEO PATAVINO PRO|FESSOR MATHEMATICVS.


The Order of Seraphins in Sweden. (20.)
In the year of our Lord Favin. in le Theat. d' Hon|neur. l. 7. c. 10. 1334. Magnus the Fourth, King of Sweden, in imi|tation of other Christian Princes, who had established Military Orders, instituted this of the Seraphins, or Seraphick Knights, otherwise surnamed of Iesus; in me|mory of the Siege laid to the Metropolitan City of Vpsala.
The Collar of this Order was composed of Mennen. p. 158. Seraphins and Patriarchal Crosses, the former of Gold, enamelled Red, the later also of Gold, but without any en|amel: At the end thereof hung the Gothofrid. Ar|chont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 12. Image of Christ in an Oval. Loco cit. Favin saith it was this Cipher IHS composed of three Letters, and signifying the name of Iesus, and in point four Nails. But Tessera Gen|tilitia, p. 637. elsewhere 'tis said to be the Figure of the blessed Virgin Mary, and to make the thing yet more uncertain, Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 92. b. another tells us, it was a Patriarchal Cross that hung thereat.


The Order of the Sword and Military Belt in Sweden. (21.)
We find mention made of another Order of Knights in Sweden, called of the Mennen. p: 159. Archont. Cosm. loco cit. Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Qust. 2. Sect. 30. n. 71. Sword and Military Belt, whose Collar consisted of Swords and Belts conjoyn'd (the Symbols of Justice and Love) the Swords somewhat bending towards the point, and so joined point to point, round into a Circle: But by whom or when this Order was instituted, we are not yet informed.


The Order of the Knot in Naples. (22.)
When Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 38. b. videsis Pand. Collenu|cius Hist. Neop. l. 5. Angel Con|stantin. Hist. Neop. l. 6. An. Pacca de Ord.  Societ. mi|litar. Lewis King of Hungary design'd a War against Ioane Queen of Naples, he undertook an Expedition into Italy, not so much to deprive her of her Kingdom, as to revenge the death of his Brother Andrew; whom (as 'tis reported) Queen Ioane, his Wife, had commanded to be strangled.
After many troubles and three years of War, they came to an accord, the first of April, anno 1351. and the 26. of May following (with the consent of Pope Cle|ment the Sixth) the Queen, and Lewis Prince of Tarentum, were crowned King and Queen of that Realm; and that same day, in memory of such a happy Peace, and to take away all suspitions and enmities; the Prince instituted this Order of Knights, into which entred threescore and ten of the illustrious Lords in blood of Naples, and some other Strangers.
The Habit he appointed was White, and for the Orders chief Ensign, he gave a Knot (the Embleme of Love and Friendship) intermixt with Gold: and as the like Institutions in that Kingdom, commonly ended with the death of their Foun|ders; so this Order expired in a short time.



The Order of Knights of the Annunciade in Savoy. (23.)
Fran. Capre en le Catalogue des Che|valiers de l' Ordre du Collier de Sa|voye, dict. de l'Annonciade, Edit. Turin. 1654. vide etiam Samuel Guiche|non Histoir. Genealog. de la royal Maison de Savoy. l. 1. p. 111. Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 133.  Sansovin. Orig. de Caval. f. 33. Ame the Sixth of that name, Earl of Savoy, surnamed Conte le Verde, instituted this Order under the Title of the Fran. Capre en le Catalogue des Che|valiers de l' Ordre du Collier de Sa|voye, dict. de l'Annonciade, Edit. Turin. 1654. vide etiam Samuel Guiche|non Histoir. Genealog. de la royal Maison de Savoy. l. 1. p. 111. Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 133.  Sansovin. Orig. de Caval. f. 33. Collar, in the year of our Lord Fran. Capre en le Catalogue des Che|valiers de l' Ordre du Collier de Sa|voye, dict. de l'Annonciade, Edit. Turin. 1654. vide etiam Samuel Guiche|non Histoir. Genealog. de la royal Maison de Savoy. l. 1. p. 111. Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 133.  Sansovin. Orig. de Caval. f. 33. 1362. in honor of the 15 Fran. Capre en le Catalogue des Che|valiers de l' Ordre du Collier de Sa|voye, dict. de l'Annonciade, Edit. Turin. 1654. vide etiam Samuel Guiche|non Histoir. Genealog. de la royal Maison de Savoy. l. 1. p. 111. Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 133.  Sansovin. Orig. de Caval. f. 33. Divine Mysteries of the Rosary.
Theat. d' Honneur, l. 8. c. 5. Andrew Favin, on a mistaken ground, calls it the Order of the Snares of Love, in regard (as he alledgeth) the Founder had received of his Lady, the favour of a Brace|let, made of the Tresses of her hair, knit or plaited in Love-knots, and that the four Letters, afterward interlaced by the Founder, within such like Love-knots should signifie, Frapps, Entrs, Romps, Tout.
But Francis Capre (Councellor and Secretary of State to the present Duke of Savoy) who hath given an account of the In Advis au Lecteur. Institution, together with the several re|staurations of this Order, from the Records thereof (preserved in the Charter-house in Pierre Chastle, appointed at the time of the Foundation, for the Seat of the Order) In Advis au Lecteur. confutes this error of Favin, and with him several others, who have un|warily swallowed down the same mistake.
Pag. 131. Mennenius and Pag. 39. Miraeus take not the least notice of its denomination from the Collar, but call it the Order of the Annunciation in Savoy: But it is cleer enough from the FoundersGuichenon. Hist. Geneal. de la Maison de Savoy. l. 6. p. 217.last Will and Testament, bearing date the 27. of February, anno 1383. and from whatLocis supra relatis. Capre and Guichenon alledge, as also from the Sansovin. f. 33. Sta|tutes of Ame the Eighth, that at the time of the Foundation, it was called the Order of the Collar: under which name it continued, till the time of Charles the Third, surnamed le Bon, Duke of Savoy, when (and not before) it had bestow|ed on it the Title of the Annunciation, from the Picture of the History of the blessed Virgin Mary, by him first made appendant to the Collar, in the year 1518.
The Capre. Guichen. Sansovin. locis praed. Founder appointed the number of his Knights (reckoning himself the Chief and Sovereign for one) to be fifteen, (among whom we find Guichenon. l. 2. p. 414.  Capre en le Catalog. des Cheval. c. Portoit d'or, a trois Pals d'azur. Sir Richard Musard, an English Gentleman, recorded) agreeable to the number of the before mentioned Divine Mysteries; but in the additional Statutes made by Ame the Eighth (first Duke of Savoy) anno 1434. and by Duke Emanuel Philibert, 1568. there is a permission given to augment their number, by adding five to the former fifteen, but the Soveraigns have not always been confin'd to this number.
Besides the Institution of this Order, the Founder erected and founded the Capre in ad|vis. au Lecteur. Guichenon. l. 6. p. 217. Chartreuse of Pierre Chastle in Bugey, wherein were entertained 15 Priests, and they obliged to celebrate every day 15 Masses, to the honor of the 15 Joys of the blessed Virgin, to the Souls health of him, his Predecessors, and all who had been, were, or should hereafter be Knights of this Order. So that the resem|blance of this Institution, with the foundation of this religious house, is some argument, that the Order, as well as the House, were founded upon a religious and pious, not amorous or wanton account.
At Pierre Chastle were the Ceremonies observed, and the Chapters held by the Sovereign and Knights, Guichenon. l. 1. p. 113.  l. 2. p. 791. until the time that Charles Emanuel First of that name, Duke of Savoy, exchanged it, and some other places, for the Marquisate of Saluces, upon the Treaty of Peace concluded at Idem Guich. 16 p. 548. Lyons, 17. Ian. 1607. and then the Anniversary of the Feast, and celebrations of the Order (be|ing fixt to the Feast-day of the Annunciation of our Lady) were translated from hence, first to the Church of St. Dominick at Montmeillar, and afterwards by his declaration, dated at Turin Fr. Capre, ut supra. 3. Dec. following, to the Hermitage of Camaldule, situate upon the Mountain of Turin, vulgarly called l' Eremo Assis, where they were performed, as formerly, at Pierre Chastle.
TheFr. Capre, ut supra. ancient Collar (from which also the Order received its denomination) was made of Gold, about three fingers breadth, as may best be collected from

the Founders own Collar, which he Guichen. l. 1. p. 112. gave to the religious at Hautomb, in whose Vestry it is yet preserved. Upon this Collar are engraved these Letters F.E.R.T, represented in ancient barbarous Characters after this manner  and one Knot (commonly called the Knot of Savoy) at the end of each Fert, which with three other like Knots entwin'd one within another, made up the circumference depending at the Collar: nevertheless, without any Figure or Image within the Circle.
These old Characters (as hath been generally taken and supposed) were the initial Letters of this Epigraph, Fortitudo ejus Rhodum tenet, alluding to the glo|rious actions of Conte Ame le Grand, who gallantly defended the Isle of Rhodes, against the Turks, anno 1310.
But the world hath now received more light in this particular, from the indu|strious pains of Monsieur Guichenon;In Hist. Ge|nealog praed. l. 1. p. 147. who has very fortunately cleered this so common a mistake from all obscurity.
For the Devise of the House of Savoy, consisting in the before noted word, or four Letters, appears to be more ancient, than the time of Conte Ame le Grand, in regard that Lewis de Savoy, Baron de Vaud, who dyed anno Dom. 1301. did al|ways wear this Devise, as appears from some of his Coyns, which this Author Idem ibidem. in|serts; and further, the Monument of Thomas de Savoy, the First of that name, Son of Humbert the Third, Conte de Savoy, de Piemont,  de Maurienne, who died the 20. of Ianuary, anno 1233. and lies interr'd in the Cathedral Church of Aouste, hath (on the Draught of the Idem. l. 2. p. 251. Monument which Guichenon exhibits) a Dog ly|ing at the feet of his Portraicture, which (on a Collar about his neck) bears this word Fert, without pointing also, or distinguishing of Letters; and is besides a strong proof, that this was but one word.
But yet to add more strength to this assertion, he exhibits another con|vincing Testimony, from a Lib. 1. p. 141. Brass Coyn of the same Earl Thomas, whereon is a bowing Escotcheon, charged with a Cross, and for the Crest, a Lyons head winged, and surmounted with a Peacocks Feather; on the one side of the Crest are these two Letters TS, being the initial and final Letters of his Christian name Thomas, and on the other side HI, the first and last Letters of the Surname Humberti, which signifies, Thomas filius Humberti: On the Reverse of this Coyn, is to be seen two Knots, of the fashion afore noted, and the word Frt in the midst.
He moreover gives us the Ectype of a Ib. p. 145. Silver Coyn, of Peter de Savoy (who for some time abode in England, in the Reign of King Henry the Third, and built that stately Structure in the Strand, called the Savoy) in which is repre|sented the Devise Fert, in Gothick Characters.
From all which it is fully evident, that this word, as also the Knot and Cross were used for the Devise, Badge, and Arms of the House of Savoy, long before Count Ame le Grand relieved Rhodes, against the power of the Turks, or the time of the Institution of the Order; though for how long before is not certainly known; nor is the true interpretation of the word left rendred to Posterity.
We may here not unfitly add, that though Historians generally report for a truth, that Conte Ame le Grand, relinquished the Eagle, the ancient Arms of Sa|voy, and assumed the Cross of Rhodes, to wit, Gules, a Cross Argent, in memory of the relief he gave to that City; yet doth this particular suffer much contra|diction. For it is made clear enough by Ib. l. 1. p. 126. Guichenon, that some of this Conte's Ancestors, Earls of Savoy, and other Princes of that House, did bear the said Cross for their Arms, long before that famous action at Rhodes: Nevertheless he de|termines not when it was first so assumed by the House of Savoy, but modestly in|terposeth his conjecture; Pag. 127. conceiving, that upon the return of Ame the Third, Earl of Savoy, out of the Holy Land, anno Dom. 1147. he might assume the Cross for his Arms (for in the like kind we have several instances in the Arms of Families herein England, when their Ancestors returned home from that Country) as well for the honor he bore to this Pledge of our redemption, as for a memorable Badge of that his Military Expedition. And seeing that in those times Arms were not become hereditary, the Earls of Savoy, did one while bear an Eagle,

another while the Cross, until Conte Ame le Grand established the later of these in his Family.
The ancient Collar had no Idem Gui|chenon, l. 1. p. 112. Rose on the Circle of its pendant, or Image either of our blessed Lady, or St. Maurice, asFav. Theat. d' Honn. l. 8. c. 5. videsis Hie|rom de Bara, in la blaison des Armoiries p. 44 Marc. Gilb. de Varennes en le Roy d'Armes. p. 595. some relate: but was composed only of the afore|said word, linked together by a single Knot, and three little Knots in the pen|dant; until the time of Duke Charles the Third, as may be proved by the anci|ent Collars of the Soveraigns of this Order, preserved in the Monastery at Haut|combe in Savoy (Guichenon in le Hist. Geneal. de la Maison de Savoy l. 6. p. 31. founded by Conte Ame the Third, anno 1125.) where most of the Soveraigns are interred, with the Figure of which Collar, Fr. Capre hath incompassed the Arms of all the Knights, from the first foundation, unto the time of Duke Charles the Third; as may be seen in his Catalogue of the Knights of this Order.
This ancient Collar is still in use, and daily worn, but now called the Capre loco supra relato. Guichenon. l. 1. p. 113. little Col|lar of the Order, being made of Gold, or Silver and gilt, about an inch broad, and of different weight. The Knights wear it about their neck, close to the Collar of their Doublet, in which manner Ame the Tenth, Duke of Savoy, is represent|ed, in his Picture at full length, now hanging in the Gallery at Whitehall, to which Collar (within a round formed of three Knots) hangs the Figure of the Annun|ciation.
As Duke Charles the Third restored much of its decayed splendor to this Or|der, so anno Ibid. 1518. did he introduce another larger Collar, and called it the grea Collar, so that now the Knights use two Collars, the later being only worn upon days of Ceremony, and Festivals of the Order. This later and larger Collar weighs about 200 Crowns in Gold, and is composed of the word Fert interwo|ven with Knots, severed with Roses, viz. 15 Roses of Gold, whereof seven are enamell'd with White, and seven with Red, and bordered with two Thorns; as also the Figure of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin, enamelled in various co|lours, pendant at three Chainets to another Rose, coloured both White and Red.
We read not of any peculiar Habit assigned to the Knights of this Order, be|fore the time of Duke Charles the Third, who brought into use the Ibid. great Man|tle of Crimson Velvet, his own being fur'd with Ermins, but the rest of the Knights with Miniver, fringed and bordered with Knots, (to wit, of the fashion of those that adorn the Collar) in fine Gold: Under this Mantle is worn a Surcoat, of white Damask.
Capre. Guichenon. Duke Emanuel Philibert his Son, changed afterwards the colour of the Mantle to Azure, and lined it with White Taffaty, of which Silk he also made the Surcoats.
But Capre. Guichenon. Charles Emanuel altered the Mantle unto an Amaranthus or Purple Co|lour, seeded with Roses, and Flames, in embroidery of Gold and Silver, bor|dered throughout with the Symbols of the Order, fringed with Gold, and lined with Cloth of Silver, tissued Blue, which continues hitherto in use: Under which instead of the White Taffaty Surcoat, is now worn a White Satin suit, embroi|dered with Silk, the Hose gathered upwards, in the fashion of Trouses.
Concerning the Statutes of this Order, the most ancient are those of Capre. Gui|chenon. l. 1. p. 113. Ame the Eighth (for there are none of the Founders extant) made at Chastilion the 30. of May, in the year of our Lord 1410. the original whereof is lodg'd in the Archives at Turin, which he augmented in the year 1434. and both are printed by In Origine de Cavall. f. 33. b.  36. b. Sansovin. Duke Charles the Third, made new Statutes at Chambery the 11. of Sept. anno 1518. these were enlarged by Duke Emanuel Philibert, anno 1568. and published in the year 1577.


The Order of the Thistle of Bourbon in France. (24.)
At the solemnity of the Fav. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 3. c. 12. marriage of Lewis the Second Duke of Bourbon, with Anne Daughter to the Count Daulphine of Auvergne, celebrated in the Town of Arde, on New-years day 1370. this Duke instituted the Order of Knights of

our Lady, otherwise called the Thistle, and the Ibid. first solemnities thereof were performed at Nostre Dame de Maulins in Bourbonnois, where he founded a Col|ledge of twelve Canons in honor of the blessed Virgin.
The ground of the Institution wasMenn. De. Equest. p. 142. to strengthen this Dukes power and interest, for the aid of Charles Duke of Orleans, and of his two Brothers Philip and Iohn, against the Faction of the House of Burgundy: And by joining of Flowers de Lis and Thistles (the Symbols of hope and courage) emblematically to express the nobleness of his Spirit, against all power of Fortune.
He ordained a set number of Knights of this Society, to wit, Favin. Theat. d' Hn. loc i. 26, therein com|prehending himself and Successors Dukes of Bourbon, as Chiefs; and obliged these to wear daily a Favin. Theat. d' Hn. loc i. Belt or Girdle made of watchet colour Velvet, lined with Crimson Sattin, embroidered with Gold, in the midst of which embroidery was curiously wrought the word ESPERANCE. This Girdle was fastned with a Buckle and a Tongue of Gold, bearded and checquered with green enamel, in form like to the head of a Thistle.
On the Anniversary of the Festival (namely the day of the Conception of our Lady in December) the Knights wore Cassocks or Surcats of Carnation Damask, with wide sleeves, girded with the Girdle before described.
The Favin. Theat. d' Hn. loc i. Mantle of this Order was of Skie-coloured Damask, having broad welt of Gold embroidered on the Collar, and lined with red Sattin; but the Mantlet of green Velvet.
The Bonnet was also of green Velvet, at the point of the band hung a sai Tassel of Crimson Silk and threds of Gold, the lining of Crimson Tassaty, and turned up after the antique manner, whereon they had embroidered the Golden Shield with the word Allen.
Whoso considers in this Constitution, the number of Knights, the principal colours of the Mantle, Surcoat and Girdle (with the injunction for wearing there|of) shall plainly see that this Founder took an exact pattern from the Order of the Garter, which he had observed in England, and acquainted himself with its Constitutions, while he was Prisoner in Windsor Castle: for here is little change or alteration, and only a Belt or Girdle made the chief Ensign of this, as the Gar|ter was of that Order.
The great Idem Favi, lco praed. Collar was of Gold, of the weight of ten Marks, enamelled with Green, opened like Network, which was fill'd with Flowers de Lis of Gold, and each of them(together with the Letters of the Impress)placed in a Lozenge of red enamel. At the bottom of the Collar, in an Oval of Gold(the Circle whereof was enamelled with Green and Red) appeared the Figure of the Patroness, the blessed Virgin Mary, surrounded with rays of the Sun, crowned with twelve Silver Stars, a Crescent of the same under her feet, enamelled with Purple and Skie colour, lastly at the end of the Oval depended the head of a Thistle enamelled Green, but bearded White.
Some little difference is put by Mennn.  Deli. quest. p 14. others in the fashion and composition of this Collar; namely, that it was made either of Gold or Silver, and framed of Flowers de Lis, and four leaves or Flowers of a Thistle, set in the form of a Cross.


The Order of the Dove in Castile, (25.)
Was instituted by Ios. Micheli Marquez en la Tesoro Mi|litar. de Cavalliera. f. 81. b. And. Mend de Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Qust. 4. Sect.  n. 103. Iohn the First of that name, King of Ca|stile, in the City of Segovia Anno Dom. 1390. (so saith Delic. Equest. p. 154. Men|nenius and Orig. Equest. p. 73. Miraeus, but Theat. d' Honneur. l. 6. c. 12. Favin placeth it 1379.) and pro|posed to his Nobles, as a Mennenius, loc. cit. reward to encourage them to pro|secute the noble acts of his Grandfather King Henry the Second.
The Favin.  Menn. locis nuper cit. Collar of this Order was linked or enchained with the resplendent beams of the Sun,Tessera suit Columba radis circumd  Torque dependens, Mendo loc. cit. both waved and pointed,

at which hung a golden Dove enamelled White, and Micheli en Te|soro Milit. de Caval. f. 82. b. encompassed with rays, the Eyes and Beak Red.
Herewith the Founder, saith Favin, adorned himself on Whitsonday (yet Men|nenius and Miraeus will have it the Feast-day of St. Iames) and at the Altar of the great Church in Segovia, distributed other the like Collars to his intimate Fa|vourites, together with a Book containing the Statutes of the Order. But he dy|ing the very same year, before the Order had taken sufficient root, it became of small continuance.


The Order of the Argonautes of St. Nicholas in Naples. (26.)
Tesoro Mili|tar. de Caval, f. 60, vide eti|am Pandol. Co|lenduc. Hist. Neop. l. 5. Aug. Constan. l. 8. Anellum Paca de Ord.  So|ciet. Militar. Charles the Third, King of Naples, instituted this Order, in the year of our Lord 1382. and with the Ensign thereof invested several of the Nobility of that Kingdom; with which as by a Bond, he designed to tye them one to another in a brotherly obligation.
The end of its Institution, was to preserve amity among the Nobles, to com|pose enmities, and suppress seditions; Insomuch, as if any of the Knights of this Order, were at variance one with another, and refused to be reconciled, the En|signs were then to be taken from him: but Briet. Annal. mundi. par. 3. Tom. 2. p. 300. some say the ground and cause, was to advance Navigation, which the Neopolitans stood in need of. To which the principal Ensign of this Order seems rather to allude, it being a  de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. 31. n. 77. Ship float|ing upon the waters, in the midst of a storm, having this Motto, Non credo tempori.
Tesoro Mi|lit. de Ca|val. loc. cit. In the Convent of that sumptuous Church, which St. Nicholas Bishop of Smyr|na caused to be built, was the grand Feast held, on the Anniversary of that Saint.
This King appointed a Tesoro Mi|lit. de Ca|val. loc. cit. White Habit for the Knights, and prescribed laudable Constitutions to the Order; but because he setled no Revenue thereupon, the splendor thereof ceased at his death; nevertheless Tesoro Mi|lit. de Ca|val. loc. cit. he obtained the end for which it was instituted.


Knights of St. Anthony in Hainolt. (27.)
Alb. Miraeus Orig. Equest. p. 80. videsis Iu|risprud. Heroic. p. 390. Albert of Bavaria, Earl of Hainolt, Holland, and Zeland, designing an Expe|dition against the Turks and Moors, instituted this Order, in the year of our Lord 1382.
The Ensign thereof was a golden Collar, wrought after the fashion of an Hermits Girdle: at which hung a walking Staff, and a little golden Bell.


The Order of the Porcupine in France. (28.)
Favin. in le Theat. d' Hon. l. 3. c. 11. Monsieur Lewis of France, Duke of Orleans, instituted this Order, in the year 1393. to honor the Baptism of his eldest Son Charles, by Valentina his Wife, Daughter to Iohn Galeas Duke of Millan; and made choice of the Porcupine for his Devise, with this Epigraph Cominus  Eminus; not only out of the high hopes he conceived of this Child, Ibid. but also to intimate something of revenge against Iohn Duke of Burgundy, his mortal Enemy, no less than self-defence, against all his designs and assaults, of which this Animal is a proper Emblem.
Apud Favin. Paradine, In Delic. E|quest. p. 139. Mennenius, and Tes. Milit. de Caval. f. 95. b. Micheli, make Charles, the Son of this Monsieur Lewis, the Founder anno Dom. 1430. in imitation or emulation of Philip Duke of Burgundy, Founder of the Order of the Golden Fleece; but Loc. supra cit. Favin strengthens his foresaid relation, from the authority of one Hennotin de Cleriaux an Herald,

who attended the forementioned Christning in his Heralds Coat, and set down an account of the Institution by Monsieur Lewis, together with the names of the Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen, on whom he then bestowed his new erected Or|der, their number being 25, including the Founder.
The Ibid. Habit assigned to the Knights were Surcoats of Violet Velvet, and over them Mantles of Watchet Velvet, lined with Carnation Satin.
The Ibid. Collar was formed of Gold Chains, at the end whereof hung a Porcupine of Gold, upon a little enamelled hillock of Grass and Flowers; which Gotosid. Ar|chont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 10. Creature was also embroidered on the Knights Belts.


The Order of the Lilly in Aragon. (29.)
According to In reb. Ara|gon. l. 12. c. 3c. vide Miraeum in Orig. Equest. p. 77. Hieronymus Zurita, this Order was instituted by Ferdinand King of Aragon, called the Infant of Antiquera, in the year of our Lord 1403. and dedicated to the honor of the blessed Virgin.
The Collar was composed of P. Palliot in la vraye  parfaite Sci|ence des Ar|moiries. p. 498. Bough-Pots, fill'd with White Lillies, inter|laced with Gryphons; and as Apud Menn. p. 67. Hieronymus Romanus reports, was vulgarly called La Orden de la Terraca o de las Azucenas,  Iarra de S. Maria, which is as much as to say, The Order of Lillies, or the Vessel of St. Mary.
Theat d'Hon. l. 6. c. 16. Favin gives it under the Title of the Looking-glass of the blessed Virgin Mary in Castile, instituted (as he saith) in honor and memory of a Victory, which this King Ferdinand had obtained in that Kingdom against the Moors, anno 1410. to wit, seven years after the time assigned by Zurita for the foundation. The Foun|der transplanted this Order with him into Aragon 1413. when he received the Crown of that Kingdom, and where it continued under the Sons of this King, but no longer.


The Order of the Dragon overthrown in Hungary. (30.)
The Emperor Sigismond, surnamed the Ios. Micheli en Tesore Mili|tar. de Cavall. f. 90. b. Glorious (for the many Battels he gained over the barbarous Nations, in defence of the Christian Religion) Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 7. c. 1. Menn. p. 155. ha|ving greatly laboured the peace of the Churches of Hungary and Bohemia, and, by his Travels into England, France, and Spain (to invite those Princes to join with him in that his Enterprise) brought the same to pass by the Council of Constance; out of extream joy at the accomplishment thereof, instituted this Order, in the year of our Lord 1418. for defence of the Christian Religion, and to Tesoro milit. de Cavall. loc. cit. crush all Hereticks and Schismaticks that should arise: which Order in short time became of high esteem, not only throughout Hungary, but Germany also.
The Knights wore daily for their Ensign of Honor, a Favin. loc. cit. Green Cross story, on solemn days a Scarlet Cloak, and on the Mantlet of Green Silk a double Chain of Gold (Micheli saith a Green Ribbon) at the end of which hung a Dragon dead, with broken Wings, in the posture of being overcome (the Symbol of Heresie vanquished) and the whole enamelled with variety of Colours proper. But this Order Heyl. Cosmogr. l. 2. p. 190. continued not long, for it almost expired with the Founder.
Peter Beloy, President of Tholouse, affirms he had seen a Menn. p. 156. Diploma, dated anno 1413. purporting that Basilius Colalba Marquess of Ancona was admitted into this Order, in these very words, Te quem manu propria militiae cingulo  societatis nostrae Draconicae ac Stolae seu amprisiae charissimi fratris nostri Regis Aragoniae in|signivimus, c.



Equites Tufini in Bohemia. (13.)
We find but a bare mention thereof made by In Delic. E|quest. p. 156. Mennenius, and that it was erected in the Kingdom of Bohemia (or else both in Micheli. f. 60. b. Bohemia and Austria) but he doth not in the least inform us either of the cause of its Institution, the Badge of the Order, or to what the Title refers.
The two first of these particulars Ios. Micheli supplies, but as to the third, we cannot give so perfect an account as we would; yet we remember to have read somewhere, that this Order had its name from Toca, a Cap or Coif.
The Micheli Loco prae|dicto. Arch-Dukes of Austria (saith he) were Founders of this Order, which they instituted to ingage their Subjects in the defence of the Christian Religion, and expulsion of the Turks, and those they called Hereticks, out of their Domi|nions: for having about 200 years maintained a War with vast and excessive charge, by erecting this Order, and bestowing upon the Knights thereof all that they gained in War towards their supportation, they very much ead them|selves in their Military Expences; and indeed this proved so great an encou|ragement to them, that in a few years (performing service wheresoever their Chiefs commanded them to ingage) they cleared their Provinces almost of both Turks and Schismaticks.
The Micheli Loco prae|dicto. Ensign of this Order was a plain Green Cross, and the Habit of the Knights Red.
This and the following Order (saith the same Micheli Loco prae|dicto. Author) were under the Rule of St. Basil, and profest conjugal Chastity and Obedience; but we see not from what ground he alledges this; for if so, then ought we to have placed it among the Religious rather than Military Orders, these being absolute notes and marks thereof. But inasmuch as we Menn. Delic. Equest. p. 156. elsewhere find, that Albert the Emperor adorned Moyses Didacus de Valera in Spain (a Knight of known and approved courage) with the Ensigns of his three Orders, viz. of the Dragon, as he was King of Hun|gary; of the Tusin, as King of Bohemia; and with the Collar de la Disciplinas, as Duke of Austria, it is hence manifest, they were all compleat Military Orders, of which this Emperor was Soveraign or Chief: for no man can be admitted into more than one Order at a time (if it be of a religious Constitution) and when|soever he obtains leave to change that Order, he cannot be received into ano|ther, without relinquishing the former.


Ordo Disciplinarum in Austria. (32.)
Bohemia (saith En Tesoro milit. de Ca|val. f. 59. b. Micheli) finding it self very much endangered by Turks and Hereticks, the Kings thereof instituted this Order, to suppress, or at least to keep them under, and to secure the Confines of that Kingdom. But I suppose, this Author means Austria, in regard it appears immediately before to have been con|ferr'd by the Dukes of that Country.
The Collar of the Order had a Tessera erat Aquila alba in fidei Symbo|lum. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. 31. n. 75. White Eagle hanging thereat.
This, and the former Order, together with that of the Dragon in Hungary, are said to have flourished in Germany, in the Reigns of the Menn. loco prd. Emperors, Sigismund and Albert.


Ordo de la Scama in Castile. (33.)
This Order received Institution from Idem Menn. p. 117. Iohn the Second, King of Castile, about the year of our Lord Ios. Micheli, f. 38. a. 1420. to perswade and stir up his Nobility to fight against

the Moors. For he being overcharged with War, designed this Order chiefly to awaken their courage, for the defence of his and their own Estates: which af|terwards upon all occasions they performed so well, and gave so great demon|strations of their Valour, that in a short time the Moors were vanquished.
What their symbol or Ensign was, or the reason of the Title de la Scama, hap|ned to be so far worn out, that Apud Mennen. Hieronymus Romanus (who wrote the life of this King Iohn) professeth he knew not what was meant or intended by it, though he had been very diligent in the search thereof.
Yet En su Tesoro milit. de Ca|vall. f. 38. Insigne suiz super togam candidam Crux ex squamis con|secta. Mendo de Ord. milit: Disq. 1. Qust. 4. n. 98. Ios. Micheli informs us, that their Ensign was a Cross, composed of Scales of Fishes, which does plainly enough demonstrate it to be derived from the Latin word Squama, from whence comes the Spanish word Scama, that signifies the Scale of a Fish.
Some that speak of this Order, say Micheli, loc. cit. nothing as to its beginning, being ignorant of the Founder; but it is generally believed to be Instituted by the foresaid King Iohn, in whose time it flourished; insomuch as there were few of his Nobility, but were also Knights thereof.
The Micheli, loc. cit. duty to which they were obliged, was to defend the Kingdom of Castile against the Moors, and to dye in defence of the Christian Faith; besides which, upon every occasion, when the King went out to War, they march'd before him.
Their Micheli, loc. cit. Priviledges were given them by King Iohn, as also Statutes and Rules to be governed by. Upon whose Micheli, loc. cit. death the splendor of this Order was eclipsed; as many times it hath fared with other Foundations in the like case: the Successors, wanting the zeal and love for their continuance, equal to that of the Founders for their Institution.


The Order of Knights of the Golden Fleece in Flanders. (34.)
Favin, in le Thea. d' Hn. l. 4. c. 5. Philip the Second, Duke of Burgundy, of the second and last Line, issuing out of the House of France, surnamed the Good, instituted this Order, under the Title of the Golden Fleece, in memory of the great Revenues he raised by the traffick of Woolls with the Low Countries. Some will have it erected in comme|moration of valiant Iurisp Heroi|ca p 429. aud Ioh. Germanum primum Ordn. Carcellar. Gideon, who with 300 men vanquished a numerous Army of Midianites. Or else (according to others) the Founder followed the example of Ibid. aud O|livar. arra|num. vide Men. Delic. Equest. p. 135.  137. Iason, and his Argonautes; whose Expedition to Colchus against Actes, he per|haps might intend to imitate, by a Voyage into Syria against the Turk.
Whatsoever the occasion was, 'tis certain (from the preamble of the Sta|tutes of Institution) that this Duke out of the perfect love he bore to the noble estate of Knighthood, founded this Order, to the glory of the Almighty Creator and Redeemer, in reverence of the Virgin Mary, and honor of St. Andrew, the Apostle and Martyr (whom he made Patron thereunto) to the advancement of the holy Faith, the service of the Catholick Church, and promoting of Virtue. For the maintaining and upholding of which, and for the increase of honor and fair renown, no less than the correction of Vice, Ordin. hujus statuta Aurei Velleris. Art. 31, 32, 33, 34;  35. several good orders, set down in the Institution, are appointed to be observed, at the Chapter held on the last day of every Annual Feast of the Order.
The day of Institution, was the Praefatio ad eund. Statut. 10. of Ianuary, anno Dom. 1429. on which very day the Founder solemnized his Marriage, with Elizabeth, Daughter to Iohn King of Portugal, in the City of Bruges in Flanders.
The number of Knights first chosen, were Art. 18. Men|nen. Delic E|quest. p. 126, 137 Iurisprud. heroica p. 483. 24. beside the Duke, Chief and Supream, who reserved to himself the nomination of six more at the next Chap|ter. But Charles the Fifth, anno 1516. encreased them to fifty.
And though the Founder at first resolved upon the Feast of Art. 2. St. Andrew annually, for holding the solemnities of the Order; nevertheless in consideration of the shortness of the days, at that time of the year, and how troublesome it would prove, especially to aged Knights, who lived at great distance, to take a Journey

in so cold a season; it was afterwards ordained, that the Grand Feast and Gene|ral Assembly, should be kept Ibid. from three years to three years, on the first of May, in such place as the Sovereign of the Order should beforehand give compe|tent notice of.
As to the Habit, it was at first ordained, that at the Grand Solemnity, the Knights should wear three different Mantles, to wit, the first day of the Feast, of Art. 25.  26. Scarlet Cloth, richly embroidered about the lower end, with Flints struck into sparks of Fire, and Fleeces, with Chaperons of the same; and the same day after Dinner, to proceed to Vespers in Art. 27. Mantles of Black, and black Chaperons: The day following, the Knights were to hear the grand Mass of our Lady, Art. 28. clad as should seem good to themselves. But Duke Charles, Son to the Founder, appointed them Mantles of White Damask, for that days Ceremony, and changed their Cloth Mantles into Velvet.
The great Collar is composed of Ioan. Iac. Chefflet. Insign. Gent. Equit. Ord. Veler. Aur. double Fusils, interwoven of equal big|ness, in form of the Letter B. with Flint-stones, seeming to strike fire, and sparkles of fire between them, at the end whereof doth hang the resemblance of a Fleece of Gold, enamelled in its proper Colours. These Favin. in le Theat. d' Hon. l. 4. c. 5. Fusils are placed back to back, two and two together, thereby representing the Letter B both ways, intending to signifie Bourgoigne, they are also intermingled with Flint-stones, in reference to the Arms of the ancient Kings of Bourgoigne; but it was the devise of the Founder to ingirt them with sparkles and flames of fire. To the Flint, Paradine (in his Heroical Devises) ascribes this Motto, Ante Ferit, quam Flamma micet, and to the Fleece this, Pretium non vile laboris.
The Iewel is ordinarily worn in a double Chainet or Males of Gold, linked to|gether at convenient distances; between which runs a small Red Ribbon: and so is Philip the Fourth, King of Spain, represente, wearing his Jewel in a Picture at full length, hanging in his Majesty's Gallery at Whitehall; or otherwise it is worn in a Red Ribbon alone.
The Founder ordained Ord. Statuta. Art. 19. four Officers to attend and serve the Order, after the manner declared in the Ordinances for their Instructions, annexed to the Sta|tutes, namely, a Chancellor, a Treasurer, a Greffier or Register, and a King of Arms, called Toison d' Or.
Saincte Marth. de la Maison de France. Tom. 1. p. 891. Lewis the Eleventh of France refused to accept of this Order, because his Pre|decessors were not accustomed to receive the Orders of their Subjects; for such were the Dukes of Burgundy accounted, who held that Dutchy and other Seig|niories in homage leige to the Crown of France.
Albeit the Emperors of Germany are descended from Philip Arch-Duke of Au|stria, Duke of Burgundy, and Count of Flanders; nevertheless the power of con|ferring the Order is lodg'd in the Kings of Spain only, the Title of Head and Soveraign being solemnly resigned by the Emperor Charles the Fifth to his Son King Philip, the Iurisprud. heroica. p. 433. 25. day of October anno Dom. 1556. in the Roy|al Chappel at his Palace in Bruxelles, and the Collar taken from his neck, and with his own hands put over his said Sons shoulders, in the presence of divers of the Knights, at which Ceremony he used this form of words, Iurisprud. heroica. p. 433. Accipe Fili mi, quem  Collo meo detraho, Tibi praecipuum Aurei Velleris Torquem, quem Phi|lippus Dux Burgundiae cognomine Bonus Atavus noster, Monimentum fidei sacrae Romanae Ecclesiae esse voluit,  hujusce Institutionis ac Legum ejus fac semper memineris.
Afterwards, though Philip the Second, King of Spain, invested the Infanta his Daughter Isabella, in the Dominion of the Low Countries, upon the Contract of her marriage with the Arch-Duke Albert of Austria, yet he Ibid. retained to himself, and Successors, Kings of Spain, and Dukes of Burgundy, the honor of being Chief of this Order, in which Crown it remains to this day.
The Statutes (ratified under the Founders Seal the 27. of Nov. 1431.) are print|ed in the Pag. 445. Iurisprudentia Heroica, together with those other Pag. 462. additions and alte|rations which were since made by his Successors. So also are the Pag. 470. Priviledges granted to the Knights by the Founder, his Son Charles, and Maximilian, which re|ceived confirmation from King Philip the Second, anno Dom. 1556.
The Names of the first Pag. 483. 24 Knights, and their Successors, to the number of 450. are there also registred, together with a Catalogue of the Pag. 501. Chancellors, Trea|surers, Registers, and Kings of Arms, and lastly a Pag. 499. Figure of a ght, vested in the Habit, may be there likewise seen.
The Original and Foundation of this Order is written at large in French by William Bishop of Tournay, Abbot of St. Bertin, and second Chancellor to the Or|der, in a Treatise of his called The Golden Fleece, dedicated to Charles Duke of Burgundy, Son to the Founder, and printed at Troyes, in the year of our Lord 1530. In this Work the Author treats of two manner of Golden Fleeces, viz. first of Iason's Fleece (of which he useth the testimony of Eustathius, to assert it for a true History) and by it represents the noble Virtue of Magnanimity, demon|strating several Virtues appertaining to the state of Nobility. Secondly, of Ia|cobs Fleece (viz. the party-coloured and streaked Fleece) by which he sets forth the Virtue of Iustice, which Virtue principally appertaining to Kings, Knights, and noble persons, moved the heart of Duke Philip to institute this Order, under it comprehending the Virtues of both the other Fleeces.


The Order of St. George at Genoa. (35.)
The Menn. Delic. Equest. p. 118. Republick of Genoa have an Order of Knighthood among them, dedi|cated to the honor of St. George, their titular Saint and Patron; it was instituted by Frederick the Third, Emperor of Germany, and the Knights thereof are called, Equites Divi Georgii apud Genuenses. ib. Knights of St. George at Genoa.
The Ensign is a plain Cross Gules, and worn by the Knights at a Chain of Gold about their neck.Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 8. c. 3.
The Dukes of Genoa are Chiefs thereof, and in regard their Dignity lasts but two years, the Order is much impaired through the inconstancy and alteration of times.


The Order of the Croissant in France. (36.)
Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 3. c. 14. Rene, or Renatus, descended of the second Line of the House of Anjou, King of Ierusalem and Sicily, c. Duke of Anjou, Count of Provence, c. erected this Order, under the denomination of the Croissant, or half Moon, in the City of An|jou, anno Dom. 1464. But the Geneal. Hist. de la Maison de France. Tom. 1. p. 824. Saincte Marthe's make it 16 years older, by placing the Institution in the year 1448.
Tesoro Milit. de Cavall. f. 54. a. Ios. Micheli reports, that Charles King of Sicily and Ierusalem was the first In|stitutor, anno 1268. in the great Church at Messina in Sicily, on the day of St. Lewis King of France; but he by mistake confounds this Order with that of the double Croissant instituted by St. Lewis in France; and after his death retained and setled in Sicily by the said King Charles his Brother.
The end wherefore King Rene founded this Order, is noted to be in Favin, loc, cit. honor of God, support of the Church, and exaltation of Knighthood. Over which he declared himself and his Successors Dukes of Anjou, and Kings of Sicily Chiefs.
He also chose Sainct. Marth. loco cit. St. Maurice, Knight and Martyr, for Patron, and held the first Ceremonies in the Menn. p. 163. Church of Angiers, dedicated to his name.
The Favin. ut supra. Symbol which the Knights wore on the right side of their Mantle, was a golden Crescent, whereon, in red enamel, was this word L'oz, signifying (in the opinion of Peter Mathieu) L'oz en Croissant, Heylin's Cos|mogr. l. 1. p. 170. whereby they were encouraged to search after the increase of valour and reputation.
At this Favin. loc. dict. Crescent was fastned as many small pieces of Gold, fashioned like Co|lumes and enamelled with red, as the Knights had been present in Battels, Sieges

of Towns, Cities, or Castles, which gave due intimation to all men, of their va|lour shewed in martial services; for Ibid. none could be adopted into this Order, unless he had well mited in some of these kinds.
The Knigh who were 36 in number (but the Saincte Marthe's say 50) did wear for the Habit, Ibid. Mantles of red or Crimson Velvet, and a Mantlet of White, with the lining and Surcoat of the same.


The Order of the Ermine in Britagne. (37.)
In the year of Christ Favin. Theat. d' Honn l. 3. c. 17. Menn. p. 160. 1450. Francis the First of that name, Duke of Bretagne, in memory of his S. Marthe Hist. Genealog. de la Maison de Fr. Tom. 2. p. 583. Grandfather Iohn, surnamed the Conqueror, or else in imitation of other Princes of the bloud in France, founded this Order, consisting Favin. loco praed. of 25 Knights, and thereupon also, new-built his Castle of the Ermine.
He ordained the Favin. loco praed. Habit to be Mantles of White Damask, lined with Carnation, and the Mantlet of the same.
The great Ibid. Collar to be of Gold, composed of Ears of Corn in Saltir, bound above and beneath with two Circles of Gold (in imitation of the Crown of Ceres) hereby noting the care of Husbandry, which the ancient Counts and Dukes of Bretagne had, as also the fertility of that Province; and hence is this Order other|wise called of the Ears of Corn.
Ibid. At the end of this Collar hung the Generosum incontaminati  sincerissimi animi Exem|plar. Menn. p. 161. Mus Ponticus, or Ermine, passing over a Turf of Grass, diapred with Flowers, at the edge whereof was imbossed this Epigraph in French, A Ma Vie, the devise of his S. Marthe, loco praed. Grandfather Iohn, by which he made known the greatness of his courage, and rather than fail of his word, that he would undergo any misfortune.
This Order took ending, when the Dukedom of Bretagne became Gotofrid. Ar|chont. Cosmica. l. 3. p. 12. annexed to the Crown of France, by the marriage of Anne Dutchess of Bretagne with Charles the Eighth, and he being dead, with Lewis the Twelfth, both French Kings.


The Order of the Ermyne in Naples. (38.)
Ios. Micheli, Marquez Teso|ro milit. de Ca|vall. f. 93. b vide porro Io. Pontan. de bel|lo Neopol. l. 1. Io. Bitta Cara|fa. l. 10. Angel. Constant. l. 20. Anelus Paca de Ordinib.  So|ciet. milit.Ferdinand the First, King of Naples, after the end of the War which he had with Iohn of Lorain, Duke of Calabria, erected this Order, in the year of our Lord 1463. being moved thereunto upon the Treason intended against him, by Marinus Marcianus Duke of Sessa, and Prince of Rosiona, his Bro|ther-in-law; who raising a confederacy against him, intended to kill him, when they should be together, that so he might transfer the Kingdom to the Duke of Calabria.
But this Plot being discovered, and the Duke apprehended by the King (his Subjects expecting that he should have executed Justice upon him) he not only forbore it, but having instituted this Order of Chevalry, the first of many that were invested with the Collar thereof, was this his Brother-in-law, (whom he not only pardoned, but also honored) and besides whom, admitted all the Noblemen of Title in the Kingdom thereinto.
The Collar was of Gold intermixt with Mud or Dirt, to which depended an Ermyne, and this Motto, Malo mori, quam faedari.


The Order of St. Michael in Naples. (39.)
In Orig. E|quest. p. 76. Albertus Miraeus makes this King Ferdinand Founder of another Order of Knighthood in Naples, in memory of St. Michael the Arch-Angel, Patron of Apu|lia. The Pag. 77. Habit of the Knights was a long White Mantle, embroidered with

Ermyns, and the Collar of Gold composed of the Letters O, to which was added for Symbol, this Epigraph, Decorum.
This Order is likewise taken notice of by the Author of the Pag. 390. Iurisprudentia Heroica; but perhaps it may be the same with that of the Ermyn; since we ob|serve the Habit hereof is embroidered with Ermyns, and might be otherwise called of St. Michael, if so be it were dedicated to his honor.


The Order of Knights of St. Michael in France. (40.)
S. Marth. de la Maison de France, tom. 1. l. 1. p. 59.  . 1. l. 14. p. 656. Item Mennen. p. 168.  Mi|raeus. p. 641. Lewis the Eleventh of France, considering how much the Factions of the No|bility of his Realm had disordered his Affairs, to the end he might reunite their affections to himself, and confirm the same, by new obligations of Honor, in|stituted this Order in the year of our Lord 1469. to which he gave the Title of St. Michael, this Arch-Angel being esteemed the Princeps Imperii Fran|corum. Gar|dien  Pro|cteur du Royaume de France. S. Marthe loco supra cit. titular Angel and Protector of the Realm of France; in Arthur de Monstier, in Neustria pi. pag 382. reverence of whom the ancient Kings of France were wont to observe the Feast-day of this Saint with great solemnity, and keep an open Court.
This King Lewis by the foundational Statutes of the Or|der (which passed his Royal Assent at Amboise the Vincent, Lupan. de Magistrat. Francor: lib. 1. first of August in the year aforesaid) ordained, In Statutis Ord. Art. 1. That the number of Knights should be 36. whereof himself and his Successors were to be Chief: but afterwards the number far exceed|ed, even to Heyl. Cosmogr. l. 1. p. 204. 300.
The Collar of this Order is composed of Stat. Ord. Art. 3. Scallop-shells of Gold, joined one with another and double banded, fastned on small Chains or Males of Gold; to the midst thereof is annexed an Oval of Gold, on which a rising hillock, whereon standeth the Picture of St. Michael combating with, and trampling upon the Dragon, all curiously enamelled, to which saith In Delic. E|quest. p. 169. Mennenius was adjoined this Epigraph, Immensi tremor. Oceani.
The Habit appointed by the Founder, was a Art. 32. Mantle of White Damask hanging down to the ground, furr'd with Ermyn, having its Cape embroidered with Gold, and the border of the Robe interwoven with Scallops of Gold, the Chaperon or Hood, with its long Tippet, was made of Crimson Velvet.
But afterwards King Henry the Second ordered, Theat. d'Hon. l. 3. c. 7. That this Mantle should be made of Cloth of Silver, embroidered with three Crescents of Silver, interwo|ven with Trophies, Quivers, and Turkish Bows, semed and cantoned with Tongues and Flames of fire: and moreover that the Chaperons of Crimson Velvet, should be covered with the same embroidery.
The Stat. Ord. Art. 31. grand Assembly was by the Soveraign and Knights directed according to the Statutes, to be held as a solemn Festival on Michaelmas day, and the Art. 19. place ap|pointed for celebration of these pompous Ceremonies, at the Church of Mons in procella Maris, vel in peri|culo Maris, aut Mons in Tumba. Ar. Mon|stier in Neustria pia. p. 371. Mount St. Michael in Normandy, built by St. Autbert, upon St. Michael's appearing to him in a Vision, and liberally en|dowed by Idem, p. 375. ollo Duke of Normandy and hisHeyl. Cosmogr. l. 1. p. 205. Successors, but afterwards removed to Bois de Vincennes not far from Paris.
There is an Herald of Arms appointed to this Order called Monsieur St. Mi|chel, whose duty is to attend the Solemnities thereof, and Heylin, loco cit. who in most things is precedented by our Garter, King of Arms.
Such care and moderation was used by King Henry the Third of France, when he instituted the Order of the Holy Ghost, not only to preserve the honor of this Order in its full splendor (notwithstanding the example of former times, where the rising of a new Order hath commonly proved the setting of the old) but to reform some miscarriages which had crept into it, by bestowing it upon some me and undeserving persons; that he not only continued the annual Solemnities thereof, and Election of Knights thereinto; but also declared, that neither

Stat, de l' Or|dre du Saint Esprit. Act. 37. Strangers, nor the Natives of France, who before are Knights of any other Or|der, should enter into that of the Holy Ghost, except those only of St. Michael.
The Collar of which Order is thereby made lawful to be worn, with that of the Holy Ghost, and usually represented within it, that being esteemed the more worthy place: And we are told it is now Present State of France, E|dit. Lond. 1671. p. 314. customary for those that are design'd to be Knights of the Holy Ghost, to be admitted into the Order of St. Michael the Evening before they receive that Order.


Knights of St. Hubert in Gullick. (41.)
Miraeus Orig. Equest p. 82. Item Iurisprud. Heroic. p. 390. Gerard Duke of Gullick and Berg (or as the French call them Iuliers and Mont) Instituted a Military Order in the year of our Lord 1473. in veneration of St. Hubert Bishop of Liege, who died anno 727.
The Statutes thereof were written in the Dutch Tongue, whereunto was added a Catalogue of the Knights and their Arms, to the year of our Lord 1487. But further mention of this Order, or what was the Badge thereof, we do not find.


The Order of the Elephant in Denmark. (42.)
Observing some difference among Mennenius, Favin. Mi|cheli, Gothofri|dus, Heylin,  others. Writers touching the Institution, Collar, and Ensign of this Order, I was in doubt what to say, till at length I haply met with better satisfaction from a Letter wrote anno 1537. by Avo Bilde Bishop of Arhusen, sometime Chancellor to Iohn King of Denmark and Norway, unto Iohn Fris Chan|cellor to King Christian the Third, a Copy whereof was most freely communi|cated to me by Monsieur Cristofle Lindenow Envoye from Christian the Fifth, now King of Denmark, to his sacred Majesty, the present Soveraign of the most noble Order of the Garter.
This Letter informs him of the Institution, and some other particulars relating to the Order, to wit, That King Christian the first being at Rome (whither he had travelled upon a religious account) Pope Sixtus the Fourth, among other Ho|nors invested him with this Order, in memory of the Passion of our Lord and Saviour; and withal ordained, that the dignity of Chief and Supream, should be continued as a successive right to the succeeding Kings of Denmark.
This King founded the magnificent Chappel of the three Kings in the Cathe|dral Church at Roschilt (four Leagues from Copenhagen) where the Knights were obliged to assemble, upon the death of any of their Fraternity. He also admitted thereinto divers Kings, Princes, and Noblemen.
The chief Ensign of this Order was the Figure of an Elephant, on whose side (within a Rundle) was represented a Crown of Thorns with three Nails, all bloody; in honor and memory of the Passion of our blessed Saviour.
The Knights were obliged to the performance of acts of Piety, Alms Deeds, and certain Ceremonies; especially upon those days, on which they wore the En|signs of the Order: But King Iohn set so high a value upon it, that he wore them on every solemn Festival.
He also advanc'd the honor of this Order to so great esteem, that it became ac|cepted by both our King Henry the Eighth, and Iames the Fifth King of Scot|land, his Sisters Son; with whom the Ensigns thereof, remained as a Pledge and assurance of constant and perpetual friendship; with these he likewise invested divers Ambassadors, Senators, and noble Danes.
There is one Ivarus Nicholai Hertholm, a learned Dane (as I am informed) who hath written a particular Treatise of this Elephantine Order, but not yet printed; The scope whereof is to shew, that the beforementioned Epistle of the Bishop of Arhusen does not sufficiently make it appear, that it received its first Institution, when Christi|an the First had those many Honors conferr'd on him, by Pope Sixtus the Fourth.

And that the Badge was an Ensign meerly Military, anciently given as a memo|rial and incitement to the Danish Princes, who took upon them the defence of Christianity against the Moors and Africans. 'Tis greatly presumed that this Book (which we hope may shortly be published) will furnish the world with many choice things relating to the antiquity and honor of the Institution, Ensigns and Ceremonies of this royal Order.
Heretofore the Knights wore a Collar of Gold, composed of Elephants and Crosses, fashioned something like Crosses Ancrees (Mennenius calls them De Delic. Equest. p. 150. Spurs) at which hung the Picture of the Virgin Mary to the middle, holding Christ in her arms, and surrounded with a Glory of Sun-beams: but they have long since laid this Collar aside, and now wear only a Blue Ribbon, at which hangs an Ele|phant enamelled White, adorned with five large Diamonds set in the middle. Those Elephants worn by the Knights in the Reign of Christian the Fourth, had in the same place within a Circle the Letter C, and in the heart thereof the Figure of 4, made to signifie Christianus quartus.
This Honor hath been most commonly conferr'd by the Kings of Denmark, on the day of their Coronation, both upon the Nobles and Senators of the King|dom.
It seems Frederick the Third brought into use (in imitation of the most noble Order of the Garter) an embroidered Glory of Silver Purle, wrought upon the left side of their Cloak or Vest, on which was embroidered two Crowns within a Rundle, bearing his Motto, Deus providebit; for such a one did Count Gulden low (Ambassador hither from that King) wear at his residing here in England, anno 1669. But we are to note, that the Motto hath changed with the King, for that of the present King is Pietate  Iustitia; and this the Knights of his Electi|on now wear, in the middle of the Circle. Nevertheless all the Knights created by his Father, are obliged still to continue the former Motto.


The Order of the Burgundian Cross at Tunis. (43.)
Mennen. De|lic. Equest. p. 180. I. Lud. Goto|frid. Archont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 13. Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany and King of Spain, after he had re|stored Mulleasses, King of Tunis, to his Kingdom (who had been expulsed thence by that famous Pyrate Barbarossa) on the day of his victorious entrade into Tunis, with solemn and magnificent Pomp, was apparelled in a Coat which he used to wear in Battel, whereon was embroidered the Burgundian Cross: and being de|sirous to gain the good respect of all, who had served in that War, was chiefly willing to adorn the Commanders, that had behaved themselves valiantly in the Victory, with some Badge or token of Honor, as a reward: and for this reason did he institute this Order in the year 1535. on Iuly 22 St. Mary Magdalen's day.
To this Burgundian Cross he added a Steel striking sparks of fire out of Flint, with this Inscription BARBARIA, to be the Badge or Ensign thereof: And for an additional Ornament, gave a Ios. Michels. f. 94. b. vide A. Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Qust. 4. n. 105. Collar of Gold, whereat hung the said Badge.
Men. Delic. Equest. loco cit. Some say this Order was instituted at ten of the Clock that day, it being also the hour of Mercury, in which respect the Character of that Planet is usually enamelled on the one side of the Jewel, as the Burgundian Cross is on the other. But it was of short continuance, for it expired long since.


The Order of Knights of the Holy Ghost in France. (44.)
This Order received Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 3. c. 9. vide perro Delic. Equest. p. 187. Institution from the French King, Henry the Third, the first Chapter being held on the last day of the year 1578. The design thereof was chiefly to S. Marth. Hist. Geneal. de la Maison. d France, Tom. 1. l. 1. p. 60.  l. 16. p. 789. unite and tye his Nobility and Prelates more firmly to

their natural obedience, as also to In Statut. hujus Ordin. Art. 12. stir up and encourage them to persevere in the Romish Religion, to illustrate and adorn the state of the Nobility, and to re|store its ancient splendor and dignity.
It had its denomination from the Holy Ghost (to Mennen. p. 288. whose power and assistance the Founder usually ascribed all his Actions and Councils, advanced with most glorious and fortunate successes) in Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 3. c. 7. remembrance that he was born on Whitson|day in the year of our Lord 1550. elected to the Crown of Poland on Whitsonday 1573. and lastly came to the Crown of France on Whitsonday 1574.
The number of Knights whereof this Order was to consist, is by the Statutes or|dained to be one Art. 40. hundred, besides the Soveraign or Great Master, which Office and Dignity is Art. 2. inseparable from the Crown of France.
A long Art. 72. Mantle of Black Velvet turned up on the left side, and opened on the right, was also appointed for the Habit of this Order, being at first embroider|ed round with Gold and Silver, consisting of Flowers de Lis and Knots of Gold, between three sundry Cyphers of Silver; and above the Flowers de Lis and Knots were thickly seeded or powdered Flames of Fire.
This great Mantle was garnished with a Art. 72. Mantlet of Cloth of Silver, covered with embroidery, made after the same fashion as was the great Mantle, excepting only, that instead of Cyphers there were wrought fair Doves of Silver; and both these robes double-lined with Satin of Orange-tawney colour.
The great Favin. loco nuper cit. Collar of the Order (worn over the Mantlet) was at first composed of Flowers de Lis, cantoned or cornered with Flames of Fire, interwoven with three Cyphers, and divers Monogramms of Silver, one was the Letter H, and a Greek Lambda, both double; the first of these belonging to the Kings own name, the other to the Queen his Wife, Madam Lovisa de Loraine; the other two were reserved in the Kings own mind, but not without Briet. Annal. Mundi, pars 4. Tom. 2. p. 310. suspicion of referring to some wanton Amours.
But these Fav. Theat. d' Hon. l. 3. c. 9. Cyphers were taken off from the Collar, and the embroidery of the Robes by Henry the Fourth his Successor, and for a mark of his Battels and Vi|ctories, Trophies of Arms were interlaced instead thereof, with the Letter H crowned (because it was also the initial Letter to his Christian name) whereout arose flames and sparks of Fire; and for the like reason hath this Letter H been since changed into the Letter S. Marthe de la Maison de France, Tom. 1. p. 54. L, both by Lewis the Thirteenth, and Lewis the Fourteenth.
At this Collar hung a Bottel. Histor. Relat. p. 40. Cross, artificially wrought and adorned with a rich en|amel, in the midst whereof was represented the form of a Dove, in a flying po|sture, as descending down from Heaven, with full spread Wings: and to the end an Epigraph might not be wanting, some have attributed to it this, S. Marth. Tom. 1. l. 1. p. 61. Duce  Auspice, thereby to signifie, that those who wear it, ought to hope for good success in their designs and enterprises, being guided and assisted by the happy conduct of the Holy Ghost.
Besides these Ornaments, the Knights wear a Boitel. loco cit. Black Velvet Cap adorned with a white Plume; their Boitel. loco cit. Breeches and Doublets are of Cloth of Silver, and their Shoes White, tyed with Roses or Knots of Black Velvet.
The Badges ordained to be ordinarily worn, are a Stat. Ord. Art. 82. Cross of Yellow or Orange colour Velvet, wrought in the fashion of a Malta Cross, fixed on the lest side of the Soveraigns breast (but this at pleasure) and the like Cross sewed on the left side of the upper Garments of the Prelates, Commanders, and Officers; except in actions of Arms, and then they are permitted to wear them of Cloth of Silver, or White Velvet; having in the midst thereof a Dove embroidered in Silver, and at the angles or corners, Rays and Flowers de Lis of Silver.
Moreover Art. 83. a Cross of the Order made of Gold, like to the Cross of Malta al|so, with a Flower de Lis in each angle thereof, was appointed to be worn about their necks in a Blue Ribbon, and to be enamelled White about the sides, but not in the middle; such as are Knights, both of the Order of St. Michael and the Holy Ghost, are to bear the Figure of St. Michael on the one side, and of a Dove on the other.
The Anniversary of the grand Feast is ordained to be held on the Art. 71. first day of

the new Year, but the first part of the Ceremony begins always on the Art. 28. last day of the old; the place for celebrating thereof is the Church of Art. 79. Augustine Friars in Paris. An account of the first Solemnity, as also of some other which have succeeded in the Reign of King Lewis the Thirteenth, are set forth by Monsieur Boitel, in his historical relations of the Pomps and Ceremonies used at the receiv|ing of several Knights into this Order by this King, and Printed at Paris 1620.


The Order of the Precious Blood of our Saviour Jesus Christ of Mantua. (45.)
Mennen. in Delic. E|quest. p. 192 videsis Fa|vin. in le Theat. d' Hon. l. 8. c. 8. Mirae|um, p. 74. Men|do de Ord. Mi|lit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. sect. 29. Vincentio de Gonzago the Fourth Duke of Mantua, and Second of Mont|ferat, instituted this Order, anno Dom. 1608. for defence and propagation of the Christian Religion, and in honor of three drops of blood of our Saviour and Re|deemer; as also the more nobly to set forth the Nuptials of his eldest Son Fran|cisco (who succeeded him in his Dukedoms) with Margaret of Savoy, Daughter to Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, and Catharine of Austria.
It was allowed and approved by Pope Mennen. in Delic. E|quest. p. 192 videsis Fa|vin. in le Theat. d' Hon. l. 8. c. 8. Mirae|um, p. 74. Men|do de Ord. Mi|lit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. sect. 29. Paul the Fifth, and consisted of 20 Knights; the Founder declared himself Great Master, and after him his Succes|sors Dukes of Mantua and Montferat.
The Collar is fill'd with variety of fancy and design, being Mennen. in Delic. E|quest. p. 192 videsis Fa|vin. in le Theat. d' Hon. l. 8. c. 8. Mirae|um, p. 74. Men|do de Ord. Mi|lit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. sect. 29. composed of Ovals of Gold, some extended in length, others in breadth, and interlinkt with small Annulets. On those Ovals in length, is raised in white enamel, these words, Domine Probsti; on the other in breadth, upon flames of Fire on a Trevet enamelled Black, a Crucible Grey, fill'd with small rods of Gold; he being desirous to intimate by this devise, that they who entred into this Society, should hold inviolable faith, and perpetual concord, in the greatest tryals and extremities.
At the end of this Collar is pendent a larger Oval of Gold, in which are ex|prest Mennen. in Delic. E|quest. p. 192 videsis Fa|vin. in le Theat. d' Hon. l. 8. c. 8. Mirae|um, p. 74. Men|do de Ord. Mi|lit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. sect. 29. two Angels standing upright, enamelled according to life, holding be|tween them a Chalice crowned, in the Table whereof are figured three drops of blood, enamelled Red, and round the Oval, Nihil isto triste recepto.
On Mennen. in Delic. E|quest. p. 192 videsis Fa|vin. in le Theat. d' Hon. l. 8. c. 8. Mirae|um, p. 74. Men|do de Ord. Mi|lit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. sect. 29. Whitsonday, in the year 1608. were the first Ceremonies of this Order performed, in the Dukes Chappel of the Palace at Mantua.


The Order of Amaranta in Sweden. (46.)
This Order of the Knights of Amaranta, was instituted by Christina Queen of Sweden about the year 1645. in honor of a Lady of that name of great beau|ty, courage, modesty, and charity: The chief Ensign is a Jewel of Gold, com|posed of two great AA, adorned with Diamonds on both fides, and joined toge|ther by reversing one of them, being set within a Circle of Laurel Leaves wreathed about with White, and on the four sides this Motto, Dolce nella memoria; which Jewel the Knights wear, either in a Gold Chain, or a Crimson or Blue Ribbon, as they best like of.
The Ceremony used at the Investiture of these Knights with this Ensign, is briefly this. The Queen being seated under her state, the designed Knight is brought up, with usual Reverences, and approaching neer the Queen, he kneels before her, then she in a short speech acquaints him with the inducements that invited her to bestow this honor, enumerating his services and merits; to which he makes a return of humble thanks.
This done, he takes his Oath, still kneeling and holding his hands between the Queens hands; the effect whereof is to defend the Queens person from harm, and the persons of the Brothers of the Order, to promote to his power, Justice, Vir|tue, and Piety, and to discountenance Vice, Injury, and Wickedness.
Having obliged himself to the performance of this Oath, the Queen puts about

him (in the manner of a Baudrick) a Crimson Silk Scarf, with the Iewel fastned thereto, after which the Knight ariseth and retireth, with all sutable reverence.
To an absent Prince or great Personage, whom the Queen intends to honor with this Order; he sends the Jewel, accompanied with her Letter, which serves instead of a personal Investiture.
Among many others admitted thereinto, were Vladislaus Sigismundus late King of Poland, Carolus Gustavus late King of Sweden, and Adolphus Iohannes his Brother, also Iohn George Duke of Saxony, the Lantgrave of Hesse, several German Princes, the Count Montecuculi General of the Horse to the Emperor, Don Antonio Piementelli de Parada Envoye Extraordinary from the King of Spain, as also divers great Lords of the Court of Sweden; and of our Nation, Sir Bulstrode Whiteloke, to whose friendly civility we are obliged for the foregoing Account.



SECT. II. Of Knights in the West-Indies.
IF after all these we take some prospect of those Martial Honors, bestowed in the West-Indies, which the Europeans commonly call by the Title of Knight|hood; as having some resemblance to it from the nature of the Ceremonies, used at the entrance and admittance into that Dignity, and the end for which they were bestowed; we shall find they properly enough deserve mention here.
The Purchas Pil|grimage, part 3. p. 1063. Mexicans gave the first place of Honor to the profession of Arms; and therefore on such as had performed valiant services in Wars, they bestowed great recompence, and gave them sundry Priviledges, which none else might enjoy.
Valour and Courage were with them the steps by which a man of mean extra|ction, ascended to high dignity and honor; and therefore the chief of their No|bility commonly sprung from the Camp.
Among whom Ibid. Eagle Knights. Moteuma set Knighthood in highest splendor,Mexican Knights. ordaining certain Military Orders, with several Badges and Ensigns. The most honorable among the Knights, were those that carried the crown of their Hair tied with a little Red Ribbon, having a rich Plume of Feathers, from which did hang branches and rolls of Feathers upon their shoulders. They carried so many of these rolls, as they had done worthy deeds in War.
The King himself was of this Order, as may be seen in Capultepec, where Mo|teuma, and his Sons are represented, attired with those kind of Feathers cut in the Rock.
There was another Order of Knighthood,Lyon  Ty|ger Knights. which they called of the Ibid. Lyons and Tygers; these Knights being commonly the most valiant, and most noted in the Wars, and always bore with them their Badges and Armories.
Other Knights there were,Grey Knights. as the Ibid. Grey Knights, not so much respected as the rest, they had their Hair cut round about the ear. They went to the Wars, with Ensigns like the other Knights, yet not armed, but to the Girdle, while the most honorable were armed all over.
All Knights might carry Gold and Silver, wear rich Cotton, use painted and gilt Vessels, wear Shoes after their manner; but the common people only earthen Vessels, neither might they carry Shoes, nor attire themselves but in a gross Stuff called Nequen.
Ib. p. 1064. Every Order of these Knights had their Lodging in the Palace, noted with their Ensigns; the first was called the Lodging of the Prince, the second of Ea|gles, the third of Lyons and Tygers, and the fourth of Grey Knights.
They of the Province of Cinaola (an Inland part near new Mexico) created their Knights by giving a Bow,Knights of Cinaola. then setting them to encounter a Lyon, or some other wild Beast; the death of which was accounted the life of their Gentility.
The Purcha Pil|grim. part 3. p. 1045. Inguas Lords of Peru, in their solemn Feasts at Cusco, dedicated their Children to Honor, by adorning them with Guarras or Ensigns. They pierced their Ears, whipt them with Slings, anointed their Faces with Blood, and all in sign that they should be true Knights to the Ingua.
Those of the Ib. part 4. p. 1474. blood royal in Peru,Knights of Peru. before they received the Degree of Knight|hood, pass'd through sundry probations, but chiefly they performed some Mili|tary Exercises, and managed the Lance, Dart, and other Arms. The manner and order of tryal of their skill and courage, was both rigorous and severe; Ibid. as abstaining from all things for seven days, except a little raw Corn and Water, then being heartned again, their running of Races, afterwards, one day holding out, another besieging a Fort, then Wrestling, Leaping, Shooting, Slinging, throwing the Dart and Lance, exercising in all Weapons of War, and enduring to be beaten on the hands and legs with wands; all these things tending to discover whether they could bear the hard adventures of War, or not; which tryals if they could not manfully suffer, they were rejected and denyed Knighthood.
Next followed the Circumstances and Ceremonies of their Creation, as Ibid. boar|ing a hole in the Ears, putting on gallant Shoes, as also Breeches, which before they might not wear, adorning their heads with Flowers, and an Herb that none else might use; and lastly giving an Axe into their hands. All which Mr. Pur|chas having set down at large, we thought it less needful to be more particular.
These Knights are by In Delic. E|quest. p. 196. Mennenius called Oreiones, from the Spanish word Orejas, which signifies flap or loll-eared, and in Latin Auriculares, either from the Leaf which they carried hanging in their Ears, or as Ios. Micheli saith, Tesoro Milit, de Cavall. f. 96. a. for that they were only to negotiate, and treat of great Affairs with the Emperor, and had his ear at all times.
To these we shall add the account we have of an Order of Knights in Iapan,Knights of Japan. intituled Ibid. f. 7. Mengoras, part of them are called Bonzoes, living in Fraternities, as do our religious Brotherhoods in Europe. Some of these relate to their Temples, and have the charge of their Idols, and the service appertaining to them; others are Knights and follow the Wars, accepting pay from any Lord that imploys them.
Of this Order there are found to be about 30000. who in many things bear paral|lel with the Religious Knights in Europe: They prosess Chastity with such seve|rity, that into their Cities no Woman may enter. They have the Rule given them over those Kingdoms which they conquer, and are very rich; some of them having not less than 60000 Duckets per annum Revenue.
Every day they make and present five Arrows to the publick Armory, which is a very prudent provision, in regard no man is sensible of the charge; and thereby they find themselves well provided upon all occasions.


SECT. III. The Feminine Cavaliers of the Torch in Tortosa.
AND now, in close of our Discourse of the Orders of Knighthood, give us leave to bring up the rere, with a memorial relating to Feminine Valour, and of the later Age (for we shall not need to instance in the Amazons of old, whose fame in Arms is so generally known) since some of that Sex, having acquired honor and renown, by their personal courage and valiant exploits; have had be|stowed on them the priviledge of living after the manner, and in the esteem of Knights.
The Example is of the noble Women of Tortosa in Aragon, and recorded by Io|seph Micheli Marquez, who plainly calls them Cavalleros del Passatiem|po del Hacha. Tesoro Mil. de Cavall. f. 96. b. Cavalleros, or Knights; or may I not rather say Cavalleras, seeing I observe the words Iurisp. Heroit. p. 413. Equitissae and Militissae (formed from the Latin Equites and Milites) heretofore applied to Women,

and sometimes used to express Madams, or Ladies; though now these Titles are not known.
Tes. Milit. loco. cit. Don Raymond, last Earl of Barcellona (who by an intermarriage with Hiet. Blancus in Serie Regum Aragon. Pe|tronilla, only Daughter and Heir of King Ramiro the Monk, united that Princi|pality to the Kingdom of Aragon) having, in the year 1149. gained the City of Tortosa from the Moors, they on the 31. of December following, laid a new Siege to that place, for the recovery of it out of the Earls hands. The Inha|bitants being at length reduced to great streights, desired relief of the Earl; but he being not in a condition to give them any, they entertained some thoughts of making a surrender. Which the Women hearing of, to prevent the disaster threatning their City, themselves, and Children; put on mens Clothes, and by a resolute sally, forced the Moors to raise the Siege.
The Earl, finding himself obliged, by the gallantry of the action, thought it to make his acknowledgments thereof, by granting them several Priviledges and Immunities; and, to perpetuate the memory of so signal an attempt, Don Ramon Berenguel ul|timus Comes Barchinonae arum Foeni|narum Con|gregationem, seu quasi mili|tiam formavit, elictam de la Hacha, quia in capite gesta|bant purpure|am Fais for|mam. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Q. 4. num. 106. Insti|tuted an Order, somewhat like a Military Order, into which were admitted only those brave Women, deriving the honor to their Descendants, and assigned them for a Badge, a thing like a Fryars Capouche, sharp at the top, after the form of a Torch, and of a crimson colour, to be worn upon their Head-clothes. He also ordained, that at all publick meetings, the Women should have precedence of the Men; That they should be exempted from all Taxes; and that all the Apparel and Jewels, though of never so great value, left by their dead Hus|bands, should be their own.
These Women (saith our Author) having thus acquired this Honor by their personal Valour, carried themselves after the manner of Military Knights of those days.
We may also, not unfitly, bring in here a word or two, of a more general Orna|ment of Honor, not long since made peculiar to this fair Sex, to wit, that of the Cor|don; which some will have to be an L'Ordre de la Cordeliere, ou du Cordon. Nouveau Thea|tre du Monde. Tom. 2. p. 1413. Ordo Funige|rae vel Funis. Gotosr. Archont. Cesm. l. 3. p. 13. Order, or somewhat equivalent thereto, un|der that Title. The Ibid. Institution of it, is attributed to Anne of Britane, Wife to Charles the Eighth of France, who instead of the Military Belt, or Collar, bestow|ed a Cordon or Lace on several Ladies, admonishing them to live chastly and de|voutly, always mindful of the Cords and Bonds of our Saviour Iesus Christ; and to engage them to a greater esteem thereof, she surrounded her Escocheon of Arms with the like Cordon. From which Example, it is since drawn into use, that the Arms of unmarried Ladies and Gentlewomen (usually represented on Esco|cheons made after the form of a Lozenge) are adorned with such a Cordon.
But if we look back into ancient times, we may see when Women among the Romans were first thought worthy of enjoying respect and peculiar favours; and in particular, out of a great honor to the Mother of Marcus Coriolanus, the liber|ty of wearing the Segmenta aurea, or bordures of Gold and Purple on their Gar|ments (the latter of which the Romans raised to an high esteem) was Caldernius ad Martialem annotat. first permit|ted to the Roman Matrons, since she had so extraordinarily deserved of that Com|mon-wealth, by Liv. lib. 2. c. 40. An. Vrbe Cond. 264. vide Plu|tarch. in vita Coriolani. diverting the fury of her Son, and drawing off his Army from before the City, whose ruine he had threatned, upon a just resentment of the Citi|zens ingratitude towards him; in memorial of which Liv. lib. 2. c. 40. An. Vrbe Cond. 264. vide Plu|tarch. in vita Coriolani. preservation, was there also a Temple erected and dedicated to the Female Fortune. On this occasion al|so, other accessions of honor and respect were decreed to this Sex; namely Cujacius l. 12. Observat. c. 24. to have place in passing on the way, and the permission of wearing golden Ear-rings. To all which the Romans willingly condescended for her sake, whose powerful perswasions, and rhetorical tears, had gain'd them so great a deliverance.




CHAP. IV. OF THE Castle, Chappel, AND Colledge OF Windesor.

SECT. I. Of the Castle of Windesor.
ALthough we intend hereafter (God assisting) to make publick a com|plete History of the Antiquities of the Castle, Chappel, Colledge, and Town of Windesor by it self (towards which we have already made some progress) nevertheless we are obliged to give a brief Account of such of them here, as bear a particular relation to our chief de|sign unfolded in the succeeding Chapters: and more especially, for that the Chappel of St. George is situate in this stately Castle, made highly illustrious by those many pompous Solemnities of the most noble Order of the Garter, exhibit|ed within its Walls.
To begin then with the Place; it's ancient name [Wynlehoa] seems to claim no greater antiquity than of the Saxon times, and as our Learned In Attrebat. Cambden con|jectures, received this denomination from the winding of the shore thereabouts; as did Wandsworth in Surrey, anciently written Rot. Cart. Antiq tit. CC, num. 2. Windlesworth, and probably for the same reason.
The first authentick notice we have of it (for we rely not upon the reports of Geofry of Monmouth, or his Followers) is from that Instrument of Donation, which King Edward the Confessor made thereof, among other Lands, to the Mona|stery of St. Peters at Westminster, wherein it is declared, that this King, Monast. An|glican. Tom. . p. 61. for the hope of eternal reward, the remission of all his sins, the sins of his Father, Mother, and all his Ancestors, to the praise of Almighty God, granted as an endowment and per|petual inheritance, to the use of the Monks there, that served God, Wyndleshore, (situ|ate within, yet at the East point of the County of Berks) with all its appurtenances.
But it continued not long in their possession, for King William the Conqueror, the first year of his Reign, being greatly enamoured of the pleasant situation of the place, and Ex praf. Rot. Cartar. antiq. loco citato. for that it seemed exceeding profitable and commodions, because

situate so near the Thames, the Wood fit for Game, and many other particulars ly|ing there meet and necessary for Kings, yea a place very convenient for his reception; invited Eadwin the then Abbot and Monks, to accept in exchange for it Ibid. Wo|kendune in Ceaford Hundred in the County of Essex, a Mansion called Ferings, with all its Members and Hamlets in Lexedene Hundred in the same County, to|gether with fourteen Sokemen and their Lands, and one Freeholder in Thure|staple Hundred, who held one yard Land, belonging to the said Mansion, with three Houses in Coleceastra; and hereupon was it again returned to the Crown, where it hath ever since remained.
The King being thus possest of Windesor, forthwith built a Castle upon the Hill, which we find by Bercsta. Terra Radulfi filii Seifridi. Radulfus filius Seifridi tenet de Rege Cli|vore, pro quinque Hidis, modo pro quatuor Hidis  dimid. Castellum de Wyndesores est in dimidia Hida. Domesday Book, contained half a Hide of Land, and that half Hide is there noted to be parcel of the Manner of Clure.
This Castle King Henry the First Hen. Hunt. fo. 217. b. Londini 1596. re-edified, and beau|tified with many goodly buildings; and to entertain himself with the pleasure thereof, did in the Hen. Hunt. fo. 217. b. Londini 1596. tenth year of his reign, summon all his Nobility thither, where he held his Whitsontide with great state and magnificence.
Shortly after, we find this Castle called Spelman. Gloss. Archaiolog. verbo Mota. Mota de Windesor, the Fortress of Windesor, as the Tower of London is called Turris de London; both which are so termed in a Charter of Peace between King Stephen and Duke Henry (after|wards King of England, by the Title of Henry the Second) and this word Mota, is here used for what the French call Mote, or A little Hill, or high place, a Seat for a Fort, or strong House. Motte, being the same with Collis, or Colliculus, and Meta in Latin, viz. a little Hill.
Within this Castle was King Edward the Third Claus. de anno 6. E. 2. mem|brana 22. Dors. born (whence commonly called Edward of Windesor) and received his Baptism in the old Chappel. The native affection he bore to this place was exceeding great, insomuch as he consti|tuted it the Head and Seat of that most noble Order of the Garter, whereof him|self became the most renowned Founder; in honor to which he there also found|ed the Colledge of the Chappel of St. George, and much enlarged and beautified the Castle: To this work he appointed several Surveyors, whom he assigned to press Hewers of Stone, Carpenters, and such other Artificers, as were thought useful and necessary, so also to provide Stone, Timber, and other materials and Carriages for them; among these Surveyors, we find remembred Pat. de anno 23. E. 3. pars. 1. m. 10. Iohn Peyntour, Pat. 24. E. 3. pars 1. m. 23. Richard de Rochell, Pat. 24. E. 3. p. 2. m. 21. Dorso. William de Hurle, William de Herland, Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 2. m. 11. Robert de Bernham, and some others.
And to the end this great undertaking might be honestly and substantially per|formed, the King assigned Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 1. m. 12. Iohn Brocas, Oliver de Burdeux, and Thomas de Foxle, jointly and severally, with all care and diligence (at least together once a Month) to survey the Workmen and their works, and to encourage such as did their duty competently well, but to compel others that were idle and slothful.
He afterwards commissionated Pat. 27. E. 3. p. 2. m. 2. Dorso. Pat. 28. E. 3. p. 1. m. 20. Iohn de Alkeshull, and Walter Palmer to provide Stone, Timber, Lead, Iron, and all other necessaries for the work; and to imprest Carriages for their conveyance to Windesor.
William de Wyckham (who attained to the Dignity of Bishop of Winchester, and was the second Prelate of the Garter) had a Pat. 30. E. 3. p. 3. m. 21 Supervisor's or Surveyor's place granted to him by Letters Patents bearing Teste at Westminster the thirtieth of October anno 30. E. 3. He had like powers given him with those Surveyors first above-named, and a grant of the same Fee as had been formerly allowed to Pat. 30. E. 3. p. 3. m. 21 Ro|bert de Bernham, viz. Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 2. m. 11. One shilling a day, while he stayed at Windesor in his employ|ment, two shillings a day when he went elsewhere about that affair, and three shillings a week for his Clerk: which like allowances had been first of all made to Pat. 24. E. 3. p. 1. m. 23. Richard de Rochell.
Afterwards he had bestowed upon him the Pat. 33. E. 3. p. 2. m. 20. chief custody and surveyorship of this Castle, of the Mannors of Old and New Windesor, and of several other Castles, Mannors, and Houses enumerated in his Letters Patents, with power to appoint and dispose of all Workmen, buy necessaries for Reparation, provide Carpen|ters, Masons, and other Artificers, Stone, Timber, c. Pat. 33. E. 3. p. 2. m. 20. and in those Mannors to hold Leets and other Courts, Pleas of Trespass and Misdemeanors, to enquire of the Kings liberties, rights, and all things appertaining thereunto.
It may be presumed, that about the thirty fourth year of this Kings Reign, the most considerable enlargement of the Castle was made, seeing there were then great store of the best Diggers and Hewers of Stone, imprest in London, and out of divers Counties in England, by virtue of Claus. 34. E. 3. m. 34. Writs, directed to several She|riffs (dated the 14. of April in that year) with command to send them to Winde|sor, by the Sunday next after the Feast of St. George at the furthest, there to be employed at the Kings Wages, so long as was necessary, viz.

London.
40
Essex and Hertford.
40
Wilts.
40
Leycest. and Worcest.
40
Cambridge and Huntingd.
40
Kent.
40
Gloucester.
40
Somerset and Devon.
40
Northampton.
40

Herewith the Sheriffs were commanded to take sufficient security of these Work|men, not to depart from Windesor without the License of William de Wyckham (who was appointed to return the same Securities into the Court of Chancery) and all this, under the penalty of one hundred pounds to each respective Sheriff.
And because divers of these Workmen, for gain and advantage, had after|wards clandestinely lest Windesor, and were entertained by other persons, upon greater Wages, to the Kings great damage, and manifest retarding of his Work, Claus. 36. E. 3. m. 36. Dorso. Writs were therefore directed to the Sheriffs of London, with com|mand to make Proclamation, to inhibit any person, whether Clerk or Layman, under forfeiture of all they had forfeitable, for employing or retaining any of them, as also to arrest such as had so run away, and commit them to Newgate, and from time to time to return their names into the Chancery.
But a great number of them dying of the great Pestilence, other Ibid. m. 33. Writs issu|ed (30. of March, anno 36. E. 3.) to the Sheriffs of several Counties (not of the former number) That under the penalty of two hundred pounds apiece, they should send to Windesor, able and skilful Masons and Diggers of Stone, to be there on Sunday the Utas of Easter at furthest, to be employed in the Works, namely to the Sheriffs of.

York.
60
Derby.
24
Salop.
60
Hereford.
50
Nottingham.
24
Lancaster.
24
Devon.
60

It was the thirty seventh year of this King, or e're the Buildings were ready for Glasing, and then Pat. 37. E. 3. pars prima, m. 28. Henry de Stamerne and Iohn Brampton, were employed to buy Glass in all places of the Kingdom, where it was to be sold: to press four and twenty Glasiers, and convey them to London, to work there at the Kings Wages; and Ibid. m. 30. twelve Glasiers for Windesor, to be employed in like manner within the Castle.
In this year also, the work went effectually on, as may be guess'd from the great store of Pat. 37. E. 3. p. 1. m. 12.  29. Workmen prest for this service, as also Carriages for Stone and Timber, much of the Stone being digg'd out of the Quarries of Ib. m. 26. Wellesford, Hel|well, and Careby, and the next year, not only in these, but in the Quarries of Pat. 38. E. 3. p. 1. m. 29. Heseleberg, and Demelby, and the following year out of the Quarry of Pat. 39. E. 3. p. 1. m. 37. Melton.
From hence to the forty third year of this Kings Reign, we find Artificers were yearly prest, and the buildings of the Castle seriously pursued; but after we meet with nothing in that kind mentioned to be done, until the eight and fortieth year, and thence not any thing during his Reign. So that its to be presumed, this famous piece for magnificence and strength, was for the greatest part finished in his said forty third year, that is to say, the Kings Palace, the great Hall of St. George, the Lodgings on the East and South side of the upper Baily or Ward, the Keep or Tower in the middle Ward, the Chappel of St. George, the Houses for the Custos and Canons in the lower Ward, together with the whole circumference of the Walls, and their several Towers and Gates, as now they stand.
In succeeding times, some other additions were made to the buildings within the Castle; in particular, King Henry the Seventh added that stately Fabrick, ad|joining to the Kings Lodgings, in the upper Ward. King Leland ad Cygneam Can|tionem verb. Windlesora. Henry the Eighth new built the great Gate, at the entrance into the lower Ward. King Edward the Sixth began, and Queen Ex Lib. Com|pet. penesHarris nuper de Windesor gen. an. 1660. Mary perfected the bringing of Water from Blackmore Park in Wingfield Parish, into a Fountain of curious workmanship, erected in the middle of the upper Ward, which served all the Castle. Queen Elizabeth made a Cambden in Atrebat. Terrace Walk on the North-side of the Castle, from whence there is a pleasant prospect down upon Eaton Colledge, the Thames, and neighbouring Country. And King Charles the First, an. 1636. built the Gate at the East end of the said Terrace, leading into the Park. Lastly, his now Majesty out of a particular regard to this princely place, hath issued great sums of money in its repair, and furnishing it with a curious and gallant Magazine of Arms; so well order'd and kept, that it is worthy the sight of every Traveller.
And here our learned Cambden's elegant Description of this Castle's situation, must not be omitted; Cambden, loco cit. For from an high Hill (saith he) that riseth with a gentle as|cent, it enjoyeth a most delightful prospect round about; Foreright in the Front, it over-looketh a Vale, lying out far and wide, garnished with Corn-fields, flourishing with Mea|dows, dckt with Groves on either side, and watered with the most mild and calm River Thames: behind it arise Hills every where, neither rough nor over high, attired as it were with Woods, and even dedicated, as one would say, by Nature to hunting Game.
With this let us offer what Sir Iohn Denham's ingenious Muse hath rarely limn'd out of its situation also and majestick fabrick.
Coopers Hill. Windesor the next (where Mars with Venus dwells,
Beauty with strength) above the Valley swells
Into my eye, and doth it self present
With such an easie and unforc't ascent,
That no stupendious precipice denies
Access, no horror turns away our Eyes:
But such a Rise, as doth at once invite
A pleasure, and a reverence from our sight.
Thy mighty Masters Emblem, in whose face
Sat Meekness heightned with Majestick Grace;
Such seems thy gentle height, made only proud
To be the basis of that pompous load,
Than which, a nobler weight no Mountain bears,
But Atlas only that supports the Spheres.
And now to afford our Reader's Eye, yet more pleasure and satisfaction, than these verbal Descriptions can do his fancy; we shall here insert the exact Draughts of several Views and Prospects of this princely and magnificent Structure.
This Castle is under the government of a Constable, whose Office is of great an|tiquity, honor, and power, but of little profit.
The use and signification of the word Constabularius (with others of a neer spelling, and like sense, found in Historians) is shewed by the learned Gloss. Archai|olog. verbo Con|stabularius. Spelman, and particularly applied to the Governour of a Castle, the French call him Cha|stelan, whom we call Constable of a Castle, but in the Rolls of King Iohn's time (which is as high as we have any) the Governour of this Castle is called Constable, and under that title hath the Office ever since passed.
Ex relatione Bulstrode Whiteloke, Or|dinit Amarant. Milit. His Office is mixt, partly Military, and partly Civil; as a Military Officer, per|tains to him the sole Command of the place, and of any Garrison placed there, as also of the Magazine of Arms, Stores, and Houses. He is obliged to defend it against all Enemies, whether domestick or foreign, hath the charge of Prisoners brought thither; and is answerable for them, and for all that is in the Castle to the King, under whom he is Captain or Governour there.
As a Civil Officer, the Constable is Iudge of a Court of Record, held there by Prescription, for the determination of Pleas between party and party, arising



Prospect of the Castle from the S. E.












Prospect of WINDSOR CASTLE. from the North.




within the Precincts of the Forest of Windesor, and Liberties thereof, which compriseth many Towns, over the Inhabitants whereof this Court hath jurisdicti|on, to any Sum or Contract, by way of Action at the Common Law, and all legal Process, Judgments, and Executions, issue out in his name.
He hath a Deputy learned in the Law, who is called Steward of the Court of Record, and is Keeper of the Constables Seal of Office, belonging to this Court, with which all things issuing out of it are sealed. This Officer supplies the Con|stables places as Iudge of that Court of Pleas, from whose Judgment the appeal is by Writ of Error returnable in the Kings-Bench, or Common-Pleas at Westminster.
The Constable of this Castle is likewise chief Forester and Warden of the Forest of Windesor, which is one hundred and twenty miles in compass: He hath under him one or more Lieutenants at his pleasure, with several other Officers, and hath power to imprison any Trespasser in Vert or Venison, being convicted accord|ing to the Law of the Forest, having a Prison in the Castle for that purpose, called the Colehole.
This Command of his, is not only great, but full of pleasure (specially to such a one as takes delight in Hunting) for he hath the freedom of using the sports of the Forest when he pleaseth, which none else can do, unless the Kings license, or Constables leave be first obtained. He signs all Warrants to kill Deer (except what the King signs) to fell Timber and Wood.
He that was Chastelain of this Castle in William the Conquerors Reign, was Cambd. in Atrebat. Wal|ter fitz Other, from whom the Honorable Family of Barons Windesor are de|scended; and the present Constable is his Highness Prince Rupert.


SECT. II. Of the Chappel of St. George.
PRoceed we next to the Chappel of St. George, situate in the lower Ward or Court of this princely Castle, concerning which, we think fit to give our pre|sent discourse commencement at the foundation of the Colledge within this Chap|pel, by King Edward the Third, because it had a peculiar respect to the most no|ble Order of the Garter; and wave speaking of the first erection thereof by King Ex lib. N. p. 13. in Pro|emio. See Stow in Ed. 3. Henry the First, who Pat. 2. E. 3. p. 2. m. 6. dedicated it to King Edward the Confessor.
First therefore, we shall observe, That King Edward the Third, shortly after he had founded the Colledge (of which we shall treat in the next Section) thought it convenient to pull down the old Chappel, and to erect another more large and stately: Hereupon he granted to Pat. 24. E. 3. p. 1. m. 2 Iohn de Sponlee the Office of Master of the Stone-hewers, and gave him power to Pat. 24. E. 3. p. 1. m. 2 take and press, as well within Liberties as without, so many Masons and other Artificers as were necessary, and to con|vey them to Windesor, to work at the Kings pay, but to arrest and imprison such as should disobey or refuse, until the King took other order; with a command to all Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, c. to be assisting to him on the Kings behalf.
The following year this King assigned Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 1. m. 10. Iames de Dorchester, Sub-Constable of the Castle, to keep a Controll upon all the Provisions whatsoever, bought for the works of the Chappel, as also on the payments made for the same, and all other things relating thereunto.
Together with this Fabrick he erected several Houses neer adjoining for the Custos and Canons to inhabit in, and afterwards King Henry the Fourth gave to them a Pat. 10. H. 4. p. 2. m. 13. void place in the Castle called the Wodehawe, nigh to the great Hall, for building of Houses and Chambers for the Vicars, Clerks, Choristers, and the other Ministers, assigned to the service of the Chappel.
But King Edward the Fourth (whose inclination to, and kindness for this place was extraordinary) finding upon survey, that the former foundation and walls

of the Chappel of St. George were in his time very much decayed and consumed, and esteeming the Fabrick not large or stately enough, designed to build one more noble and excellent in its room. To this purpose he constituted Richard Beauchamp Bishop of Salisbury, Master and Surveyor of the work. And taking notice, that divers of the Pat. 15. E. 4. p. 2. m. 17. Officiary Houses, and other irregular Buildings and old Walls stood in his way, and hindred the design he had to inlarge the Stru|cture, gave the Bishop power wholly to remove all such impediments, and to de|molish and dig up their Foundations; particularly those ancient Buildings on the East-side of the Chappel, which reached unto the Walls on the North-side of the Castle, where the Towers, commonly called Clure ys Tower, and Le Amener ys Tower, and Barner ys Tower were situated; as also on the South-side of the Chappel, unto the Belfrey there, exclusively, and to imploy the Stone, Tim|ber, and other materials thereof, upon such Edifices in the Castle, as he should think most convenient.
With what diligence and sedulity, and how well the Bishop performed this Of|fice and Employment, appears from the testimony given him by the King in the preamble of that Patent, by which he shortly after constituted him Chancellor of the Garter, to wit, Pat. 15. E. 4. p. 3. m. 18. That out of meer love towards the Order, he had given him|self the leisure, daily to attend the advancement and progress of this goodly Fabrick.
From the new Foundation thus laid by King Edward the Fourth, arose (like a Phoenix out of its ashes) the elegant and beauteous Structure now standing, en|larged in length at least Bulla de con|cessione Episcopo Sar: ad conden|dum novas Or|dinationes. one hundred fathom (whose order and figure, as well on the outside as the several Views from within, are here represented) though it at|tained not its beauty and perfection, until the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; to|gether with the Dean and Canons Houses, situate on the North-side of the Chappel, and those for the Petty Canons, raised at the West end thereof, in form of a Fet|ter-lock, (one of King Edward the Fourths Royal Badges) and so vulgarly called.
In Henry the Seventh's Reign, Sir Reginald Bray, (one of the Knights-Compa|nions of the Order) became a liberal Benefactor towards finishing the Body of this Chappel, and building the middle Chappel on the South side thereof, still called by his name (where his body lies interred) as is manifest not only from his last Ex Lib. vo|cat. Blaymer in Officio Praero|gat. Cant. n. 26. Will, but also from his Arms, Crest, and the initial Letters of his Christian and Surname, cut in Stone, and placed in divers parts of the Roof.
By Ex ipso Au|togr. in Aerar. Collegii Winde|sor. Indenture dated the fifth of Iune, in the one and twentieth year of this Kings Reign, Iohn Hylmer, and William Vertue Free Masons, undertook the vault|ing of the Roof of the Choire (that curious and excellent piece of Architecture) for seven hundred pounds, and to finish it by Christmas, anno Dom. 1508.
In his Son and Successors reign the Lib. N. p. 204. Rood-loft and Lanthorn were erected, with the contributions raised among the Knights-Companions, anno 8. H. 8.
Adjoining to the East end of this Chappel was a little Building of Free-stone raised by Cardinal Wolsey, called the Tombe-house, in the middle whereof he de|sign'd to erect a goodly Monument for King Henry the Eighth, and had well-nigh finished it before he dyed. But this was demolished in April 1646. by com|mand of the long Parliament, and the Statues and Figures provided to adorn it, being all of Copper gilt, and exceedingly enricht by Art, were taken thence.
This place Ex relatione Dan. Stokes, nu|per unius Ca|non. Coll. de Windesor. King Charles the First, of ever blessed and glorious memory, in|tended to enlarge, and make fit and capable, not only for the interment of his own royal Body, but also for the Bodies of his Successors Kings of England, had not bad times drawn on, and such, as with much ado, afforded him but an obscure Grave, neer the first haut-pace in the Choire of this Chappel, his Head lying over against the eleventh Stall on the Soveraigns side, and in the same Vault, where the Bodies of King Henry the Eighth, and his last Queen yet remain.
In this Chappel also rest the Bodies of two other Soveraigns of the most noble Order of the Garter (besides sundry of the Knights-Companions) namely of King Henry the Sixth, removed thither from Spelmans Councils, Vol. 2. p. 712. Chertsey Abbey in Surrey, and deposited under the uppermost Arch at the South side of the high Altar, but without either Monument or Inscription, only his Royal Badges may be yet seen painted in seve|ral places on the inside of this Arch; and likewise the Body of King Edward the



The Prospect of S^t. George's Chapell, from the South, The Tombe House.


The Groundplot of St. George's Chapell.




PROSPECT OF THE INSIDE OF THE CHAPEL
1. The midle Isle,
2 The South Isle,
3 The North Isle,
4 The Pulpit,
5 The Choire Dore,
6 Roof of the Nu,
7 Roof of the Choire,
8 East Window of the Choire.



Fourth, under a large Stone of Tuch, raised within the opposite Arch, at the
North side of the Altar, but without Inscription also; having on the outside of
his Grave a range of Steel gilt, set to inclose it from the North Isle, cut excel|lently
well in Church-work.
Over this Arch hung this Kings Coat of Male, gilt, cover'd over with crimsoit Velvet, and thereon the Arms of France and England quarterly, richly embroi|dered with Pearl and Gold, interwoven with divers Rubies. This Trophy of honor had ever since his Funeral hung safely over his Grave, but was plunder'd thence by Captain Fogg the twenty third day of October 1642. (on which day he also robb'd the Treasury of the Chappel of all the rich Plate, dedicated to the use of the Altar) yet having met with an exact measure and size of each part there|of, as also of his Banner, both heretofore taken by Sir William le Neve, sometime Clarenceux King of Arms, an exact observator of any thing curious, referring to Arms or Ceremony, we think fit to transmit it thus to posterity.
Ex Collecta. praes. Will. le Neve. The Coat of Arms was two foot seven inches deep, and below two foot in breadth.
Above (the Maunches being extended) in breadth three foot and six inches: whereof the length of each Maunch, was one foot.
The breadth of the upper part of the Coat besides the Maunches one foot and a half.
The breadth of each Maunch one foot and eight inches.
The Arms were embroidered upon Velvet, lined with Sattin, and better wrought then they use to work in these days.
The Banner which also hung over his Grave, was of Taffaty, and thereon painted quarterly France and England; it had in breadth three foot four inches, besides a Fringe of about an inch broad, and in depth five foot and four inches, besides the Fringe.
There were within this Chappel of St. George several Chantries, endowed with Lands, and other Revenues, appointed for the maintenance of Chaplains and Priests, to sing Masses there, for the Souls of their Founders, and their Kindred: As first,
Ex ipso Au|togr. in Aerr. Colleg. Winde|sor. William of Wickham Bishop of Winchester, gave two hundred Marks for buy|ing of twenty Marks Rent per annum, to sustain a Chaplain to celebrate Mass in this Chappel, for the health of his Soul, the Soul of King Edward the Third, of the said Bishops Father, Mother, and all his Benefactors: The Covenants be|tween him and the Dean and Chapter for performance thereof, bear date at Windesor the 29. of May, anno 3. H. 8.
TheEx ipso Au|togr. in Aera. praed. 26. of November, anno 18. E. 4. the Feossees of Richard Duke of Glou|cester, confirm'd and deliver'd to the Dean and Chapter, the Mannors of Bent|fieldbury in the County of Essex, Knapton in the County of Norfolk, and Chelles|worth in the County of Suffolk; who thereupon granted (among other things) that they and their Successors should cause yearly for ever, a Mass to be daily ce|lebrated in this Chappel, for the good estate of the said Duke, and of Anne his Dutchess while they lived, and their souls when dead; as also for the souls of their Parents and Benefactors.
Ex ipso Au|togr. in Aerar. praef. Sir Thomas St. Leger Knight (sometime Husband to Anne Dutchess of Exeter, Sister to King Edward the Fourth) founded a Chantry of two Priests, who (in the middle Chappel, situate on the North side of the Church) were ordain'd to pray for the healthful estate of King Edward the Fourth, and his Queen, and Cicely Dutchess of York the Kings Mother, while they lived, and for their souls when dead: as also for the Soul of Richard Duke of York, the good estate of the said Sir Thomas, and Richard Bishop of Salisbury, then living, and after their decease for their souls, and the soul of Anne Dutchess of Exeter. The Foundation of this Chantry and the Covenants between Sir Thomas St. Leger, and the Dean and Colledge, are dated the 20. of April, anno 22. E. 4.
By the Lib. voca Denton in Aerar prae. f. 260. last Will of King Edward the Fourth, a Chantry was ordained to be founded of two Priests, to serve at his Tomb, to whom was appointed an exhibiti|on of twenty Marks yearly apiece. They were called King Edward's Chantry Priests.
The Ibid. f. 241. Chantry of Thomas Passche (one of the Canons of this Chappel) was found|ed for a Priest to pray daily for his Soul, and the Soul of William Hermer (another of the Canons there) as also for the good estate of Master Iohn Arundel, and Ma|ster Iohn Seymer, Canons, and of Master Thomas Brotherton, and their Souls after they should depart this life.
Ibid. There was another Chantry Priest assigned to pray for the Souls of the said Passche and Hermer, and of Iohn Plumer Verger of the Chappel, and Agatha his Wife; which devotion was appointed to be perform'd at the Altar on the North side of the new Church, and the setlement thereof bears date the 18. of March, anno 9. Hen. 7.
The Ex ipso Au|togr. in Ae|rar. Colleg. Windesor. first of March anno 12. H. 7. Margaret Countess of Richmond, obtained license from the King, that she or her Executors might found a Chantry of four Chaplains, to pray for her Soul, the Souls of her Parents and Ancestors, and all faithful Souls departed: This Celebration was to be performed in a place neer the East part of the new work of the Chappel. And the Ex ipso Au|togr. in Ae|rar. Colleg. Windesor. 18. of Iuly, anno 13. H. 7. the Dean and Canons granted, that the Countess or her Executors, should erect such a Chantry in the Chappel, as is before mentioned.
The Ex libro vo|cat. Denton. f. 244. Chantry of William Lord Hastings, founded of one Priest to pray for his Soul, the Souls of the Lady Katherine his Widow, and of Edward Lord Hastings his Son, and Mary his Wife after their death: The Chappel wherein this Service was celebrated, is that on the North side of the Choire, about the middle thereof, where the Body of this Lord lies interred. The Ordination is dated the 21. of February anno 18. H. 7. Ibid. f. 247. On the North side of St. Georges Chappel stands a little house, built for the habitation of this Chantry Priest, having over the Door (cut in stone) the Lord Hastings's Arms, surrounded with a Garter.
Ib. f. 233. b. Charles Somerset Lord Herbert (created afterwards Earl of Worcester) was bu|ried in the South Chappel (dedicated to the Virgin Mary) at the West end of the Church, where he ordain'd a secular Priest to say Mass every day, and to pray for the Souls of him and his first Wife, Elizabeth the Daughter and Heir of William Herbert Earl of Huntingdon, Lord Herbert of Gower, who also lies there interred. Ib. f. 237. Adjoining to the House built for the Lord Hastings's Chantry Priest, is another like Building, erected for this Chantry Priest, and over the Door thereof, now to be seen, is the Founders Arms within a Garter, cut also upon stone. The Foun|dation of this Chantry is dated the 30. of Iuly anno 21. H. 7.
To these we shall add the pious Foundation of the House called the Ibid. f. 261.  262. New Com|mons, erected over against the North Door of the Body of St. George's Chappel, by Iames Denton one of the Canons of the Colledge (sometimes Dean of Lichfield) anno 11. H. 8. for the lodging and dieting such of the Chantry Priests, Choristers, and stipendary Priests, who had no certain place within the Colledge, where to hold Commons in, but were constrained daily to eat their Meals in sundry houses of the Town: this House he furnished with proper Utensils for such a use, the whole charge amounting to 489 l. 7 s. 1 d. and for all which the Choristers were desired by him (in the Statutes he ordained for their Rule and Government) to say certain Prayers, when they entred into the Chappel, and after his death, to pray for his, and the Souls of all the faithful departed.
In this Chappel of St. George, there were heretofore several Anniversaries or Obits held and celebrated, some of them as they are entred down in an In Aerar. Coll. Windesor. Account of Owen Oglethorp Treasurer of the Colledge for the year, commencing the first of October, anno 38. H. 8. and ending the last of September, anno 1. E. 6. inclusive, we will here remember.


October.
November.


2. Sir Thomas Sentleger Knight.
3. William Bewster Canon.


6. Iohn Wygrym Canon.
5. Iohn Plomer Verger.


8. William Edyngton Bishop of Winchest.
10. Iohn Brydbroke Canon.


9. King Edward the Fourth.
13. Thomas Pashe Canon.


16. Rich. Beauchamp Bishop of Salisbury.
20. Robert Vere Earl of Oxford.


22. William Cock Canon.
27. Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick.



29. Iohn Chapman Vicar.





Prospect of the Cancellor Screen from the West.


PROSPECT OF THE CANCELL from the East.


PROSPECT OF THE CHOIRE from the West



PROSPECT OF THE CHOIRE from the East.






December.
January.


3. Ralph Wyndesor.
3. Katherine Queen of England.


14. Iohn Howden Canon.
8. King Edward the Fourth.


30. Richard Duke of York.
10. Anne Devereux.


31. Tho. Beauford Duke of Exeter.
11. Iohn Chambre Canon.



12. Anne Dutchess of Exeter.



14. Geoffry Aston.


February.
March.


4. Richard Raunds Canon.
1. Richard Smith.


21. William Mugge Custos.
4. Knights of the Garter.


28. Roger Lupton Canon.
5. Walter Devereux.



10. Richard Welles Canon.



19. King Henry the Fourth.



24. Henry Duke of Lancaster.


April.
May.


3. William Butler Canon.
11. King Henry the Seventh.


5. Geoffry Wren Canon.
21. King Henry the Sixth.


6. King Edward the Fourth.



19. Robert Ravendale Canon.



20. Anne Dutchess of Exeter.



21. Iohn Bean and his Wife.



June.
July.


2. Iohn Stokes Canon.
9. King Edward the Fourth.


7. Anne Queen of England.
12. Anne Dutchess of Exeter.


8. Edward the Black Prince.
13. William Harmer Canon.


11. William Ferrys.
16. William Palet Canon.


12. Iohn Vaughan Canon.
17. Henry Deane.


13. William Lord Hastings.
27. Iohn Oxenbrydge Canon.


14. Brothers and Sisters of St. Anthony.



21. King Edward the Third, Founder.



27. Will, Askew Bishop of Salisbury.



August.
September.


4. Sir Reginald Bray Knight.
5. Iohn Seymor Canon.


8. Iohn Blount.
13. Henry Hanslappe Canon.


10. William Mychell Canon.
14. Iohn Duke of Bedford.


11. Robert Barham Canon.
16. William Bohun Earl of Northampton.


17. Philippa Queen of England, Foun|dress.
27. William Wykham Bishop of Winchest.


18. Richard Surland Canon.



31. King Henry the Fifth.



It was an usual thing in former Ages, especially for those of the Military pro|fession, after they had spent their youth and manhood in the service of their King and Country, to bestow the remainder of their liv in Prayers for both, and the salvation of their own Souls. And therefore to cherish the piety of well disposed Knights-Companions of the most Noble Order of the Garter, who for de|votions sak were induced to retire to Windesor, permission was given then by the Statutes of Institution, Ed. 3. Stat. Art. 31. to make their continual abode there. Nevertheless to main|tain themselves out of their own Estates, not at the Colledge charge.
This Article is confirmed by the Art. 32. H. 8. Stat. Art. 35. Statutes of King Henry the Fifth, to which those of King Henry the Eighth add, That the Soveraign should assign them conve|nient Habitations within the Castle. The H. 5. Stat. Art. 33. H. 8. Stat. Art. 36. like favour upon like occasion, was af|forded to other devout Knights, though not of the Order; but the Lodgings to be such as the Soveraign and Knights-Companions should decree.
We no where find, that any of the Knights-Companions made use of the bene|fit of this Article hitherto: but in another nature and for their better accommo|dation at the grand Feast of the Order, and other Solemnities held at Windesor; they moved the Soveraign in Chapter there (Sir Iames Palmer's large Iournal. p. 16. 22. of May anno 14. Car. 1.) That they might have Rooms for Lodgings assigned them, in the great (or upper) Court (which they offered to repair at their own charge) since all the officers of the Order had Lodgings in the Castle, but the Knights-Companions none. This mo|tion was not disliked by the Soveraign, Exrelatione D. Chr. Wren, nuper Reist. hujus Ordinis. so it might be without exclusion of the Great Officers of State, concerning whom He declared, That he would not have them removed from him at any time; and thereupon it was left to further consideration.


SECT. III. The Foundation of the Colledge within the Chappel.
KIng Henry the First, as he had erected a Chappel within the Castle, so did he therein found a Colledge for eight Canons, neither endowed nor incorporate, but maintained by an annual Pension out of the Kings Exchequer. King Edward the Second founded here a Chantry for Claus. 6. E. 2. m. 2. Dorso. four Chaplains and two Clerks, to pray for his Soul, and the Souls of all his Progenitors; as likewise a Chappel in the Park of Windesor, under the same Ordination, for four more Chaplains, whom his Son King Pat. 4. E. 3. p. 1. m. 19. Edward the Third (by the advice of his Council) removed and joined to those other before setled in the Chappel of the Castle, and built Claus. 11. E. 3. m. 18. habitations for their better accommodation on the South side thereof: all which we shall pass over with this short mention, as not directly relative to our present purpose.
But the Foundation that we shall treat of here, King Edward the Third laid by His Appendix Num. 1. Letters Patent bearing Teste at Westminster on the sixth day of August, anno regni sui 22. that being about three quarters of a year before He instituted the most Noble Order of the Garter: for (being inflamed with the zeal of a pious devotion, and desiring by a good kind of Commerce to exchange earthly for heavenly, and transitory for eternal things) at his own Royal Charge, He new founded the ancient Chappel in honor and to the praise of the omnipotent God, the glorious Virgin Mary, of St. George the Martyr, and St. Edward the Confes|sor: And by his Kingly authority and as much as in him lay Ordained, that to King Henry's eight Canons there should be added one Custos, fifteen more Canons, and twenty four Alms-Knights, together with other Ministers, all under the Govern|ment nevertheless of the Custos: and these to be maintained out of the Revenues wherewith this Chappel was and should be endowed.
But, according to the opinion of those times, his Kingly Authority extended not to the instituting therein men of Religion, and other Officers to perform and attend the Service of God; for that lay in the power and disposition of the Pope: And therefore this King, setting forth what he had profer'd to do, in reference to the endowment of this Chappel, requested Pope Clement the Sixth to grant to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of Winchester the authority and power of ordaining and instituting the Colledge, and other things thereunto appertaining.
Hereupon this Pope by his Appendix Num. II. Bull dated at Avignion pridie Calendas Decembris, in the ninth year of his Papacy (which answers to the thirtieth day o November, Anno Domini 1351.) commending the pious purpose of the King in this affair, granted to the Archbishop and Bishop, and to either of them, full power to Or|dain, Institut, and Appoint in this Chappel, as should seem good to them, a cer|tain number of Canons, Priests, Clerks, Knights, and Officers, continually to attend upon the Service of God, of which Canons and Priests, one should have the Title of Custos, and preside over the rest.
On that day twelvemonth the Statutes and Ordinances of the Colledge bear date,

being made by In praefa|tione ad Col|leg. Statut. virtue of the Popes authority, the Kings Command, the Consent of the Bishop of Salisbury (in whose Diocess the Chappel is situate) and of the Dean and Chapter of Salisbury. By which Statutes the Bishop of Winchester, one of the Popes Delegates (for we find not the Archbishop's name used in them) did Ordain and Institute a Colledge, within the Chappel of St. George, consisting of one Custos, twelve secular Canons, thirteen Prists or Vicars, four Clerks, fix Choristers, and twenty six Alms-Knights, beside other Officers. And to this Cu|stos and Colledge, by the name of Custos and Colledge of the Free-Chappel of St. George, within the Castle of Windesor, for the most part, but sometimes of Cu|stos and Colledge of Chaplains, or otherwise of Custos and Chaplains of the same Chappel, were the Donations of Advowsons, and other temporal Endowments, commonly made and granted.


SECT. IV. Of the Dean, Canons, Petty-Canons, Clerks, and Choristers.
SHortly after the Foundation of the Colledge by the Kings Letters Patent,The Dean. to wit, thePat. 22. E. 3. p. 3. m. 19. 14. of November, anno 22. E. 3. the King constituted Iohn de la Chmbre Custos of the Chappel of St. George, but he enjoyed this dignity not above half a year, for the Pat. 23. E. 3. p. 2. m. 29. 18. of Iune ensuing, the Letters Patent, for consti|tuting William Mugg Custos, bears Teste: so that in truth Iohn de la Chambr was the first Custos, though in the Rot. Parl. 8. H. 6. n. 31. Preamble to the Letters Patent past under the Great Seal of England, with consent of the Lords and Commons in Parlia|ment, anno 8. H. 6. William Mugg is there said to be the first, and so hath been Tho. Frith. in suo Custodum sive Decanor. Catalogo. since accounted.
But it seems the Catalogue of Custos's and Deans, took commencement at the Institution of the Colledge by Papal (not Kingly) authority, and though William Mugg (in like manner as Iohn de la Chambre) had been constituted Custos above three years before, yet being then again nominated by the King to receive In|stitution from the Bishop of Winchester upon his ordaining the Colledge, he came to be accounted the first Custos, as being so under that Institution; and conse|quently Iohn de la Chambre not taken notice of.
By this Title of Custos were those that succeeded De la Chambre and Mugg, pre|sented by the King, till the last year of King Henry the Fourth, when Thomas Kingston was the Ibid. first of them presented by the name of Dean; and his Succes|sor Iohn Arundell observing that divers of the Lands and Endowments of the Col|ledge, were sometimes granted thereunto by the name of Custos, at other times of Dean and Custos, or lastly of Dean only; and doubting that this variation and diversity of names might beget some damage to the Colledge, especially being both beside and against the form of the Foundation (wherein the Title of Custos was only used) he applied himself by Rot. Parl. ni, 8. H. 6. n. 31. Petition to the Parliament before mention|ed; whereupon the King being pleased to provide for the security of the Col|ledge in this particular, did, with consent of the Lords and Commons, by Letters Patent under the Great Seal of England, grant and declare, That the said Iohn should be Custos sive Decanus for his life, and enjoy all rights thereunto belong|ing, and for the future, he and every other Custos of the Chappel for the time being should be called Ibid.Custodes sive Decani, viz. Wardens or Deans of the free Chappel of St. George within the Castle of Windesor; and that the Custos, or Dean and Ca|nons thereof, and their Successors, by the Name of Custos, or Dean and Canons of the said free Chappel, should have and hold to them and their Successors for ever, all Lands, Tenements, Rents, Possessions, c. s also all manner of Liberties, Franchises, Immunities, c. granted to the Colledge at any time before.
So that here was instituted a kind of new Incorporation of this Chappel, by the Title of Custos, or Dean and Canons only, and the whole State of the Colledge, together with its possessions, strengthened and constituted in a manner De novo: at least this was a great step to the compleat incorporating them by King Edward the Fourth, when, through the interest of Richard Beauchamp Bishop of Salisbury, then also Dean of Windesor, d Chancellor of the most noble Order of the Gar|ter, there was obtained from King Edward the Fourth, Letters Patent bearing Teste at Windesor the 6. of December in the 19. year of his Reign, for Pat. 19. E. 4. m. 5. incorpo|rating the Custos, or Dean and Canons and their Successors, by the name of Dean and Canons of the free Chappel of St. George within the Castle of Windesor, and that thenceforward they should be one Body Corporate in, thing and name, and have a perpetual Succession.
Furthermore, that they and their Successors, should by the same Name, be persons capable in Law, to purchase, receive, and take Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services, Liberties, Franchises, and Priviledges, or other Possessi|ons whatsoever, to be held and possest in Fee and Perpetuity: As also to have a Common Seal, for the Affairs and Causes of them and their Successors. And that they and their Successors, by the name of Dean and Canons, c. might plead and be impleaded, pursue all manner of Causes and Actions, real and mixt, challenge all Franchises and Liberties, and answer and be answered, before any Judges spiritual or temporal.
But for the avoiding all further doubts, which might be taken for any occa|sion or cause, touching the Dean and Canons of this Chappel in their Corporation, Capacity, or Possessions, and for the more surety of them in all their tempora Endowments; the Letters Patent of Incorporation, were within three years after, past into an Vide Rot. Parl. 22. E. 4. n. 11. Act of Parliament, which yet remains in force.
Thus much for his Title of Custos and Decanus; we shall next touch upon his Au|thority and Ecclesiastical Iurisdiction: for as he is constituted (both by the Dat. Avinio|niae pridie Cal. Dec. Pontif. sui anno 9. Bull of Pope Clement the Sixth, and the Praef. ad Coll. Stat. Institution of the Colledge thereupon) President over the rest of the Colledge, to govern, direct, and order them, their Goods and Estates; so is he to Praef. ad Coll. Stat. exercise all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over them, with a reservation of power of Appeal to the Chancellor of England, Visitor of that Colledge.
Moreover, Colleg. Stat. cap. 39. where any of them live inordinately or unpeaceably, he, with the advice of the Chapter (in cases where no particular penalty is appointed to be in|flicted) hath power to reprehend or correct at discretion. Ibid. And in case where discord ariseth among any of them, shall within eight days reconcile the parties, or do justice. Lastly, he hath power (after the third time of admonition) to Cap. 20. vide eriam Injunct. Io. Archiep. E|hor. Angl. Can|cellar. c. 1.  2. ex|pel from the Colledge, all sowers of Discord, Back-biters, and Whisperers, that are below the Degree of a Canon.
And to the end there may be no defect in Government at any time, during his non-residence, it is provided by the Statutes of the Colledge, Cap. 49. That when he hath occasion to be absent from thence, above eight days or more, he shall before his departure constitute one of the Canon-Residents (whom he please) for his Deputy, who during his absence (having the Title of Lieutenant) shall in all things exer|cise and execute his Office: for we are to note, that the said Statutes allow him Cap. 7. sixty days for non-residence, the Royal Visitation held anno 1552. enlarged that time to Ex Collect. G. Evans modo unius Ca|noni. hujus Colleg. lib. B. f. 74. a. one hundred and ten days, and the Lord Chancellor Hyde gave him liberty of Ex Collect. G. Evans modo unius Ca|noni. hujus Colleg. lib. B. f. 74. a. six weeks absence, to attend the affairs of his Deanry of Wolverhampton.
But in the Colleg. Sta|tut. cap. 50. vacancy of the Custos, whatever power or authority belongs unto him, the same is then devolv'd upon the Chapter of the Colledge; which Chap|ter ought within two days after the vacancy known, to elect one of the Resident-Canons, under the Title of President, to govern the Colledge and direct all affairs relating thereunto, until there be provided another Custos.
Canons.Leaving the Custos thus setled under the Title of Decanus (which later he is only known by at this day) we are now to speak of the Canons, whose number by the Letters Patent of Foundation, were appointed to be four and twenty, in|cluding the Custos; but upon Institution of the Colledge, by the Bishop of

Winchester, there was then ordained (as hath been noted) one Custos, twelve Secular-Canons, and thirteen Priests or Vicars, in all twenty six; being the very num|ber before ordained by the Statutes of Institution of the Order of the Garter, and answerable to the just number of the Knights-Companions of that most noble Ordr. And for a further distinction between these Canons-Secular, and the Priests, the first twelve are in a Dat. 11. Cal. Oct. an. 1484. Bull of Pope Innocent the Eighth, called Majores Canonici, the other Lib. N. p. 221. elsewhere Canonici Minores, or Petty Canons.
To these twelve Seculars were assigned so many Colleg. Stat. . 2. Prebendships in the Chappel of St. George (as also Ibid. c. 55. Stalls in the Choire, and Places in the Chapter) together with that, held by the Custos, whence of later times they are frequently called Prebends as well as Canons, and their Dignities Canonships and Prebendships. Every Pre|bend hath a Ib. c. 10. vide E. 3. Stat. Art. 4. Sacerdotal power given him by the Statutes of the Colledge, and in regard of this, those Statutes further ordained, That each Canon of the Chap|pel being a Prebend, if not at that time a Priest, should within a year after he hath enjoyed his Prebendship, be so ordained; otherwise (without further admonition) to be deprived thereof.
By the fore-mentioned Bull of Pope Clement the Sixth, there is reserved to the Founder, his Heirs and Successors, the right of presenting the Canons, Priests, Clerks, Alms-Knights, and Ministers belonging to the Colledge; and thereupon we find it noted, that Praefat. ad Colleg. Stat. he nominated and presented William Mugg, and four other Presbyters to the Bishop of Winchester, to institute them Canons and Prebends, in the Canonships and Prebendships of the Chappel, which the Bishop did according|ly, and then gave the said William Mugg institution to the place of Custos, upon the Founders nomination and presentation also.
Notwithstanding which, it appears by the Art. 4. Institution of the Garter, that the first Canons were presented to the Custos by the first Founders of the Or|der, viz. the five and twenty first Knights-Companions, every one of them being permitted by the Soveraign's favour, to present a Canon; yet was it therewithal provided, Art. 4. That neither the Knights-Companions, who thus first presented, nor any one of their Successors from that time, should present to the vacant Canonships, but the Soveraign only. To which end, in another place, the Custos was obliged when any of the Ibid. Art. 33. vide eiam H. 5. Stat. Art. 3. Canons died (the Soveraign being out of the Kingdom) to sig|nifie the same to him by Letter, that so he might appoint whom he thought sit to succeed him.
But upon whomsoever these Dignities are conferr'd, they ought to be Colleg. Stat: cap. 9. Ad|mitted, Instituted, and Installed, by the Custos (or Dean) or his Lieutenant, to whom (at the time of their Installation) they are to be obliged by Oath, to Cap. 3  48. yield Canonical Obedience, and observe the Statutes of the Colledge, so far as it concerns them. The form of their Admittance is annexed to those Statutes.
The principal duty of these Praefat. ad Stat. Colleg. Canons (so also of the Vicars, Clerks, Alms-Knights, and Ministers of the Colledge) is continually and personally to attend upon the Service of God, in the Chappel of St. George; and upon each days omission of a Canon-Resident, it was Ordained, that he should forfeit his Colleg. Stat. cap. 11. quotidian distribu|tion, viz. Ibid. c. 2. twelve pence. Nor do we find any license of non-residence, or dis|continuance given to any of the Canons by the Colledge Statutes, but only to the Cap. 7. Custos, and that but for sixty days in the whole year (as is before remembred) howbeit there is mention of Canons-Resident, and non-Resident in the said Statutes; to the non-Residents there are great Cap. 20. defalcations appointed to be made, and good reason for it, because the Resident-Canons bear not only the burthen of that duty belonging to the Chappel and Colledge, but the expence of Hospitality and other works of Charity, occasioned from their residing at Windesor.
Nevertheless the effect of a favourable indulgence towards the Canons was in|troduced by degrees, and when Richard Beauchamp Bishop of Salisbury, had ob|tained power by a Dat. Romae anno 11. cal. Aug. 1475. Bull from Sixtus the Fourth, to make new Statutes in the Col|ledge, he in this particular dispensed with the old ones, and the fifth of March 1478. gave to the Dean and every Canon and their Successors, fourteen days of non-Residence in every Term, to wit, six and fifty days in the year. By the visi|tation held anno 1552. these days are inlarged to Ex Colle. praefat, G. E|vans lib. B. f. 74. fourscore, and the Lord Chan|cellor

Hatton yet further indulged them with Ibid. two hundred and two days, which liberty the late Lord Chancellor Hyde Ibid. confirmed; and consequently there re|mains one hundred sixty and three days in the year, in which the Canons ought to be resident at Windesor. For each Canons great Residence is Collect. praef. G. Evans, lib. A.f. 143. 21 days, the looser Residence in conjunction with the greater is 163 days; that is 21 of these 163 are to be kept without interruption, and with hospitality according to the Statute.
The Canons are particularly obliged, Colleg. Stat. c. 34. humbly to pray for the prosperity of the Soveraign of the most noble Order of the Garter from time to time being, as also for the Ord. Stat. in lib. N. Art. 4. happy estate of the Order. E. 3. Stat. Art. 32. And if any Knight-Companion, or other person, should out of Devotion bestow ten pounds per annum revenue or more in Lands or otherwise, that so he might be made partaker of the Prayers, ap|pointed for the Benefactors of the Colledge, his name was ordained to be in|scribed among them, and himself also prayed for; which Article, though King Henry the Fifth confirmed, yet he provided H. 5. Stat. Art. 34. H. 8. Stat. Art. 37. that neither the Custos or Canons, should thenceforth admit of any such charge upon the Colledge, without the con|sent of the Soveraign, his Deputy, or the Knights-Companions of the Order.
To this let us adjoin the care taken by the Injunctions of the 8. of February an. 4. E. 6. for commemorating the bounty of the Benefactors of this Colledge to Po|sterity, for there it is enjoyn'd, Art. 16. That from thenceforth upon the Tuesday, next after the third Sunday in Lent, and on the first Tuesdays in Iune, September, and December, some one of the Colledge should in a brief Sermon commend the munificence, not only of the Founder, and of King Henry the Eighth, but of all other Noblemen, whose bountifulness had appeared in their pious acts, and set forth how greatly God is to be glorified, who by them had bestowed so many benefits on the Colledge: As also exhort his Auditors to use their gifts to the glory of God, increase of Virtue and Learning, and the pious intent of Benefactors; and lastly, pray the Almighty so to stir up the hearts of the living, to bestow some part of their substance likewise, to the increase of Religion, and setting forth of his glory.
Thus far of the Canons Ecclesiastical Duty; but those things which relate to their Civil Obligations are to attend the Soveraign (or his Deputy) and the Knights Companions, at the Grand Feast of St. George, whensoever celebrated at Windesor, as also at the Feasts of Installation; or when the Soveraign upon any other solemn occasion shall come to the Chappel of St. George to offer; or lastly, when any of the Knights-Companions (being on a Journey neer the Castle) come thither to offer likewise.
As touching their part in the Ceremonies observed upon any of these occasions, we shall hereafter note them down in their proper places; and only mention here the Robe appointed for them to wear at these times over their Ecclesiastical Ha|bit. This by the Statutes of Institution is appointed to be a Art. 5. vide Hen. 5. Stat. Art. 5. Mantle, and though these mention not the matter whereof it was made (which at this day is Taffaty, of the fashion of the three inferiour Officers of the Order) yet they set down the Colour to be Art. 5. vide Hen. 5. Stat. Art. 5. Murrey, as also that the Arms of St. George should be placed within a Rundle on the Ord. Stat. in lib. N. Art. 5. right shoulder thereof.
Petty Canons.Those, who are now called Petty Canons, have no nominal nor other distinction in the Pat. 22. E. 3. pars 2. m. 6. Founders Patent of Foundation, from those other afterwards called Ca|nonici majores, but both go under the Title of Canons only. In the Praefat. ad Colleg. Stat. Bull of Pope Clement the Sixth (which recites the substance of the Founders Patent) in re|ference to the transferring his authority to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bi|shop of Winchester, for instituting the Colledge, they are called Presbyteri; and by the said Bishop, in the very words of his Ibid. Institution, Presbyteri sen Vicarii, but in the Art. 4. vide H. 5. Stat. Art. 4. Foundational Statutes of the Order of the Garter, are stiled Vicarii only.
Their Number at the first Institution was Praef. ad Col|leg. Stat. thirteen, and the same number ap|pears to be continued, being taken notice of in all the Exemplars of the Statutes of the Order. Only Art. 13. King Henry the Eighths English Statutes mention eight Petty Canons, beside thirteen Vicars (but the Latin takes notice only of Lib. N. p. 221. thir|teen Priests, part of them are there called Canonici minores, and other part

Vicarii) afterwards the Injunctions of the Kings Commissioners dated the 23. of November anno 1. E. 6. appointed Art. 5. twelve Priests, and they to be called Petty Ca|nons: that is, four to be added to the former eight, mentioned in King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, which the said Article directed to be done after this man|ner, to wit, that at the first avoidance of the next Vicar, his stipend should be equally divided among three of the eldest Vicars, who thereupon were to be called Petty Canons; and when the room of another Vicar became void, then five marks of his stipend should be appointed to the next senior Vicar (who was likewise to be stiled Petty Canon) and this direction being observed, the number of twelve Petty Canons became compleated. Yet in Queen Penes Carne|vario Scac|crii. Elizabeths Ordi|nances for the continual charge, the number of Petty Canons thereby provided for, are noted to be thirteen, agreeable to the ancient number of Vicars; but at this day they are but seven, and one of them Sub-chanter.
The Vicars at their admission (according to the appointment both of the Sta|tutes of the Colledge, and those of the Order) are bound to be Colleg. Sta. cap. 3. E. 3. Stat. Art. 4. H. 5. Stat. Art. 4. Priests, or at least Deacons, from whence they are next to be ordained Priests, to wit, Ord. Stat. in lib. N. Art. 4. Colleg. Stat. cap. 11. the next time appointed for Ordination. Those Statutes bound them also to Ord. Stat. in lib. N. Art. 4. Colleg. Stat. cap. 11. continual perso|nal residence, and if absent without a lawful cause, from Mattens, they were amerced Ord. Stat. in lib. N. Art. 4. Colleg. Stat. cap. 11. two pence apiece for each omission, and two pence a time more, if not at every grand Mass, and one penny for their absence from every Canonical hour, the Mass of the Virgin Mary, or for the Defunct. All which forfeitures were to be deducted ot of their Sallary, and divided among those Vicars who gave their attendance in the foresaid Duties. But the Art. 7. Injunctions anno 1. E. 6. appoint the forfeit of absence from Mattens, to be one penny half penny, and from either Procession, Communion, or Even-Song the like Sum, to be paid to the poor Mens Box.
And not only they, but all other Ministers of the Chappel, if absent from the Colledge above Colleg. Stat. c. 18. twenty days, without just cause approved of by the Resident Ca|nons, or do behave themselves scandalously in life or conversation, are by the Statutes of the Colledge to be expell'd, after the fact proved before the Custos or his Lieutenant; but if any of them absent themselves for less than twenty days, with|out the like approbation, then to be punished at discretion.
Each of these Vicars had at first but the annual Pension of Ibid. c. 3. eight pounds Ster|ling, paid after this manner, to wit, every Kalendar Month eight shillings for their Diet, and that which then remained at the Quarters end, went towards furnish|ing them with other necessaries. Afterwards King Edward the Fourth encreased their Pensions to Ex lib. vocat. Dento. f. 177. twenty marks apiece. To which Queen Elizabeth in augmen|tation of their livings (they being then called Petty Canons) added thirteen shil|lings four pence per annum to each of them, out of the Lands setled on the Col|ledge by King Edward the Sixth, as appears by the Penes Came|ar. Scaccarii. Book of Establishment made by her, among the certain disbursments. And now their yearly Pensions are lately encreased by the Colledge to Collect. praef. G. Evans lib. B. f. 85. b. thirty pounds. One of these Petty Canons is chosen from among the rest, to be Sub-Chanter (and usually the same person is the Deans Vicar) to whose duty belongs the cure of Souls, Marrying, Burying, c.
To these Petty Canons it is requisite that we subjoin those,Four Clerks. who after the Foun|dation of the Colledge by King Edward the Third, were took into the Choire for the service thereof. As first the Quatuor Clerici, remembred in the Preface to the Statutes of the Colledge, whereof Colleg. Stat. c. 17. one was to be instituted a Deacon, and another a Sub-Deacon, before their admission: and these two were next in de|signation, and accordingly promoted to the Vicars places; but for the other two, it was sufficient if they had institution into lesser Orders, in which they were to continue. Each of the two first of these had Ibid. c. 3. eight Marks yearly Pension, and the two last but six.
King Edward the Fourth increased their number to thirteen, and allowed them Lib. Denton. f. 177. ten pounds per annum apiece. The same number do we find mentioned in Art. 1. King Henry the Eighth's Statutes of the Order, and by the Art. 9. Injunctions 23. Nov. anno 1. E. 6. made by the Kings Commissioners, they were increased to fifteen, but here appointed to be Laymen, wearing Surplices in the Choire, each having an allowance of ten pounds annually for his service.
In the 23. Article of the Injunctions, of 28. Feb. an. 4. E. 6. a course is prescribed to bring these fifteen Clerks to twenty, but in Penes Came|ar. Sccc. Queen Elizabeth's Establishment, they were again reduced to thirteen, which number is yet continued, (one of them being Organist, hath a double Clerks place, and consequently reckoned for two of the thirteen) and an augmentation to each of two pounds thirteen shillings four pence half penny farthing yearly; which being at first opposed by the Dean and Pre|bends, they at length (anno 5. Eliz.) consented to allow them forty shillings per annum apiece, not out of the New-lands, but out of other payments, which the Dean and Canons should otherwise yearly receive, and Ex Collect. praef. G. Evans. lib. B. f. 86. d. anno 1662. increas|ed their annual Pensions to three and twenty pounds apiece.
They are tyed to be Injunct. dat. 8. Feb. an. 4. E. 6. present in the Choire at all times of Service, as are the Petty Canons, and under the same forfeitures, Injunct. dat. 8. Feb. an. 4. E. 6. nor may they, or the Petty Canons go out of Town, without the Dean's or his Lieutenant's license, nor then neither, above Injunct. dat. 8. Feb. an. 4. E. 6. three at once, except for very weighty cause, left the Choire should be unfurnished of a convenient number, to perform the daily Service.
Choristers.Secondly, There were appointed for the further service of the Choire Praefat. ad Coll. Statut. six Choristers, and they to be likewise Clerks, or at the time of their admission to have been Colleg. Stat. c. 3. instituted of the Clerical Order, to each of which was allowed five Marks Sterling, annually, or to the value thereof in common Money. And in like manner as the Deacon and Sub-Deacon were placed in the Colledge, only in addition to the Vicars, and designed to succeed them as vacancies hapned, so al|so were there Cap. 17. six secular Children, endued with cleer and tuneable voices, ad|mitted and design'd to succeed the Choristers, when their voices altered.
King Edward the Fourth enlarged the number of Choristers to Lib. Denton. f. 177. thirteen, and allowed them annually six Marks apiece, and though this number was confirm'd by Art. 13. King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, yet the Art. 27. Injunctions dated the 8. of Feb. an|no 4. E. 6. reduced them to ten, nevertheless by Penes Ca|mer. Scacc. Queen Elizabeth's Establishment, the former number of thirteen was restored, and thereby given in augmentation among them all, Penes Ca|mer. Scacc. three pounds eleven shillings eight pence: Howbeit they were since brought to eight, and their present exhibition is twelve shillings a Month to each.


SECT. V. Of the Alms-Knights.
PUrsuing the Order of our Discourse, the Alms-Knights come next to be spo|ken of, wherein to avoid confusion, we shall consider them, first, under the Foundation of King Edward the Third; Secondly, when separated from that, by Act of Parliament; and lastly, as they were established anew by Queen Elizabeth.
First then, King Edward the Third, out of the great respect he bore to Mili|tary honor (of which himself had gain'd a large share) and due regard had of valiant men, chiefly such as had behaved themselves bravely in his Wars, yet af|terwards hapned to fall in decay; took care for their relief and comfortable sub|sistence in old age, by making room for them within this his Foundation, and uniting them under one Corporation and join Body, with the Custos and Canons; these he called Milites Pauperes, and we vulgarly Poor or Alms-Knights, the or|dained number being at first but Pat. 22. E. 3. pars 2. m. 6. four and twenty, as were the Custos and Canons at the first foundation of the Colledge. But shortly after upon his Instituting the Princely Society of Knights of the most noble Order of the Garter, consisting of six and twenty, there were added two more to the former number (as there was to the first Canons) to make them of like number with the Knights-Companions of that Order; which number of twenty six we after find setled at the Ordination of the Colledge by the Praef. ad Col|leg. Stat. Bishop of Winchester the Popes Delegate.
The charitable intention of the Royal Founder, was to provide for such only, as were truly objects of Charity, and therefore he describes (even in the Instru|ment of Foundation) what kind of men they should be, to wit, Poor Knights, weak in body, indigent and decayed; and to like effect is their qualification in|serted in the Statutes of Institution of the most noble Order of the Garter, viz. Art. 6 videsis Hist. Tho. de la Mare. f. 156. b. such, as through adverse fortune were brought to that extremity, that they had not of their own wherewith to sustain them, orCa. an. 25. E. 3. n. 14. m. 6. live so gentilely as became a military condition; but this being thought not enough, the same is repeated (probably for greater caution) in King Art. 6. Henry the Fifth, and King Art. 16. Henry the Eighth's Sta|tutes to prevent diverting the Founders pious intention, and against admit|tance of such as are otherwise able to live of themselves; which conjecture is not improbable, because we find the Cap. 6. ancient Statutes of the Colledge Ordained (as also the Orders of Art. 20. Queen Elizabeth) That in case there should happen to fall to any of the Alms-Knights either Lands or Rents, by succession or any other way, to the yearly value of twenty pounds or more; then such Knight should imme|diately be removed from the Colledge, and made incapable of receiving any pro|fits or emoluments thence, and another Alms-Knight preferr'd into his place.
Their presentation when first admitted, was by the same hands that presented the first Canons, viz. E. 3. Stat. Art. 6. Each Knight-Companion of the Order presented his Alms-Knight, nevertheless it was then also Ordered, That from thenceforward, every Election should remain at the disposal of the Soveraign of this most noble Order.
To each of these Alms-Knights was appointed for their Habit, a Ibid. Art. 7. H. 5. Stat. Art. 7. Red Mantle, with a Scutcheon of St. George, but without any Garter, to surround the same.
Their Exhibition from the Colledge at first, was Stat. Col|leg. Cap. 5. twelve pence apiece for every day they were at Service in the Chappel, or abode in the Colledge, and forty shil|lings per annum for other necessaries; it being the like allowance as was ap|pointed to each of the Canon-Residents, which shews the quality and esteem then had of these Alms-Knights.
It seems (about the beginning of King Henry the Sixth's Reign) these quotidian distributions, and the forty shillings per annum so assigned them, had been un|paid by reason of some dissentions and quarrels that had risen between the Dean and Canons, and Alms-Knights; but upon complaint to Iohn Archbishop of York, Lord Chancellor of England, Visitor of the Colledge, by the Art. 36. Injunctions issued upon his Visitation anno 10. H. 6. the Arrears of both were appointed to be forthwith paid without charge, and in case the Treasurer of the Colledge became negligent in future payments, he was to incur the loss of his own Quotidiaus, from the time of his voluntary delay; the same to be divided among the Alms-Knights.
Their duty was to attend the Service of God, and pray for the prosperity of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions of the Order, to be Colleg. Stat c. 6. every day present at high Mass, the Masses of the Virgin Mary, as also at Vespers and Compline, from the beginning to the end, except any lawful occasion did impede. But it was Ordained that for Cap. 5. every days absence from the Chappel, they should be debarred of receiving the twelve pence per diem, and whatsoever was raised from such forfeitures, should be converted to the use of the rest of the Alms-Knights then being in the Castle of Windesor.
Notwithstanding which Decree, it appears that the Dean did afterwards take upon him the disposure of these Mulcts at his pleasure, which occasioned the Alms-Knights to complain to Adam Lord Bishop of St. Davids, Chancellor of Eng|land and Visitor of the Colledge, who among other of his Injunctions Pat. 2. R. 2, pars prima m. 15. dated the 8. of October anno 2. R. 2. commanded that the Mulcts should be equally distri|buted among those Alms-Knights, who did attend at Divine Service in the Chap|pel, as the Statute had enjoin'd. And besides, the like complaint being made for the Dean's disposing of Donations and other Liberalities of the Knights-Compa|nions, so that the Alms-Knights had no part thereof towards their sustentation, this Chancellor also appointed Ibid. an equal distribution of them among the Alms-Knights and Canons, until the King and his Council should otherwise determine.
These and other differences between the Dean and Canons, and Alms-Knights,

grew at length so wide, that they could not be reconciled; insomuch as in the Act of Parliament, anno 22. E. 4. for the Incorporation of the Custos and Canons, by the name of Dean and Canons, the Alms-Knights were not only omitted, but this Clause inserted, Rot. Parl. anno 22. E. 4. m. 11. That the Dean and Canons, and their Successors, should for ever|more be utterly quit and discharged from all manner of Exhibition or Charge of or for any of the said Knights. And this was obtained upon pretence, Rot. Parl. anno 22. E. 4. m. 11. That the King had greatly increased the number of the Ministers of the Chappel, so that the Revenue was not sufficient to maintain both them and the Alms-Knights, as also Rot. Parl. anno 22. E. 4. m. 11. that the King had otherwise provided for the Alms-Knights. But we elsewhere find some other cause, and this afterwards alledged by the Dean and Canons in their Answer to the Knights Petition for Repeal of the said Act, to wit, Collect. praef. G. Evans, lib. A. ad Calcem. That William Omerey and Iohn Kendall, Alms-Knights, laboured much before this Act pass'd, to be incorporate by themselves, to get Lands setled on them, to be ex|empt from the obedience and rule of the Dean and Canons, and governed by Or|dinances made among themselves.
In the second place, this Act being thus obtained, and the Alms-Knights divi|ded from the Body of the Colledge, as also struck off from the benefit of the Quo|tidians, Portions, and Fees, assigned by the Foundation of King Edward the Third; how they next subsisted doth not fully enough appear: but so soon as King Henry the Seventh came to the Crown, Ex veteri MS. f. 12. they petitioned the King and Par|liament, for repeal of the Act anno 22. E. 4. affirming it was gained without their knowledge, or being called thereunto; to which Petition the Dean and Canons answered, and the Alms-Knights replied, but it seems all they could alledge did not induce the Parliament to repeal the Act: but on the contrary the Dean and Canons some years after obtained an Collect. praef. G. Evans, lib. A. f. 76. Exemplification thereof under the Great Seal, dated 4. Feb. anno 18. H. 7.
And it is clear from King Henry the Eigth's Ex lib. Den|ton. f. 72. b. Letter to the Colledge, which takes notice of their discharge from any exhibition to the Alms-Knights, by virtue of the said Act, That what the Colledge did in that kind, after this Act past, was meerly upon courtesie, and not obliged thereunto; for He thanks them for grant|ing a Pension of twenty Marks to Peter Narbone, whom He had recommended to an Alms-Knights place, and promiseth they should be no further burthened with Alms-Knights, but that he would setle Lands upon them for their maintenance, and free the Colledge from the said Pension.
Besides, when Mr. Narbone had the Pension granted him, it was by an Ibid. f. 73. In|denture made between Nicholas West then Dean of Windesor and the Canons on the one part, and the said Peter on the other, dated 18. Iuly anno 3. H. 8. where|in he covenanted, that when the King should setle any Lands on the Colledge, for sustentation of such Knights, then the grant of the Pension should be void, and of none effect.
In the interval between the disunion of the Colledge and Alms-Knights by the foresaid Act, to their establishment by Queen Elizabeth, their Habit and Badge continued the same, and was so confirm'd by King Henry the Eighth's Art. 16. Statutes: But it may be collected from his last Will, that there was then an intention to draw the Garter about the Scutcheon of St. George's Arms, but it took no effect: We observe also, that in this interval several persons who had been of considera|ble quality and worth, became Alms-Knights, some of them were nevertheless great objects of Charity; among whom was Sir Robert Champlayne Knight, a valiant Soldier, and one whose martial services abroad, rendred him an honor to our Nation.
It seems he had taken part in the Civil Wars here, with King Henry the Sixth, against King Edward the Fourth, shortly after whose coming to the Crown he left England, and travelled into Ex vet. MS. Hungary (having with him an Equipage of three Servants and four Horses) where, in the assistance of Matthias Corvinus King of Hungary against the Turk, he behaved himself bravely, and like a valiant Knight: But prosperous Fortune not attending him at all times, he received many wounds, and at length was taken Prisoner, lost all, and forced to pay 1500 Ducates for his Ransom. For the justification of all which, he obtained Ex vet. MS. several

authentick Testimonies under the Great Seals of Matthias King of Hungary, Iero|nimus Archbishop of Crete, Legate de Latere in Hungary, Frederick the Third Em|peror of Germany, Renat King of Sicily (Father to Queen Margaret Wife of our King Henry the Sixth) Frederick Count Palatine of the Rhyne, Charles Duke of Burgundy, and lastly a Declaration thereof from our King Edward the Fourth, under his Privy Seal, dated the third of April in the nineteenth year of his Reign. And being reduced to a low condition, by his great losses and the charge of his Ransom, he was through the favour of King Henry the Seventh Ann. 1. H. . admitted an Alms-Knight here.
But some others made their retreat hither, and obtained admittance into this Fraternity, probably out of devotion, rather than cause of poverty; and among these were Pat. 22. E. 4. pars 1. m. 26. Thomas Hulme sometime Clarenceux King of Arms, An. 7. H. 7. Lodowick Carly the Kings Physician, Pat. 18. H. 7. p. 1. Iohn Mewtes Secretary of the French Tongue, and An. 6. H. 8. Bar|tholomew Westby made second Baron of the Exchequer Pat. 1. H. 8. p. 2. m. 31. 2. Iune anno 1. H. 8.
It is manifest by the Will of King Henry the Eighth (as also by an Ex lib. vocat. Frith in Aerar. Coll. Windesor. p. 55. Indenture Tripartite between King Edward the Sixth of the first part, the Executors of his Father of the second part, and the Dean and Canons of Windesor of the third part, dated the fourth of August anno 1. E. 6.) that he intended a re-establishment of half the ancient number of Alms-Knights, viz. Thirteen, to which end he ap|pointed, that as soon as might be, after his death (if not done in his life time) there should be a Revenue of 600 l. per annum in Mannors, Lands, and Spiritual Promotions (above all charges) setled upon the Dean and Canons and their Suc|cessors for ever, upon the Conditions following, that is to say, That the Dean and Canons should for ever find two Priests to say Mass at the Altar neer his Tomb, to keep yearly four solemn Obits for him, and at every Obit to distribute ten pounds in Alms, as also to pay twelve pence a day to each of those thirteen Alms-Knights, and they to have once in a year a long Gown of White Cloth, and a Mantle of Red Cloth, besides five Marks annually, to such one among them as should be appointed for their Governor: And lastly, to cause a Sermon to be made at Windesor every Sunday throughout the year.
King Edward the Sixth (in performance of this Will) the 7. of October, in the first year of his Reign, did setle several Lands upon the Colledge, which we shall mention by and by; immediately after which, the Ibid. p. 37. Dean and Canons were put in possession thereof, and received the Rents: but 600 l. per annum of these Rents, were by them paid back at the appointment of the then Lord Treasurer, to be imployed in building of Houses for the Alms-Knights, intended to be setled as King Henry the Eighth designed.
But it seems this work was not begun till the last of February anno 3.  4. Ph.  Mar. and finished the 25. of Sept. anno 5.  6. of the same King and Queen, the charge whereof came to Lib. Com|pos. praef. penesHaris nuper de Windesor. 2747 l. 7 s. 6 d. These Houses are situate in the South side of the lower Ward of the Castle, and contain thirteen Rooms, besides a Hall, a Kitchin and Pastry. The Lib. Com|pos. praef. penesHaris nuper de Windesor. Stone for building was brought from Red|ding, the Timber from several places in the Forest, and the Lead and Apparels for Chimnies, from Suffolk-place in Southwark.
At a Chapter of the Order of the Garter held the Lib. C. p. 24. first of Iune anno 4.  5. Ph.  Mar. (these Houses being then neer finished) debate was had about placing some Alms-Knights therein, if possible by Michaelmas following, where|upon it was Ordered, That the Lib. C. p. 24. Marquess of Winchester Lord Treasurer, should assign Lands for their maintenance, that not any thing might be want|ing to finish so pious a work. And towards the completing of all, the Queen had nominated nine of the thirteen designed Alms-Knights, name|ly Lib. vocat. Frith. p. 64. Iames Crane, Michael Whiting, Silvester Clessop, Hugh Iohans, Robert Case, Iohn Brigby, George Fothergill, George Thackwell, and William Berd: but she fell sick of a Fever in August following, and so a stop was put to this business.
But now (in the third place) to come to the Establishment, which these Alms-Knights obtained, and under which to this present they continue, Queen Eliza|beth, immediately after her coming to the Crown, confirmed her Sisters Grants to

the said nine Alms-Knights, and associated unto them Ibidem. Thomas Kemp, William Barret, William Cowper, and Iohn Acton, to make up the full number of thirteen, ordained by King Henry the Eighth.
Afterwards, viz. Ex lib. per|gam penes Ca|merar. Scacc. 30. Aug. anno primo Eliz. the Queen, minding the continu|ance of the Foundation erected by King Edward the Third, and as neer as might be the performance of the intent of her Progenitors, and advancement of the most noble Order of the Garter, and especially of the knowledge given her of the last mind and Will of her Father King Henry the Eighth, to make a special Foundation and continuance of thirteen poor men, decayed in Wars, and such like service of the Realm, to be called Thirteen Knights of Windesor, and kept there in succession: And having also set forth and expressed certain Orders and Rules for their better Government, and declared how and in what manner the profits of certain Lands, of the yearly value of 600 l. given and assigned by her Father to the Dean and Canons and their Successors, should be imployed for the maintenance of these Poor-Knights, and otherwise according to his mind and will, she lastly declared her pleasure, That the Dean and Canons and their Suc|cessors should for ever cause the said Orders and Rules to be observed and kept, which are these that follow.

1. Ibidem. First, We do establish 13 Poor-Knights, whereof one to be Governor of all the residue by such Order as followeth; The same 13 to be taken of Gentlemen, brought to necessity, such as have spent their times in the service of the Wars, Garrisons, or other service of the Prince, having but little or nothing whereupon to live, to be continually chosen by Vs, and our Heirs, and Successors.
2. Item, We Ordain, that the Governor and Knights shall be chosen of men un|married, and shall continue, except in special case, where it shall please Vs the Soveraign, and the Heirs, and Successors of Vs the Soveraign Kings of this Realm, to dispense with any person to the contrary. Provided nevertheless, if any of them will marry, he may so do, losing his place at the day of his Marriage.
3. Item, We Ordain, that no man desamed, and convicted of Heresie, Treason, Fel|lony, or any notable Crime, shall be admitted to any Room of the said 13 Knights, and if any so admitted be afterwards convicted of any such Crime, he shall be expelled out of that company, and lose his Room.
4. Item, The same 13 Knights to have yearly for their Liveries, each of them one Gown of 4 yards of the colour of Red, and a Mantle of Blue, or Purple Cloth, of five yards, at six shillings eight pence the yard.
5. Item, The Cross of St. George in a Scutcheon, embroidered without the Garter, to be set upon the left shoulder of their Mantles.
6. Item, The charges of the Cloth, and of the Lyning, making, and embroidering, to be paid by the Dean and Chapter, out of the Revenue of that foundation, and endowment given for that and other causes.
7. Item, The said 13 Knights to come together before Noon, and afternoon daily, at all the Divine Service, said within the Colledge, in their ordinary Appa|rel, and to continue to the end of the same service, without a reasonable lett, to be allowed by the Governor.
8. Item, The said 13 Knights shall keep their Lodgings appointed unto them, and their Table together in their common Hall appointed, and to have their pro|visions made by their common Purse, except for any reasonable cause, any of them be licensed to the contrary, by the Dean or his Deputy, and that Li|cense to endure not above 20 days in no year, except it be for sickness only.
9. Item, The said 13 Knights shall not haunt the Town, the Ale-houses, the Taverns, nor call any Woman into their Lodgings, without it be upon a reaso|nable cause, and that with the License of the Dean or his Deputy.
10. And further, We will that 12 of the said Knights shall be obedient to the thirteenth, appointed for the Governor, and all 13 shall be obedient to the Dean and Chapter, in the observation of these Statutes, for the good Order of themselves.
11. Item, The said 13 Knights shall be placed within the Church where the Dean and Canons shall think best, to hear the Divine Service together, where they shall least trouble the Ministers of the Church.
12. Item, They shall be present at the Service, to be done quarterly for the memo|ry of the Patrons and Founders of the said Colledge, and specially of our said deaer Father and Us, and have for every of them at each time 20d. and the Governor 2s. The said Service shall be used at the four quarters of the Year, every Sunday next before the Quarter-day; That is to say, the Sunday next before the Feast of the Annunciation of our blessed Lady, the Sunday before the Nativity of St. John Baptist, the Sunday before the Feast of St. Mi|chael the Archangel, and the Sunday before the Nativity of our Lord God.
13. Item, If any of the 12 Knights do not obey the Governor in the observation of these Statutes, he shall sustain for every time of such disobedience, such forfeiture as the Dean and Chapter shall put on him. The Governor shall make report of all such disobedience and other Offences committed by any of the said Knights to the Dean and Chapter; and if the offence be such, as shall seem to them to require such punishment, they shall besides a pain Arbi|trary, give a warning to the Offender, causing the same to be registred, and he that shall so twice be warned by them, shall immediately upon the third offence, be expelled for ever out of that company. And if the Governor disobey the Dean and Chapter in the Observation of the said Statutes, upon such warning by them, he shall receive like punishment as the other twelve.
14. Item, The Penalties of such as are punished by the Dean and Chapter for not observing of these Statutes, shall be imployed, by the discretion of the Dean and Chapter, upon any of the Ministers or Choristers of the Church where they think best.
15. Item, When it shall please God, that We, or our Successors, Kings of this Realm, shall repair to the Castle of Windesor, the said 13 Knights shall stand before their doors in their Apparel, to do their obedience unto Vs, then, at the com|ing and going away.
16. Item, Yearly at the keeping of the Feast of St. George, they shall stand like|wise in their Apparel, before their doors, at the coming and going out of the Lieutenant, and of the other Knights of the Order, chosen for the keeping of that Feast.
17. Item, When any Feast of St. George is kept within that Castle of Windesor, the Governor and Knights at the Dinner, shall sit together in their Apparel, as aforesaid, at one Table, and have allowance of meat and drink, at the charges of Vs, our Heirs, and Successors.
18. Item, The said 13 Knights shall daily in their Prayers, pray for Vs the Sove|raign, our Heirs and Successors, and for the Companions of our said Order of the Garter.
19. Item, The said 13 Knights shall all lye within their Lodgings provided for them, and if any of them shall lye without their said Lodgings, and the Col|ledge, without the license of the Dean, or his Deputy, he shall lose for every time twelve pence.
20. Item, If any of the Poor-Knights, after his admission into that room, shall have Lands or Revenues fall unto him to the yearly value of 20l. or upwards, he shall immediately upon the coming of such Lands or Revenues unto him, be re|moved, and put from his said room of a Poor-Knight, and another, such as aforesaid, taken into his place.
21. Item, The said Poor-Knights (excepting cause of sickness) shall be every day present in the Colledge, at Church at Divine Service as is aforesaid, and re|ceive there for a daily distribution of twelve pence by the day, to be paid them Monethly, if it may be, or at least in such sort as the other Ministers of the Chappel be paid; and he that shall be absent from the Church one day with|out leave of the Dean or his Deputy, shall lose his distribution of 12d. aforesaid.
22. Item, The Governor shall keep a Book, and therein note aswell the absence of every Knight from the Church, as other faults committed by them, punishable

by these Statutes, whereof he shall deliver one to the Dean or his Deputy, and another to the Steward, or him that payeth the Poor-Knights, who by order of the Dean or his Deputy, shall defaulk at the time of their pay such sums as are set upon any of the said Knights for Penalties as aforesaid.
23. Item, The Dean or his Deputy shall once in the year at least, appoint a day and hour, at the which the Poor-Knights shall be warned to be present, unto whom the said Dean or his Deputy, or one of the Commons to be appointed by the Dean, or in his absence by his Deputy, shall read these Statutes, and if any of the Knights, being warned, shall be absent from that reading, without license of the said Dean or his Deputy, he shall lose for every time of such absence, six shillings eight pence.
24. Item, The Poor-Knights so chosen, as is aforesaid, and every of them, before he take any commodity of his Room, shall give a corporal Oath before the Dean or his Deputy, to be faithful, and true to Vs, and to our Heirs, and Successors, Kings of this Realm, and that he or they for the time of their tarrying there, shall truly observe these Statutes and Ordinances, so far as the same concern|eth them, or such other as shall be hereafter made by Vs, or our Heirs, and Successors, touching the good order of that Company upon the pains contained in the said Statutes.
25. Item, Notwithstanding the Article before expressed, prescribing the aforesaid number to be chosen of Gentlemen, which we do most allow, yet considering that before the perfection of these Orders, we be advertised, that the more part of them now chosen, and admitted, be not certainly known Gentlemen, were re|ceived into the same Order, as men well reported for honesty, and thought meet to be relieved for their poverty, we are pleased to dispence with all such, as are presently placed, being not Gentlemen born, and hereafter mean in that point, not to have any admitted, contrary to the said Order.

The annual allowance to each of these Alms-Knights upon this new Establish|ment is 18 l. 5s. 0d. to be paid by the Dean of Windesor (but their Governor hath 3l. 6s. 8d. more) besides a Gown or Surcoat of Red Cloth, and a Mantle of Blue or Purple Cloth, on the left sleeve whereof is embroidered the Arms of St. George in a plain Scutcheon. King Iames was pleased to double this Pension, viz. to each of them Howes Chron. p. 1037. 18l. 5s. 0d. more, and made it payable out of the Ex|chequer by quarterly payments.
To these thirteen Alms-Knights there was added, in the Reign of the late Sove|raign King Charles the First of ever blessed memory, five more; to wit, two of the Foundation of Sir Peter la Maire Knight, and three of Sir Francis Crane Knight, sometime Chancellor of this most noble Order.
For Sir Peter la Maire, by his Ex lib. v|cat. Adely in Officio Praero|gat. Cant. f. 7. last Will and Testament, bearing date the eighth of Ianuary anno 1631. bequeathed the sum of 1500 l. to be bestowed and setled to and for such charitable and pious uses, and in such manner and form as Sir Fran|cis Crane (who had married his Sister) should think fit and appoint, within four years after his death.
Afterwards Lib. R. p. 113. Sir Francis determining (very greatly to his own Fame and the honor of the Order) to erect certain Houses in Windesor Castle, for the dwelling of five  Knights, did thereupon design the said 1500l. towards that use, and added  money of his own to make up the rest; charging his Executor [Sir Richard Crane his Brother, afterwards created Baronet] by his Lib. vocat. Pyle in Officio praed. f. 105. Will, dated the 27. of August, anno 1635. to see the buildings, which himself had begun, finished. He also bequeathed for ever two hundred pounds per annum, to be setled in Lands by his Executor, according to the advice and direction of Thomas then Earl of Arundel and Surrey, and Henry Lord Marevers his eldest Son, to serve for the perpetual maintenance of five Alms-Knights, after the rate of forty pounds per annum to every one of them.
But his Executor growing slack in the performance of this, the work being ra|ther exposed to ruine than any way forwarded by him, by whom the same was only expected to be finished; and complaints thereof several times made to the

Soveraign and Knights-Companions in Chapter, Lib R. p. 140. Orders were issued thereupon to quicken him, and a Sir Iames Palmer's Iour|nal pro anno 1639 p. 64. peremptory Letter sent him, dated the 7. of March 1639. to go on with the work forthwith; which commands he evading, and bad times growing on, the building was wholly neglected.
Sir Richard Crane afterwards dying, by his Vide lib. vo|cat. Aylet in Officio praed. f. 186. Will dated, the 20. of Sept. 1645. appointed that his Mannor of Carbrooke in Norfolk, should for ever stand bound for the payment of the said 200l. per annum, whereupon by an Inquisition taken at Windesor, 4. Mar. 1652. by virtue of a Commission upon the Statute, anno 43. Eliz. for charitable uses, the Mannors of Woodrising and Wesfield, with other Lands in the County of Norfolk were found liable to satisfie for building and finish|ing the said five Houses, and payment of the 200l. yearly; and further, that the Arrears thereof from Sir Francis Crane's death, came at that time to 3200l.
Some contest then ensued in the Court of Chancery, between Ralph Mabb, with other Prosecutors on the Alms-Knights behalf, and William Crane Esquire (to whom the Estate of Sir Richard Crane fell) nevertheless the 200l. per annum was (19. Iuly 1655.) Decreed to be paid out of all the Lands which were Sir Richard Cranes, and the building of the Houses out of his personal Estate. And upon this (about two years after) that fair pile of Building, erected between the Chan|cellor's and Garter's Towers, against the West wall in the lower Ward of the Castle, was taken again in hand, and finished in the following year; the charge whereof amounted to 1700l.
But for a final end of the Sute it was Decreed, the 27. of Ianuary 1659. That the before mentioned Mannor of Carbrook should for ever stand charged with 200l. per annum, to be paid half yearly at Michaelmas and our Lady-day, or within thirty days after, for the perpetual maintenance of five Alms-Knights, together with 30l. yearly for repairs, payable at the foresaid times, and an assu|rance thereof to be made accordingly: towards the recovery and setling of which, the care and assistance of Sir Bulstrode Whiteloke (then Constable of the Castle of Windesor) was not wanting.
The setlement being perfected, the present Soveraign, in a Chapter held at Whitehall the 14. of Ianuary anno 12. Car. 2. Decreed, That the Chancellor of the Order for the time being, should receive the said annual sum of 230l. and dispose thereof thus; 200l. per annum among the five new-instituted Alms-Knights quar|terly, by even and equal portions, at the four usual Feasts of the year, and to employ the residue (being 30l. per annum) upon repair of the new buildings, erected for their Lodgings, which powers were inserted into the Patenor his Office, bearing date the 20. of the same Month.
And it was further decreed at the same Chapter, That these five Alms-Knights should be subject to the same Rules and Government, under which the other thir|teen were established by Queen Elizabeth's Foundation, and made equal parta|kers of the same Priviledges, and have the like Habit assigned to them.
The number of Alms-Knights being by the donation of Sir Francis Crane, in|creased to eighteen. King Charles the First of ever blessed memory, taking no|tice thereof (though they were not yet setled) intended to make them up six and twenty, as they were at the Institution of the Order; to which end, in a Chapter held at Whitehall the 18. of April 1637. it was Ordered, Lib. . p. 121. That the Knights-Companions (Commissioners for other affairs of the Order) should consider of the best way how the same might be effected, and report their opinions to the then Sove|raign: But nothing being done thereupon, this Affair yet waits a more propiti|ous season for the compleating thereof.



SECT. VI. Of other Ministers of the Colledge.
IN the last place, the Ministri or Officers of the Colledge and Chappel of St. George, bring up the rear in the Patent of Foundation, under which Title are comprehended, first, the Superior Officers, namely the Chantor, Steward, and Treasurer.
Chantor.The Colleg. Stat. c. 37. Chantor is ordained to be chosen from among the Canons, the chief part of whose Office is to govern those that sing in the Choire, and such as are em|ployed about Divine Service: Before the Reformation in Religion, he appointed who of them should begin the Antiphones, celebrate the Masses, and read the Les|sons, Epistles, and Gospels; with these, to his care was committed the Colleg. Stat. c. 37. custody of the Books, Crosses, Chalices, Vestments, and all the sacred Ornaments of the Chappel. He receives the Offerings there made, and accompts for them, for all which service an annual Pension of 5 l. is allowed him.
The Steward and Treasurer are Ibid. cap. 38. Steward. annually chosen on the morrow after Michael-mas-day, from out of the Canon-Residents. To the Stewards Office belongs the Government of all the Revenue of the Colledge; the Rents and Profits arising thence, he is to pay to the Treasurer: To his keeping is delivered all the Orna|ments, Jewels, and other Treasure of the Chappel, not committed to the Chan|tor, under the obligation of rendring an account, and his yearly Pension is 5 l.
Treasurer.The Ibid. Treasurer is appointed to distribute to the Custos, Canons, Vicars and every other Minister of the Chappel, the Pensions and Allowances assigned to them, of which if he fail eight days after the expiration of their set times of payment, he is debar'd of his own Quotidians, as Canon-Resident, until such Arrears be dis|charged, so also the Steward if he be faulty herein. The Pension allowed him is also 5 l. per annum.
As there is one Treasurer who receives the Rents of the Old Lands, so was there appointed another distinct from the former, and chosen from among the Canons to receive the Rent of the New (within few years after they were setled on the Colledge) to whom the like annual Pension of 5 l. hath been also al|lowed. The Title of the former being Senescallus veteris Dotationis, and of the latter Senescallus novae Dotationis.
There is also the Steward of the Courts,Steward of the Courts. and Clerk of the Lands, which is an Of|ficer under both the before mentioned Stewards: He Lib. Collect. praef. G. Evans, lib. A. f. 74.b. keeps the Courts by him|self or Deputy, he is a Barraster at Law, and the standing Council for the Col|ledge; his yearly Pension is Ibid. f. 75. a. twenty Nobles; but the Council in Spiritualibus, is usually a Graduate in the Civil Law.
Chapter-Clark.The Ibid. Chapter-Clerks Office, or Registership, is to enter or register all Acts agreed upon in the Chapter-house, he also draws, ingrosseth, and registreth all Inden|tures, Patents, Grants, Leases, and other Writings, which pass under the com|mon Seal of the Dean and Canons. His Pension is Ibid. 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. per annum. The Vnder Stewardship and Chapter-Clarkeship went sometimes heretofore together, but of late they are divided, and now this Officer is also a Barraster at Law.
Verger.Of the Vergers Institution the Colleg. Stat. Cap. 54. Statutes of the Colledge take notice, and ap|point that in the Chappel at Processions and other Solemnities, he shall go be|fore the Dean and Canons bearing his Rod: for which service there was then al|lowed him annually one Robe,Sextons. Bell ringers. Clock-keeper. Porter. and six pence per diem. And besides these Offi|cers, there are two Sextons, two Bell-ringers, a Clock-keeper, and a Porter, who at|tends the shutting and opening of the Gates.



SECT. VII. Of the Endowment of the Colledge.
OUR brief account relating to the Dean, Canons, and other Members of the Colledge, being now dispatch'd, it follows that we treat of the Endowment there|of, and shew what Lands were given towards the maintenance and support of this Foundation. But because we intend no other account here, than in that of the Castle, Chappel, and Colledge, which was but short; we will only set down what Lands, c. the Founder endowed the Colledge with, and then touch upon those other considerable additions made by some of his Successors, Soveraigns of the most noble Order of the Garter, and of the Knights-Companions, referring the rest (after a bare mention of some other that were taken into the first Foun|dation) to the larger discourse which we intend hereafter to make publick.
The Endowments wherewith King Edward the Third invested this Colledge by his Letters Patent of Foundation before mentioned, were first the Pat. de an. 22. E. 3. pars. 2. m. 6. Advowsons of the Churches of Wyrardesbury (vulgarly called Rasbury) in the Diocess of Lincoln, of Southtanton in the Diocess of Exeter, and of Uttoxater in the Dio|cess of Coventry and Lichfield. These he gave to the Custos, Canons, Alms-Knights and Ministers of the Colledge, to hold in free, pure and perpetual Alms, throughly and perpetually, free from all secular exactions, with license to ap|propriate the same to the Colledge, notwithstanding the Statute of Mortmain. Pat. de an. 22. E. 3. pars. 2. m. 6. He thereby also appointed so much of his Treasure as should be for their decent support, until he had setled an immoveable estate of 1000 l. per annum upon them in Lands, Benefices, or Rents.
But as for two of these Advowsons, namely Vttoxater and Southtanton, 'tis to be doubted there was afterwards discovered some defect in the Kings Title to them, and that the right of Patronage lay rather in Henry Earl of Lancaster, and Thomas Earl of Warwick: for the 18. of Iune anno 23. E. 3. the King granted special Licence to Henry Earl of Lancaster that he should give and assign to the Custos and Chaplains of the Chappel of St. George in Windesor, and their Successors for ever, the Pat. 23. E. 3. p. 2. m. . Advowson of the Church of Vttokeshatre, it being there said to be of the Earls proper Patronage. And the like license to Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, for assigning to them the Pat. 23. E. 3. p. 2. m. . Advowson of the Church of Southtanton, that being of his Patronage also: The King gave special license likewise to receive these Advowsons from these Earls, and to appropriate them to the use of the Colledge.
Another like license pass'd (Pat. 24. E. 3. p. 1. m. 3 26. Ian. anno 24. E. 3.) to William de Bohun Earl of Northampton, that enabled him to assign to the said Custos and Chaplins and their Successors, the Pat. 24. E. 3. p. 1. m. 3 Advowson of the Church of Dadyngton in the County of Oxford, which he held of the King in Caepite, with license for them to receive and appropriate the same.
The 28. of Ianuary following, this royal Founder gave unto the Custos and Colledge, by the name of Custos and Chaplains of his Free Chappel of Windesor, Pat. 24. E. . p. 1. m. 36. one Messuage, seventeen Acres of Land, one Acre of Pasture, and three shil|lings Rent, with the appurtenances, lying in Wyrardesbury in the County of Buckingham, which had been conveyed to him by Rich. de Gloucester Heir to Isa|bell de Ditton. And on the 22. of May ensuing, he also granted unto them, the Pat. 24. E. 3. p. 1. m. 14. Advowson of the Church of Dachet neer Windesor, with license to appropri|ate it to them and their Successors.
In the following year (primo Martii) the King gave them the Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 1. m. 24. Advowsons of the Churches of Eure in Buckinghamshire, of Riston in the County of Norfolk, and of Whaddon and Caxton in the County of Cambridge, to appropriate these also to them and their Successors. And the 9. of May after he likewise granted and assigned to them, the Pat. de eod. an. p. 1. m. 14. Advowson of the Churches of Symondesbourn

(which the Colledge in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth surrendred to Richard Duke of Gloucester) and of St. Stephens of Saltash, with like license of Appropriation. But the first of these was the gift of Queen Philippa, she having purchased it of Ibidem. Sir Iohn Darcy Knight; and the other of Edward the black Prince; and both granted by them, first to the King, that by his Grant afterwards to the Colledge, its Title might be better strengthened.
The 26. of October in the same year, the King granted to the said Custos and Colledge and their Successors, Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 3. m. 15. one hundred Marks per annum, to be received out of the Farm of the Town of Northampton; and paid them by the hands of the Bailiff of that Town for the time being, at Easter and Michaelmas by equal portions, towards their sustentation and maintenance, and the supportation of the burthen of the Chappel.
It was at the instance of the Founder (and therefore we mention it here) That the Bailiffs and Communality of Yarmouth granted to the Colledge (the first of April anno 26. E. 3.) under their Common-Seal, a Ex ipso Au|tograph. in Ae|rar. hujus Col|leg. Last of Red Herrings yearly, well dried and cleansed; to the end they might take this Corporation into their Prayers. But some say it was enjoin'd them as a Penance, for murdering a Magi|strate among them.
Moreover the Founder granted to them and their Successors (18. Iuly anno 26. E. 3.) the Pat. 26. E. 3. par 1. m. 1. Mannor of Eure neer Weybrigg, with its appurtenances in Bucking|hamshire, the Mannor of Craswell, with its appurtenances in the Parish of Bray, in the County of Berks, and a certain Weare, called Braybrok, placed in the Ri|ver of Thames, with all the Lands and Tenements in the said Parish conveyed unto him by Sir Iohn Philibert, together with the Knights Fees, and Advowsons of Churches, Chappels, Chanteries, and other things whatsoever, to the said Man|nors, Lands and Tenements belonging or appertaining. And the 23. of February following, a Claus. 27. E. 3. m. 25. Writ issued to Henry de Greystock Clerk, Steward of the Lands set apart for the use of the Kings Chamber, and to Robert de Haddon Escaetor of the same Lands, to give full seisin to the Custos and Colledge of these Mannors of Eure and Bray St. Philebert, as also of a Wood called Temple-Wood in Stoke-pugeys, conveyed to the King by Iohn de Molyns.
Afterwards, the King considering, that all the Lands he had assigned for support of this Colledge, were yet too little for that end; and being desirous to have it better provided for, he further granted to the Custos and Colledge and their Suc|cessors by like Letters Patent, a Pat. 28. E. 3. p. 2. m. 22. Pension of one hundred pounds yearly out of his Exchequer. These Letters Patent were afterwards vacated, for that by other like Letters dated the 12. of May anno 34. E. 3. he gave them Lands to the yearly value of Pat. 34. E. 3. p. 1. m. 13 101 l. 11 s. 11 d. of the possessions of Religious Aliens, which fell into his hands, by occasion of the French Wars. One hundred pounds per annum part of this, was in recompence of the said 100 l. yearly Pension issuing out of the Exchequer, and the 1 l. 11 s. 11 d. in part of satisfaction of the Lands, which the King intended to provide for the further maintenance of the Colledge; nevertheless he thereby also granted, Pat. 34. E. 3. p. 1. m. 13 that in case these Possessions should by Treaty of Peace or otherwise be restored, they should then receive the said yearly sum of 101 l. 11 s. 11 d. out of his Exchequer as before, until there was pro|vided for them Lands of the like annual value.
And whereas in the Patent of Foundation it is said, that the King designed to setle upon the Colledge Lands of the value of 1000 l. per annum; now in another Letters Patent bearing Teste the said 12. of May, there is notice taken only of Lands of the annual value of Ibid. 655 l. 15 s. 0 d. (as if his intended Donation had extended to Lands of no greater value) and that the King in pursuance of such his purpose, had already provided Lands and other Possessions, rated at 604 l. 5 s. 3 d. per annum, the residue to make up the intended sum here exprest, being but 51 l. 9 s. 9 d. He thereupon Ibid. appointed the Colledge to receive that sum year|ly out of 126 l. 0 s. 0 d. which the Prior of Takkele paid to him for the Farm of that Priory, it being then in the Kings hands by reason of the War with France: Howbeit in case Peace was so concluded, that the same should be resto|red to the Prior, the King then further granted, Ibid. that the Custos and Colledge should

thenceforward receive the said sum of 51 l. 9 s. 9 d. out of his Exchequer, at Michaelmas and Easter, by even Portions.
But it seems the Lands fell short of the value rated at in this Account, and reached not to the total of the Kings intended Endowment by 90l. per annum: For the first of Pat. 35. E. 3. p. 2. m. 21. Iune in the following year, by other Letters Patent, he grant|ed to the Custos and Colledge, so much money to be annually paid them out of his Exchequer (to make up what yet fell short) until he should cause to be provi|ded Lands or Rents of that value, to be setled on them and their Successors.
Lastly, the 2. of April anno 39. E. 3. the Founder bestowed on them a Pat. 39. E. 3. p. 1. m. 22. piece of ground in New-Windesor (upon which had stood a House sometime of Iohn de London) in lieu of the great Garden lying on the South part of the Castle, Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 1. m. 37. for|merly given them by him, for the use of the Custos and Canons. And also a Gar|den opposite thereunto, on the other side of the way, with its appurtenances, for the use of the Alms-Knights, Vicars, Clerks, Choristers, and other the Officers of the Colledge; and herewith he closed his Endowments.
But besides all these Donations made by the Founder, to the Custos, Colledge, and their Successors, there were other Lands, Parsonages, Pensions, and Portions given to them by pious and devout persons, in free, pure, and perpetual Alms for ever, towards their sustentation, which are said MS. to be taken into the first Foun|dation, and made up that Revenue, which Praesat. ad Colleg. Stat. William Bishop of Winchester, ac|counted and declared sufficient for the maintenance of the Custos and those other of the Colledge, according to the number by him limited in the Colledge Sta|tutes, as also for the due defraying of all charges imposed upon them, and these we shall let pass with the bare mention only.
The MS. Mannor of Dodyngton Castle, two Pastures called Frith and Ashcroft, the Chappel of Langeley, the Parsonages of Esriton, Langeley-Maries, Wan|tynge, Shaldeborne, Wedonbeek, Glynde, and Ryslepe, the Pensions of the Vicarages of Wantynge, Clyffe, Tyltehey, and Gottesford, and the Portions of Bassyngborne, Preewyke, in Haseley magna, Chalgrave, Adewelle, Aston, Rowband, Sebyngdon, Kyngeston, and Henton, in Stoke-Basset, and Clope|cote, in Gatehampton, Whytechyrche, Maplederham, Retherfeld, Esthen|rith, Stretham, of Thernecroft in Letherhed, of Totynbeek in Wodesdon, Ebyngton, Woodmershtborne, of Fordham, Ethorpe, ewenham, and in Tollesworth.
In following times, there were many other considerable Donations bestowed on the Colledge, by the succeeding Soveraigns and Knights-Companions of the Order (for as to what was given by others, we shall not need to take further no|tice of now) either out of devotion, or desire to be more especially taken into their Prayers, or in honor to the Military Order; some of which, as they fall into our way, we will here set down.
King Richard the Second, Grandchild and Successor to the Founder (13. Feb. anno Regni sui 13.) gave to the Custos and Canons Pat. 13. R. 2. par 2. m. 11. one Croft in the Town of Northmolton, together with the Advowson of that Church, it being in the Diocess of Exeter, and license to appropriate the same.
Iohn Duke of Bedford, third Son to King Henry the Fourth, bestowed on this Colledge, by his Deed dated the 3. of December anno 9. H. 5. the Ex ipso Au|togr. in Aerar. hujus Colleg. Priory of Oke|borne in the County of Wilts (a Cell to the Abbey of Bee in Normandy) together with all and singular the Possessions thereunto belonging or appertaining. This Grant King Henry the Fifth Ex Lib. vocat. Arundel in Ae|rar. praed. f. 91. confirmed, and that it might be more valid, was likewise confirmed by King Cart. de an. 1. E. 4. m. 20. Edward the Fourth.
King Edward the Fourth had a singular respect and favour for this Colledge, to which, the 18. of Iuly in the seventh year of his Reign, towards augmentation of its maintenance, and ease of the great burthens of the Dean and Canons, he gave the Pat. . E. 4. Mannors of Atherston in the County of Warwick (a member of the Priory of Okeborne) the Mannors and Advowsons of the Churches of Chesing|bury in Wiltshire, and of Quarle in Hantshire, the Church and Priorate of Uphaven, and the Deanry or Chappel of St. Burien in Cornwall, with all rights and appurtenances thereunto appertaining, as also an annual Pension which

the Abbot of Sautre paid for the Church of Fulburne to the Abby de bon Requie, and another annual Pension of 20l. paid by the Abbot of Rousford for the mediety of the Church of Rotheram.
The 29. of Ianuary anno regni sui 13. he gave the Pat. 13. E. 4. p. 2. m. 6. Mannor or Priorate of Munclane in the County of Hereford (parcel of the possessions belonging to the Priories Alien) with all and singular its appurtenances.
The following year (viz. 27. of February) he granted to them, by the name of Custos or Dean and Chapter of this Colledge, the Pat. 14. E. 4. p. 2. m. 5. Custody, Patronage, and free disposition of the Hospital or Free-Chappel of St. Anthonies London (a Pre|ceptory of the Monastery of St. Anthony at Vienna) with all the Liberties, Privi|ledges, Lands, Rents, Services, and Emoluments whatsoever thereunto belong|ing, upon the first vacancy, whether it should happen by death, resignation, or otherwise.
He also gave them (the 17. of May ensuing) the Pat. 14. E. 4. p. 1. m. 1. Priorate of Brimsfield in the County of Gloucester, the Mannor of Blakenham in the County of Suffolk (parcel of the Priory of Okeburne) the Priorate of St. Elene in the Isle of Wight in Hampshire, the Priorate of Mannor of Charleton in Wiltshire, and all the Lands, Tenements, Rents, and Services in Northumudon, Compton, and Welegh in the Counties of Sussex and Southampton (which sometime belonged to the Abbey of Lucerne in Normandy) the Mannor of Ponyngton and Wedon in the County of Dorset (parcel of the possessions of Okeburne Priory) one annual Pen|sion of twelve Marks, payable by the Prior of the Priory of Monte-Acuto, toge|ther with all and singular the Lands, Tenements, Rents, Advowsons, Liber|ties, c. annexed to the said Priorates and Mannors, or in any manner appertain|ing, with license to appropriate the same to them and their Successors.
About two Moneths after, this King gave also to the Colledge, the Ibidem. Mannor of Membury in Devonshire, and Lordships of Preston and Monkesilver in the County of Somerset, the Advowsons of the Churches of Puryton, and Wolla|vington in the said County (being parcel of the Priory of Golalys in Wales, and one of the Priors Aliens) together with the Knights Fees, Advowsons, Profits, Rights, c. thereunto belonging.
In the 18. year of his Reign, the Queen, Thomas Archbishop of York, and se|veral Bishops, Noblemen and others, being seised to the use of the King his Heirs and Successors of the Ex ipso Au|togr. in Aerar. Colleg. Winde|sor. Mannor of Wykecombe called Bassetsbury, the Fee Farm of the Town of great Wykecombe, the Mannor of Crendon in the County of Buckingham, and of the Mannors of Haseley and Pyrton in the County of Oxford, parcel of the Lands of the Dutchy of Lancaster, they (at the special command of the King) demised and granted the premises with all their appurtenances to the Custos or Dean and Canons and their Successors, until such time as the King, his Heirs or Successors should grant to them other Lands of the like yearly value.
The 17. of February following, this King gave them the Pat. 18. E. 4. p. 2. m. 4. Advowson of the Church of Cheshunt, being of his own Patronage, with license to appropriate the same, provided the Vicarage were sufficiently endowed, and a competent sum of money annually distributed among the poor Parishioners, according to the Diocesan's Ordinance, and form of the Statute in such case provided.
This King the 21. of February following united the Custody or Deanry of the Free Chappel of Wolverhampton in the County of Stafford, to the Custos or Dean of this Colledge, and his Successors for ever. This Church cum membris is exempt not only from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, but (by a Papal Bull) from all his Legates, and Delegates; nor is it subject to any ter|rene power but the Majesty of England, and under it, to the perpetual visitation of the Keepers of the Great Seal pro tempore.
He likewise gave them the Pat. 20. E. 4. p. 2. m. 23. Advowson or Patronage of the Prebend of Ewern in the County of Dorset, the 27. of Sept. in the 20. year of his Reign, with all its rights and appurtenances, and also a license of appropriation.
And lastly, the 21. of November in the ensuing year, he granted to them two parts of the Pat. 21. E. 4. p. . m. 3. Mannors of Old-Swynford and Gannow in the County of

Worcester, and the Reversion of the third part of them after the death of Mr|garet Wife of Fulk Stafford Esquire; with the Advowson of the Church of Old-Swynford.
These were the effects of this most noble and munificent Princes piety and li|berality towards this Colledge: Nor was he alone bountiful, but excited others to be so likewise, and to that purpose, in the first year of his Reign, Cart. an. 1. l. 4. m 20. hnsed all his Subjects in general to give what Lands, Rents, or Advowons they plea|ed, to the Dean and Canons, within the value of 300 Marks per annum. as well such as they held of the King in Capite, or in Burgage, or otherwise as any other Land; the same to be united and appropriated to the Colledge and its uses prp|tually, notwithstanding the Statute of Mortmaie; and afterwards increased this license to Lands of the value of Pat. 19 E. 4. m. 5. 500l. a year (but King Henry the Eighth ex|tended the like license to the value of Ex lib. Den|ton. f. 115. 1000l. per annum.)
Hereupon shortly after, to wit, Iune 29. anno Regni sui 20. he granted license to Iohn Duke of Suffolk and Elizabeth his Wife the Kings Sister, to give and assign unto them the Pat. 20. E.  p. 2. m. 26. Mannor or Lordship of Grovebury otherwise called Leighton-Busard with its appurtenances in the County of Bedford, the Church of Tin|tagell in Cornwall, with all its emoluments; as also 19 Messuages, 7 Tofts, 140 Acres of Land, 14 Acres of Medow, 140 Acres of Pasture, 1 Acres of Wood, and 4l. Rent, with their appurtenances in Newford and Blanford in the County of Dorset. And 70 Messuages, 12 Tofts, 500 Acres of Land, 100 Acres of Medow, 300 Acres of Pasture, 100 Acres of Wood, and 100 shillings Rent, with the appurtenances in Stokeley, Northall, Edelesburgh, and Rodenach in Buckinghamshire. And 20 Messuages, 8 Tosts, 300 Acres of Land, 60 Acres of Medow, 200 Acres of Pasture, 40 Acres of Wood, and 20 shillings Rent, with the appurtenances in Compton-St. John in the County of Sussex. And 10 Messuages, 9 Tofts, 200 Acres of Land, 20 Acres of Medow, 100 Acres of Pasture, 10 Acres of Wood, and 20 shillings Rent, with the appurtenances in Portsmouth and Burgbegge in Hampshire. And one Messuage, 3 Tofts, 60 Acres of Land, 6 Acres of Medow, 40 Acres of Pasture, and 20 shillings Rent, with the appurtenances in Stodeham in the County of Hertford, held of the King in Capite; notwithstanding the Statute of Mortmaine, or any other restriction or proviso whatsoever.
We shall here note, that the 24. of Iuly anno 18. E. 4. this Lib. . f. 148. Duke of Suffolk infeoffed Richard Duke of York, Thomas Bishop of Lincoln, and others, of the Mannor of Leighton-Busard, who the 25. of Iune anno 19. E. 4. at his spe|cial instance Demised and Granted the said Mannor to the Dean and Canons for+ever. And in the Octaves of St. Iohn Baptist, anno 20. E. 4. the Ibid. f. 149. Duke of Suf|folk and his Dutchess levied a Fine to the Dean and Canons, who thereupon agreed that for this their so large Donation they should be had in their perpe|tual Orisons.
The 10. of Ianuary next after, Ex ips Au|togr. in Aerar. Colleg. Winde|sor. Sir Walter Devoreux de Ferrers Knight, follow|ing this pious Example, together with Sir Iohn Devoreux, and others his Feof|fees, of the Mannor of Sutton-Courtney in the County of Berks, and of the Church of Sutton-Courtney (having withal obtained the Pat. 20. E. 4. p. 2. m. 3. vide Lib. Dento. f. 41.  42. Kings license to that end) did give and grant unto the Dean, Canons, and their Successors for ever, the Advowson or Patronage thereof, with all rights appertaining thereunto.
All the before mentioned Endowments are called the Lands of the Old Dota|tion, to distinguish them from those setled on the Colledge by King Edward the Sixth, which bear the title of Lands of the New Dotation, concerning which we shall speak in the next place. But several of them so given by King Edward the Fourth, the Colledge never enjoyed, namely, the Mannor of Atherston, the Man|nor and Advowson of Quarle, Vphaven, St. Burien, Fulburne Pension, Brimfeld, St. Elen, Charleton, Blakenham, Ponyngton, Wedon, Old Swinford, and Gannow: And of some others they were seised but a short time, to wit, Chesingbury Mannor and Advowson, the Lands in Newford, Blanford, and Portsmouth. Besides these, the Colledge was dispossest of Gottesford in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, of Cheshunt Advowson in Henry the Seventh's Reign, and in the time of King Henry

the Eighth (or some time before) of Wodemershthorne, Tyltehey, Retherfeld, Le|vyngdon, Stoke-Basset, Stretham, Totingbeek, Fordham, Ethorp, Newenham, and Tollesworth; afterwards they surrendred into the hands of King Henry the Eighth, the Mannors and Advowsons of Eure, Clyff, Ashton, Rowhand, King|ston, Est-Henrith, Northumunden, Compton, Weleg, Compton-St. Iohn's, and Shobingdon Portion.
And lastly, the Colledge lost at least 1000 Marks per annum, upon the Refor|mation of Religion, in the profit made by St. Anthonies Piggs, which the appro|priation of the Hospital of St. Anthonies London had brought to it, and no less than 500l. per annum, the Offrings of Sir Iohn Shornes Shrine, at Northmarston in Buckinghamshire; a very devout man, of great veneration with the people, and sometime Rector there. The Advowson of this Church was appropriate to the Dean and Canons, by the Prior and Convent of Dunstaple, the license of King Edward the Fourth being obtained for that purpose the Pat. 19. E. 4. m 3. 15. of November, anno regni sui 19. in exchange for the Advowson of the Church of Wedenbeck in Bedfordshire.
The Dean and Canons having by their Deed under their Chapter Seal, con|veyed unto King Henry the Eighth the Regist. vocat. Frith. p. 53. Mannor and Rectory of Ivor in Bucking|hamshire, the Mannor of Dammery Court in Dorsetshire, and divers other Lands, Rents, Portions, and Pensions in the Counties of Somerset, Hants, Middlesex, Ox|ford, and Sussex, for which they had no recompence in his life, nevertheless by his last Ex lib. vocal. Aln in Regist. Cur. Prerog. Cant. n. 32. Will and Testament, he appointed them satisfaction; and thereby charged and required his Son, and all his Executors, and likewise all his Heirs and Successors Kings of England, as they would answer the neglect before Al|mighty God at the dreadful day of Judgment, that they should see assurance made to the Dean and Canons for setling Lands on them and their Successors, in performance of his Will, and the uses therein appointed.
And it being manifest to the Lord Protector and his Co-Executors (after this Kings death) Regist. vocat. Frith. p. 56. that the Dean and Canons upon the commutation and agreement of an exchange, performed on their part by assigning to the said King the Mannors and Lands above specified, being of the yearly value of 160 l. 2. s. 4 d. for which they were as then unrecompenced; King Edward the Sixth, minding the accomplishing and performance of his Fathers last Will, as well for the assu|rance of Lands to the yearly value of 600l. to the Dean, Canons, and their Suc|cessors for ever, to the uses in the Will, and for maintenance and performance of such other Ordinances and things, as he and the said Executors should limit and prescribe to them; as also for the assurance of other Lands of the annual value of 160l. 2 s. 4 d. to be made to the Dean and Canons in recompence of the Lands, they had released and assigned to King Henry the Eighth; was pleased by his Letters Patent bearing Teste at Hampton Court, the 7. day of October in the first year of his Reign, to give and grant to the said Dean and Canons the Rectories, Impropriations, Parsonages, Chappels, Portions, and Tithes here named, viz.
The Rectories and Churches of Pat. 1. E. 6. par 5. Bradnynche, Northam, Iplepen, Ilsing|ton, and Southmolton in Devonshire, and the Tithe of Corn of Dtery in that County, part of the Duke of Somersets Possessions, as also Blosoms-Inn in St. Lawrence-Lane, London, sometime parcel of the Possessions of the late Colledge of Otery. The Tithes of Grain, c. of the Rectory of Ambrosbury in Wiltshire, and all the Tithes of Bedwyn, Stoke, Wilton, Harden, Harden-Tunrige, Knoll, Pathall, Chisbury, East-Grafton, West-Grafton, Grafton-Darten, and Wexcombe, parcel of the Prebend of Bedwyn in that County; as also the Prebend of Alcannyngs and Urchefounte, the Rectories of Urchefounte, Sta|pleford, Tytcombe, and Froxfield in the said County, and all the annual Pen|sion of 8 l. issuing out of the Mannor of Icombe in the County of Gloucester. The Rectory and Vicarage of Ikelington in Cambridgeshire. The Rectory of East-Bethworth in the County of Surrey. The Reversion of the Portion of Tithes of Trequite in Cornwall, and the Rent of 13 s. 4 d. reserved upon the same. All the Portion of Tithes of Trequite aforesaid, belonging to the Priory of St. Ger|mans in Cornwall. The Rectory and Church of Plymton, the Chappels of

Plymstoke, Wembury, Shagh, Sanford-Spone, Plymton, St. Maurise, and Bryxton in Devonshire, belonging to the late Priory of Plymton, the Re|ctory of Istleworth and Twickenham in the County of Middlesex, parcel of the possessions of the Colledge of St. Maries of Winchester, and the Rectory of Shiplake in Oxfordshire, lately belonging to the Monastery of Missenden in Buck|inghamshire. As also all the Reversion of the Rectory of Aberguille, and of the Chappels of Llanlawett (alias dict. Llanbadock) and Llanpenysaunt, (part of the Monastery of Karmarden in South-Wales) with the Rent of 30l. per ann. reserved thereon; the Reversion of the Rectory of Talgarth (part of the Priory of Breck|nock in South-Wales) with the reserved Rent of 11 l. 6 s. 8 d. The Reversion of the Rectory of Mara in the County of Brecknock (belonging to the Priory of Breck|nock) and 6l. Rent. The Reversion of the Rectory of St. Germans in Cornwall (appertaining to the Monastery or Priory of St. Germans) with 61l. 13 s. 4 d. Rent. To have and to hold all the premises, unto the Dean and Canons and their Successors for ever; except the Tithes in Woolpall and Fitz-Waren in Wiltshire (belonging to the Priory of Bedwyn) The Vicarage-house of Ikelington, the Monies called Marriage-Money, Dirge-Money, and Mass-Money, and the whole profit of the Bedrolls of Ikelington. Nevertheless to pay the King and his Suc|cessors in the Court of Augmentation, for the Rectories of Aberguille, Talgarthe, and Mara, the Chappels of Llanbadock and Llanpenysaunt 4 l. 2 s. 8 d. in the name of Tenths, and for all Rents, Services, c. of the other Rectories, c. 48 l. 7 s. 4 d. annually at Michaelmas.
Furthermore, within all these premisses the King (by the said Letters Patent) granted to the Dean and Canons, Court Leets, or Views of Frankepledge, and to have Fines and Amerciaments, Free-Warrens, Waifs, and Felons Goods, and all other Profits, Commodities, Liberties, Emoluments, and Hereditaments what|soever. All which Rectories, Tithes, Pensions, Rents, c. before mentioned, and all other Gifts and Grants in the possession of the Dean and Canons anno Iac. Reg. 2. were confirmed and made good and effectual in Law to them and their Successors, by Act of Parliament that year.
The Regist. Frith, p. 57. 2. of August preceding the Grant made by King Edward the Sixth, a Rental pass'd under the hand of Sir Edward North Chancellor of the Court of Augmentation, containing the particular charges issuing out of the aforesaid Rectories, c. whereunto certain Articles were annexed, and according to which the said Deed of Conveyance from the King was drawn.
The ancient rate of these New Lands in the Kings Books was Ibid. p. 54. 661 l. 6 s. 8 d. per annum, but according to the improved Rents, to wit, as they were then turn'd over to the Colledge, was 812 l. 12 s. 9 d. out of which improved value (as ap|pears by the Articles now mentioned) Ibid. p. 57. 160 l. 2 s. 4 d. was yearly allowed them in satisfaction of the Lands past over to King Henry the Eighth, and 600 l. per annum for accomplishment of his Will, but the remaining sum, viz. 52 l. 10 s. 5 d. was reserved in lieu of Tenths, to be yearly paid into the Court of Augmenta|tion; howbeit this last reserved sum was not agreed unto by the Dean and Canons to be so paid, because the Charges issuing out of the Lands were greater than were expressed in the Rental.
And we find, that shortly after the Ibid. p. 54. Rents of the Parsonage of St. Germans, the Rectories of Northam, Ilsington, Icklington, Ambrosbury, Stapleford, and Vrchefount, the Prebends of Alcanings and Vrchefount, being part of the New Lands, were received and accounted for, according to the old rate in the Kings Books, to wit, 162l. 13 s. 4 d. per annum, by the Steward of the Old Lands, in recompence for the Lands conveyed to King Henry the Eighth, and out of which they paid a yearly surplusage of 2 l. 2 s. 1 d. this sum together with the Rents of the rest of the New Lands, being upon the said improvement accounted to be 597 l. 17 s. 11 d. made in all 600 l. per annum; and this was paid by the Dean and Canons for some time towards building the Alms-Knights Houses, as is before remembred.
Thus stood the Lands accounted for, till the setlement made by Queen Eliza|beth, for the disposition of the whole Revenue, which then was accounted to

the Colledge, but at the value entred in the Kings Books; upon which setlement the Queen appointed the Dean and Canons to convert the Rents of these New Lands, from time to time to such uses and intents, and in such manner and form as she had set down in a Penes Ca|merar. Scaccarii. Book signed with her Sign Manual, and annexed to an Indenture bearing date the 30. of August, in the first year of her Reign, made between Her on the one part, and the Dean and Canons on the other part. By which Indenture the Dean and Canons Covenant for themselves and Successors Penes Ca|merar. Scaccarii.to distribute and employ at all times for ever the Rents and Profits of these Lands, in such manner as in the Book is declared and appointed, and to observe and keep all the Ordinances, Rules, and things whatsoever contained therein, which on their part and behalf is limited and appointed to be performed and exe|cuted, according to the true meaning of the same.
And if the Dean and Canons or their Successors should omit any thing to them appointed to be performed by the said Ordinances, Rules, and Statutes, then for every such default they are to abide such Order as shall be made by the Queen, her Heirs, or Successors, or by any of the Knights-Companions of the Order, as by her or her Successors should be thereunto appointed.



l.
s.
d.


In this Book, the Total of the Revenue, reckoned at the ancient value amounts to
661
06
08


The Annual charge and dis|bursements to the Colledge, therein set down, is
430
19
06


And so Remains
230
07
02


Which Remainder hath been and is Ibid. assigned and employed for payment of Tenths to the Crown, Vicars and Curates annual stipends, Officers-Fees, Repara|tion of the premisses, and for the relief of the Dean and Canons and their Succes|sors, in maintenance and defence of the said Lands.
And to the end the Queen might know how the Revenue of these New Lands was disposed of, she also Ordered, Ex eod. lib. That her Lieutenant and the Knights-Companions, should annually (at the Feast of St. George held at Windesor) see the just account thereof, how the Income was expended, and the payments made; and that one of the Officers of the Order, should from time to time yearly put her Lieutenant in mind thereof.
Which Order was renewed in a Chapter of the Garter held April Lib. R. p. 10.  15. 24. ann. Iac. Reg. 21. and the Chancellor of the Order appointed to be the Remembrancer: and in obedience thereunto, the Account of these New Lands (which begins annually at Lady-day, as that of the Old Lands doth at Michaelmas) was afterwards ex|hibited in Chapter, and in particular that Ibid. p. 88. Account, presented by the Dean of Windesor, and submitted to the Soveraign and Knights-Companions consideration, (the 6. of November anno 9. Car. 1.) was referr'd to the perusal and inspection of the Ibid. p. 88. Knights-Commissioners, appointed at the same Chapter to consult the Affairs of the Order.


SECT. VIII. Of the Priviledges of the Chappel and Colledge.
IN the last place, the Priviledges of both are to be considered, which we shall divide into Ecclesiastical and Temporal.
Touching the first, it appears by a In Aerar. Coll. Windesor. Bull of Pope Clement the Sixth, dated at

Avignion the 12. of February in the 9. year of his Papacy, That at the desire of the Founder, this Pope exempted the Chappel, Colledge, Canons, Priests, Clerks, Alms-Knights, and Officers of the Colledge, from all ordinary Jurisdiction, Do|minion, and Superiority of Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and all other Iudges and Officials, and received them within the protection of the Papal See. And further granted, That the Custos for the time being, should have Ecclesiasti|cal Jurisdiction over the Canons, Priests, Clerks, Alms-Knights, and Officers, and their Successors, as also the Cure of their Souls; notwithstanding any Papal Con|stitution, Statutes, Customs, whether Provincial or Synodical, or other what|soever to the contrary. Willing nevertheless, that the Custos should receive the Cure of their Souls from the Diocesan of the place. And in considerat of this Exemption and Priviledge, the Custos was obliged to pay annually on St. Georges day, one Mark in Silver to the Popes Chamber.
About two years before the date of this Bull, we find that this Chappel had the title of Pat. 24. E. 3. p. 1. m. 36. the Kings free Chappel, given unto it (so also whilst under the Rot. Finium anno 1. E. 3. m. 21. former Foundation) and still enjoys the same: which title of Free Chappel is not only intimated but confirmed by its exemption from the Jurisdictions now mentioned.
It is subject to no power (since the Supremacy in Ecclesiasticks became vested in the King, by the Law of this Realm) but only to the King of England; as here|tofore it stood divided to the King and See of Rome.
The Priviledge of Exemption by Pope Clement the Sixth, is included in the Cart. de an. 47. E. 3. Confirmation of Liberties made by the Founder in his Charter, dated the 28. of February anno regni sui 47. and all Priviledges and Liberties granted by him, are Rot. Parl. an. 8. H. 6. n 31. confirmed to the Colledge by Act of Parliament, anno 8. H. 6.
As this Colledge doth depend immediately on the King, so is it visitable only by his Chancellor, whose Praesa. ad Colleg. Stat. Visitations, and accustomed Jurisdictions exercised by him in the Chappel, Colledge, and Persons thereunto belonging, are reserved to him by the Statutes of the Colledge; and himself called in the Kings Commission for Visitation of the Colledge anno 2. R. 2. Pat. 2. R. 2. p. 1. m. 15. Governor of the said Chappel, as well in Spirituals as Temporals, and under the King immediate Custos.
And so jealous were the Dean and Canons left the power of the foresaid Exem|ption should be infringed, that when Sixtus the Fourth had granted a Lib. Denton. f. 10. Bull to the Bishop of Salisbury and Dean and Canons, with authority to make new Ordinances, and to interpret the ancient Statutes, they within few years obtained a Ibid. f. 1. Revocation of that Authority; left the said Bishop (in whose Diocess the Colledge is situate) being so impowered, might prejudice their Liberties, new form their Statutes, and by degrees bring them under his Jurisdiction, in prejudice to the said Exemption.
And further, to prevent any such design, the same Pope commissionated the Fol. 1. Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Winchester and Worcester to see this Bull of Revocation take effect, and enjoined them not to suffer the Bishop of Salisbury to intermeddle further in the Colledge Affairs or Statutes; but that the Fol. 18. Bishops of London, Lincolne, and Rochester, and the Chancellor of England, or any two or more of them, with the Dean and Canons should review, alter, or new make such Statutes or Ordinances, as might be for the utility and advantage of the Colledge: This later Bull is dated at Rome, 7. Cal. Aug. an. Dom. 1485.
It is an argument of no small priviledge, that if the Ex Collect. praef. G. Evans lib. A. ad Cal|cem. Archbishop of Canterbury be present in the Chappel of Windesor, yet he sits below the Dean; nor can he consecrate there without his License. And the instance is no less remarkable, that at the Solemnity of ratifying the Peace between King Charles the First of ever blessed memory, and Lewis the Thirteenth of France, the 6. of September 1629. in the Chappel of St. George at Windesor, Lib. R, p. 53. Doctor Matthew Wren then Dean, gave the Oath (as Dean of this Colledge) to the Marquess of Chasteneaus the French Kings Ambassador, and not the Archbishop of Canterbury, though he was then present.
By the Statutes of the Colledge, the Cap. 1. Dean and Chapter, are at their yearly Chapters, diligently to consider and debate all things that shall fall out, or seem fit to be dispatcht, in reference both to the Spiritual and Temporal Affairs of

the Colledge, and whatsoever Ordinances or Determination shall be made at these Chapters (not repugnant to the Colledge Statutes) all persons belonging thereunto, are firmly obliged to observe, so far as they are concern'd in them, until they happen to be altered by later Resolves of succeeding Chapters.
Other Notes and Marks of Exemption appears in the Deans taking no Insti|tution from any other Bishop; but that his Stat. . Cap. 9. Institution, Investiture, and Instal|lation into the Custoship, Canonship, and Prebendship, is received from such of the Canons-Resident, to whom the King (who Collates) doth recommend him by his Letters. As also in the constant Ad Calcem; Collect. pras. proving of Wills before him, or in his absence before his Lieutenant: In using the power of Excommunication within their Judiction (which is the Precincts of the Colledge) and dispensing with themselves, for eating of Flesh in Lent.
Add to these, that the Ibid. Ordinations for the Chantry Priests were confirmed by the Dean and Chapter, not the Bishop of the Diocess, so also were the Statutes of the New Commons. Nor doth the Ibid. Dean who hath the cure of Souls (as is before noted) pay any Synodals or Procurations, nor can any of the Lib. R. p. 53. Kings Chaplains preach in the Chappel of St. George, unless he be a Canon there, without the Kings special mandate, or leave of the Dean and Canons.
The Dean and Canons send no Ex praef. Col|lect. Delegates to the Synod, and when this point fell into debate, anno 1640. it was carried in the Negative, as being a perfect Novelty, and against their Liberties, and might intitle them to the payment of Subsidies, and consequently bring a new charge upon the Colledge. Nor have they share in the Government of the Church, as other Deans and Chapters have. So that notwithstanding any alteration or dissolution of the Government of the Church here in England by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and Chapters, this Col|ledge cannot be concerned, more than the Colledges in the Vniversities, where there are many nominal Deans.
Lastly, after the Act for Vniformity past, Ibid. an. 14. Car. 2. whereby every Clergy|man was bound to subscribe before the Archbishop or his Ordinary, the Ibid. Canons subscribed before the Dean of Windesor, he being the Ordinary of the place: And though some of them in majorem cautionem, subscribed also before the Archbi|shop of Canterbury, yet was it with this Salvo, saving the rights and priviledges of this Free Chappel.
Thus much in relation to the Ecclesiastick Priviledges of the Colledge: As to the Temporal and Civil, what the Founder granted to it, being very large and bene|ficial (in regard he was born here, and toucht with a prerogative of affection to this place) and hath been since confirm'd by several of his Successors, we shall here insert.
First then the Founder King Edward the Third, by his Cart. de anno 17. E. 3. m. 6. n. 14. Charter dated the 6. of March in the 27. year of his Reign, granted them several Profits, Priviledges, and Immunities to the effect following.
That the Custos and Canons, and their Successors, should for ever be free from payment of any Aid, for making the eldest Son of any King of England a Knight, and for marrying their eldest Daughter: as also of all Aids to the King, Contri|butions and Tallages.
That whensoever the Clergie of this Realm, or of the Province of Canterbury or Tork, should give a Tenth or other Imposition, out of their Spiritualities; or the Commons of England should give a Tenth or Fifteenth, or any other Tax, out of their Temporalities or moveable Goods, or that the King and his Heirs should cause his own Demain to be taxed; or that the Pope should impose any Tax or Im|position upon the Clergy of this Realm, and give the same to the King and his Heirs; this Colledge with all its Lands and Possessions should be wholly freed thereof.
That they should be free from any charge of Arraying Soldiers, for the service of the King and his Heirs; and from sending them for the Custody of the Sea-Coasts, and from every Fine or Composition for the same.
That their Houses, as well those within the Castle of Windesor, as else-where, should be free from any Livery of the Kings Stewards, Marshalls, Purveyors, Offi|cers, and Servants, and from the like Officers of the Queens, or any of their

Children, or of the Peers or Nobles. And that the said Officers should not inter|meddle there, without the leave of the Custos and Canons, and their Successors.
That no Duke, Earl, Baron, or Nobleman, nor any Stewards, Marshals, Eschea|tors, Sheriffs, Coroners, Bailiffs, or Officers, nor any other person of what condi|tion soever, should upon any colour lodge or stay in the Houses of the Custos or Canons, without their consent.
That they the said Custos and Canons, and their Tenants, should for ever be free from payment of Toll, Paviage, Picage, Barbicanage, Terrage, Pontage, Mu|rage, Passage, Paiage, Lestage, Stallage, Tallage, Cariage, Pesage, and from Scot and Geld, Hidage, Scutage, working about Castles, Parks, Bridges, Walls for the Kings Houses. And from suits to the County or Hundred Court, and Wapentakes, Court Leets, Murder, and Common Amerciaments, whether they should happen before the King, or any of the Justices of the Bench, or Justices Itinerant, or other Justices whatsoever, and from every other like Custom.
That they should have within their Lands and Fees, the Chattels of all Felons and Fugitives, and seize them to their own use.
That they should have all Fines for Trespasses, and all other Contempts and Mis|demeanors, Fines, pro licentia concordandi, and for all other causes.
That they should have all Amerciaments, Redemptions, Issues, and Forfeitures whatsoever, Annum, Diem, Vastum,  Streppum, and all things which might belong to the King and his Heirs thereupon.
That they should have Wrecks, Waiss, and Strays, within all their Lands and Fees.
That no Purveyance of Corn, Hay, Horses, Carts, Carriages, Victuals, or any Goods, Chattels, or any thing whatsoever, should be taken by any of the Kings Officers or Ministers, in, or upon any of their Lands, or the Lands of any of their Tenants.
That they should be free from the payment of any Pension, Corrody, or other Sustentation to be granted by the King, his Heirs or Successors.
That they should have Free-Warren in all their Demain Lands wheresoever. And that, although they lay within the bounds of the Kings Forest.
That they should have a weekly Market, to be held on Wednesdays, at their Mannor of Eure in Buckinghamshire, and two Fairs to endure for eight days, viz. on the Eve and Feast-day of the Apostles Peter and Paul, and for two days next following: and upon the Eve and Feast-day of St. Peter ad vincula and two days following, with all Liberties and Customs to the said Market and Fairs belonging.
That they should enjoy all their Lands, with the Liberties of Soc and Sac, Insangthes, Vtsangthes, and View of Frankepledge; with Thewe, Pillory, and Tum|brel, for punishment of Malefactors; and power to erect Gallows upon their own soil, for Execution of such Malefactors as should fortune to be apprehended within their Jurisdiction.
That they should be freed and discharged from all Suits and Pleas of the Forest, and of all Charges or Fees, which the Justices or other Officers of the Forest might demand. And from Expeditation of their Doggs, and Suits of Court there.
That they should be free from Gelds, Dane-gelds, Knights-Fees, Payments for Murther and Robbery, Building or Repairing of Bridges, Castles, Parks, Pools, Walls, Sea-banks, Causeways, and Inclosures, and of all Assises, Summons, Sheriff-aids, their Bailiffs, or Officers, carrying of Treasure, and all other Aids, as also from the common Assessments and Amerciaments of the County and Hundred and all Actions relating to them.
That they should be freed from the payment of Ward-penny, Aver-penny, Tithing-penny, and Hundred-penny, and discharged from Grithbrech, Forstall, Homesoken, Blod-wite, Ward-wite, Heng-wite, Fight-wite, Leyr-wite, Lastage, Pannage, Assart, and Waste of the Forest, so that such Waste and Offences be not committed in the Forests, Woods, or Parks of the King his Heirs and Successors; and if it should happen so to be, that then reasonable satisfaction, without imprisonment or grie|vous recompence, should be accepted.
That they should have return of all Writs and Attachments, as well relating to the Pleas of the Crown, as other, throughout all their Lands or Fees, and that

no sheriff, Bailiff, or other Officer should make any Execution of such Writs there, unless in default of the Custos and Canons and their Successors.
That they should have and hold Leets and Law-days, for all within their Lands and Fees.
That they should have cognisance of all Pleas betwixt their Tenants, as well of Trespasses and Contracts, as others, in their own Courts.
And lastly, that they should have and hold Wards, Reliefs, Escheats, Forfeitures, and other Profits, Issues, and Emoluments whatsoever, within their own Fees, from all their Tenants, which might belong to the King or his Heirs, and which the King might receive by reason of those Fees, in case they were in his own hands, as if the Tenants did hold of him or others in Capite of the Crown.



CHAP. V. THE Institution OF THE MOST NOBLE Order Of the Garter.

SECT. I. The several Opinions touching the occasion of its Institution.
EDward King of England and of France, of that name (after the Nor|man Conquest) the Third, was the first Founder of this most re|nowned Order of the Garter: And this is not only unanimously at|tested by our own, and other Historians, but also by good Authori|ties and Records of the Order it self.
The Historians generally agree in the person of the Founder, but as to the original occasion, that gave beginning to the Order, and the time when it was erected, there is not small difference among them; by reason whereof, the truth of both is left so perplext, that if we had not clearer light from some other means, the world might yet live in ignorance of the verity of either: But that we may set down these two particulars more exactly than hitherto hath been done, and give a more perfect account of a Military Order, whose same hath spread all

over the World, and been conferr'd on the greatest Princes thereof, is our de|sign in this present Work.
First then, as to the occasion of its Institution, the opinions of Writers (as we said) are various: The vulgar and more general is, That the Garter of Ioane Countess of Salisbury falling casually off, as she danced in a solemn Ball, King Edward hastily stooping, took it up from the ground; whereupon some of his Nobles and Courtiers smiling, as at an amorous action, and he observing their sportive humour, turn'd it off with this reply in French, Honi soit Qui mal y Pense; but withal added in disdain of their laughter, That in a short time, they should see that Garter advanced to so high honor and estimation, as to account them|selves happy to wear it.
But taking leave to examine this Tradition, we shall only make two or three Remarques, and then refer it to the judgment of others, what credit ought to be given thereto.
First, Sir Iohn Froissart (who only among the Writers of that Age speaks of this Institution) assigns it no such original, as that of the falling of a Ladies Gar|ter: Nor is there found any thing to that purpose in our other Historians, for the space of two hundred years, till Polydor Virgil took occasion to say some|thing of it; whose grounds we shall examine immediately. Besides it might be expected, that some Historian among the French (who were so forward to jeer at our King Henry the Fifth's design of invading them, with a return of Tennis Balls) would not have forborn to register some where or other, a scoff at the Ladies Garter; especially in a time when the fury of War had dissolv'd all obli|gations of friendship and civility, and opened the mouth of slander. Whereto we must add, that there is not the least appearance in the original Statutes of this most noble Order, to countenance the conceit of such a Feminine Institution; no not so much as obliging the Knights-Companions to defend the quarrels of Ladies (as the Rules of some Orders then in being enjoin'd) nor doth the Author of that piece intituled, Institutio clarissimi Ordinis Militaris  prenobili Subligaculo nun|cupati, written by way of Preface to the Black Book of the Garter, let fall the least touch to that purpose.
As to what Polydor says, it is even thence to be noted, that he himself is not so confident, as to ascertain the person whose Garter it was, but warily de|clining that, says, it was Angl. Histor. l. 19. p. 379. either the Queens, or the Kings Mistress; and if it were the later, yet doth he with the same caution omit her name and title of dignity, both which hath since been supplied (but on what authority we find not) by some of our modern Historians, who call her Cambd. Brit. in Aurebat. p. 208. Speedpunc; Chron. p. 588. Bakers Chron. p. 139. Edit. Lond. 1665. Fullers Holy State. p. 349. Ioane Countess of Salis|bury; and there is as little reason, why she should be supposed to be Ioane, called also the Fair Maid of Kent (whom Edward the black Prince afterwards married) inasmuch as no Historian takes the least notice, that King Edward the Third ever courted her as a Mistress.
We suppose our learned Selden points at her, when he calls the Lady from whom the Garter slipt, Titles of Ho|nor, p. 793. Countess of Kent and Salisbury; but about the time of the Foundation of the Order of the Garter, she in truth was neither: for albeit she was Daughter to Edmund of Woodstock Earl of Kent, and had been sometime the reputed Wife of William Mountagu, second Earl of Salisbury of that Family; yet then she could not properly be accounted Countess of Salisbury, because she was actually Wife to Sir Thomas Holland (one of the first Founders of that Order) and so Ex lib. in Os|sic. principal. Cantuar. vocat. Islip, f. 178. a. See Heylins Hist. of St. George, part 3. c. 2. sect. 7. Edit. 1633. where the Case is Re|ported. adjudged to be, by Pope Clement the Sixth, in a controversie depending before him, between Sir Thomas and the Earl: and for this reason not taken no|tice of either by Brooke or Vincent (in the title of Salisbury) to have been his Wife.
Nor was she yet (though afterwards) Countess of Kent, because her Brother Iohn Earl of Kent at the Institution of this Order, was alive, and died not till anno Escaet. de an. 26 E. 3 n 54. 26. E. 3.
But that there was a Countess of Salisbury, of whom King Edward the Third became greatly enamoured, is reported by Chronic. l. 1. c. 78. Sir Iohn Froissart, after this man|ner; That this King having relieved a Castle belonging to the Earl of Salisbury, in the North of England, wherein his Countess had been besieged by the Scots (the

Earl himself being at that time Prisoner in France) upon sight of her extraordi|nary beauty fell in love with her: but she so virtuously demeaned her self towards the King, during his short stay there, that he declined further sollicitation. How|beit some time after, the King out of desire to see her (saith the same Ibid. c. 90. Author) proclaimed a solemn Justs in London, whither this Countess, and many other La|dies, being invited, came.
Froissart names not the Castle, wherein this Countess lay, when the Scots be|sieged it, but only gives this note upon it, Ibid. c. 76. That the King gave the same Castle to her Husband for his good service past, when he first married her, being then but a Knight.
The name of the place being left thus by him in the dark, those who hitherto sought after it, have but roved at it with uncertain guesses. But upon more di|ligent search we have hit the mark, and find it was the Castle of Pat. . E. 3. p. 2. m. 24. Wark upon Tweed in the County of Northumberland, upon the Borders of England towards Scotland, which King Edward had so bestowed upon Sir William Mountague (af|terwards created Earl of Salisbury) for his life, together with the Mannor, Lands, and Tenements within the Liberty of the said Mannor.
This Castle being grown very ruinous, and the said Sir William undertaking the charge of the repair, (which hapned to be very great) the King thereupon Ibid. granted the same anew to him for life, by the service of one Knights Fee, the re|mainder after his death to his Son Iohn, and the Heirs of his body lawfully be|gotten, to hold by the foresaid service; and if he dyed without such issue, then to the right Heirs of Sir William for ever.
Though then it should be admitted, that this Countess of Salisbury was the Kings Mistress, yet must it be noted, that she was Wife to William Mountague, created Earl of Salisbury, Rotul. Cart. 11. E. 3. memb. 26. num. 54. anno 11. E. 3. Mother to William the before men|tioned second Earl, that her Christian name was Escaet. bun|del. anno 9. E. 3. n. 4. Katherine, not Alice, as Frois|sart, nor Ioane, as others call her, and Daughter to William Lord Granston, a Nobleman of Burgundy; and that she died Escaet. anno 28. E. 3. n. 39. anno 28. Ed. 3. and lies buried at Ex Gollect. Iac. Strange|man. Bysham Abbey in Berkeshire.
But that the whole story may appear, no otherwise than indeed it is, a Fable; we shall here insert the opinion of a late learned Writer, who hath taken no small pains to satisfie himself and the world in this particular.
Cosmography, l. 1. p. 287. Edit. 1652. This (saith Doctor Heylin) I take to be a vain and idle Romance, derogatory both to the Founder and the Order; first published by Polydor Virgil, a Stranger to the Affairs of England, and by him taken upon no better ground, than Et Fama vulgi talis. Pol. Virg. Angl. Hist. l. 19. p. 379. Fama vulgi, the tradition of the common people, too trifling a foundation to so great a building, common bruit being so infamous an Historian, that wise men neither re|port after it, nor give credit to any thing they receive from it. And yet hath it so fallen out, that many learned men, for want of reflection, have incautelously swallowed and run away with this vulgar error; whereupon it hath come by de|grees to the vogue it is now in.
Of the same spinning with the former, is another Tradition, and no less un|certain; Andr. du Chesne Hi|stoire generale d'Angleterre, d' Escosse,  d' Irlande. p. 670. That the Queen being departed from King Edward's presence to her own Lodgings, he following her soon after, hapned to espy a Blue Garter lying on the ground (thought to have slipt from her Leg as she went along) whilst some of his Attendants passed by it, as disdaining to stoop at such a trifle; but he knowing the Owner, commanded it to be taken up and given to him, at the re|ceipt whereof, he said, Andr. du Chesne Hi|stoire generale d'Angleterre, d'Escosse,  d'Irlande. p. 670. You make but small account of this Garter, but within few Months, I will cause the best of you all to reverence the like.
And some think that the Motto of the Garter was the Ibidem. Queens answer; when the King asked her, what men would conjecture of her, upon losing her Garter in such a manner.
But both these Relations are remote from truth, and of little credit; never|theless, they give us opportunity to note here, That it hath thus fared with other Orders of Soveraign Foundation; and an Amorous instead of Honorable Ac|count of their Institution, hath by some been untruly rendred.
For instance, that of the Annunciade, Instituted some few years after this of

the ennobled Garter; concerning which, though Andrew Favin hath given it an amorous original, yet have we (in the Sect. 1. pa. 10.  109. third Chapter) from better authori|ties, cleared his mistaken account thereof.
Nor hath it hapned otherwise with the Order of the Golden Fleece, even that also hath met with the same fate; and the Institution reported to have risen from an effeminate ground: for it is said, that its Favin, in le Theatre d' Hon|neur, l. 4. c. 5. Founder entring one morning into the Chamber of a most beautiful Lady of Bruges (generally esteemed his Mistress) found upon her Toilet, or Toilette, call|ed also Tavay|oile, is a large Napkin, or cloth, usually laid over Wo|mens dresses, and other Clothes after they are spred on a Table. Toilet, a Fleece of low Country Wooll; whence some of his Followers taking occasion of sport, as at a thing unusually seen in a Ladies Chamber, he (as is reported of King Edward the Third, upon such another oc|casion) vowed that such as made it the subject of their derision, should never be honored with a Collar of the Order thereof, which he intended to establish, to express the love he bore that Lady.
There is a third opinion, grounded on a Relation having an aspect to time before King Edward the Third's Institution, which is reported of King Lib. N. p. 13. in prooemio. Richard the First, and is this; that while his Forces were employed against Cyprus and Acon, and extreamly tired out with the tediousness of the Siege, He, by the as|sistance and mediation of St. George (as imagined) was inspired with fresh courage, and bethought himself of a new device, which was, to tye about the legs of a chosen number of Knights, a Leathern Thong or Garter (for such had he then at hand) whereby being put in mind of the future glory that should accrue to them, with assu|rance of worthy rewards if they overcame, they might be ronzed up to the behaving themselves gallantly and stoutly in the Wars, much after the manner of the ancient Romans, among whom were various Crowns, with which for several causes, Soldi|ers were adorned; to the end that by those encouragements, all sluggishness being sha|ken off, the virtue and fortitude of their minds might spring up and appear more re|solute and vigorous.
It further continues in the same Preface, That after a long interval of time, and divers Victories obtained by him, the said King returning into his Country, deter|mined with himself, to institute and setle this most noble Order of St. George, on whose patronage the English so much relied.
But admit this (though we are to note, it is only a Relation put down in the Preface of the Black Book, but not any part of the Annals of the Order, nor can it plead higher antiquity than the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, because writ|ten a little after the time he reformed and explained the Statutes of the Garter) all this we say admitted, and that King Richard the First did make use of this devise in the Holy Land, as a signal or distinction of a party going out upon some warlike exploit: yet that he thence took occasion to frame a distinct Order of Knighthood afterwards, there is not the least mention, nor any ground to ima|gine. So that all the advantage can be made of it is, that (as Hist. of St. George, part 3. c. 1. sect. 6. Doctor Heylin affirms) we may warrantably be perswaded, this occasion much heightned the re|putation of that Saint among the English, by which means in process of time, the most heroick Order of the Garter came to be dedicated to him; and not that it any way contributed to the Institution of it.


SECT. II. The true Cause asserted.
THus far of the conjectures of others, concerning the Institution of this most noble Order; now come we to unfold the true occasion thereof.
We affirm then, that King Edward the Third had no reflection, either upon a Ladies Garter, or King Richard's Leathern Thong, when he first designed the Institution, but that it did proceed from a much more noble cause; to wit,

that this King being a person of a most absolute and accomplisht virtue, gave himself up to a prudent management of Military Affairs; and being ingaged in War for the recovery of his right to the Kingdom of France, in the prosecution of which enterprise, he had great use of the stoutest and most famous Martia|lists of that Age, did thereupon first design (as being invited thereto by its an|cient same) the restauration of King Arthur's Round Table, which he exhibited with magnificent Hastiludes and general Justs, to invite hither the gallant and active spirits from abroad: and upon discovery of their courage and ability in the exercise of Arms, to draw them to his party, and oblige them to himself.
And conceiving no place more fit than Tho. Walsingh. sub. anno 1344. apud Lond. 1579. Windesor, upon Pat. 17. E. 3. p. 2. m. 2. Newyears-day, anno 1344. he issued out his Royal Letters of Protection for the safe coming and return of Forreign Knights, their Servants and what belonged to them, that were desirous to try their valour at the solemn Justs, by him appointed to be held there, on Pat. 17. E. 3. p. 2. m. 2. Munday after the Feast of St. Hillary next following (which that year happened on the 19. of Ianuary) and these Letters of safe conduct conti|nued in force until the Pat. 17. E. 3. p. 2. m. 2. Octaves of the Purification of our blessed Lady ensuing, being in the 18. year of his Reign.
At the time appointed, he provided a great Ex vet. MS. Chro|nic. penes Ra|nul. Pigott Ar. Supper to begin the Solemnity, and then Ordained, that this Festival should be annually held there at Ex vet. MS. Chro|nic. penes Ra|nul. Pigott Ar. Whitson|tide; and immediately after these first Martial Exercises were over (to the end better accommodation might be provided for the Knights that should afterwards come thither) he caused to be impress Pat. 18. E. 3. p. 1. m. 39. Dorso  p. 2. m. 39. Carpenters, Masons, and Carriages, for erecting a particular building in the Castle, and therein placed a Table of Walsingh. ut supra. two hundred foot diameter, where the Knights should have their entertainment of diet at his expence of Walsingh. ut supra. 100 l. a week, to which building he gave the name of the Round Table. By this means he associated to himself, from most parts beyond Seas, the prime spirits for martial valour, and gain'd the opportunity of ingag|ing them on his side in the ensuing War.
And, as at these solemn conventions, and great assemblies, the days were spent in exercising all kind of noble feats of Arms, Justs, and Turnaments; so were a great part of the nights consumed in publick Balls, and dancing with the La|dies, which attended the Queen thither; and perhaps it was hence conjectur'd, that at some of these Balls, the Queen's Gartr, or the Garter of Katherine Coun|tess of Salisbury might slip off, and that King Edward's stooping to take it up, might beget smiles in the by-standers; and afterwards, when the King had mo|delled his intended Order, a Garter appearing for its chief Ensign, might add something to the conjecture: But that any such accident became the princi|pal cause of erecting the Order, and that the Founder's particular design therein was to advance the honor of that Garter so accidentally taken up, is only a groundless imagination, and hath been already disproved.
And though King Edward so far advanced the honor of a Garter, as that the Order did derive its Pol. Virg. Angl. Hist. l. 19. p. 378. title and denomination from it; yet is it most evident, that he founded this most famous Order, not to give reputation to or perpetuate an esseminate occasion, but Ut militarem virtutem ho|noribus, prae|miis at splen|dore decora|ret. Cambden in Attrebat. p. 207. to adorn Martial Virtue, with Honors, Rewards, and Splendor: to Heyl. Cos|mogr. l. 1. p. 287. increase Virtue and Valour in the hearts of his Nobility: or as An|drew du Chesne saith, Ed. 3. desi|reux d' hono|rer la Vertu militarie de quel faveur  recompence glorieux, c. Hist. general. D angleterre, c. p. 670. to honor military Virtue with some glorious favours and re|wards; that so true Nobility (as is noted in the Preface to the Black Book of the Order) after long and hazardous adventures, should not enviously be deprived of that honor which it hath really deserved; and that active and hardy Youth might not want a spur, in the profession of Virtue, which is to be esteemed glorious and eternal.
Upon these grounds no doubt does our learned Selden affirm, that Tit. Hon. p. 794. this Order was raised chiefly out of the Round Table of that time (the Knights thereof being the flower of that Age) as out of a Seminary.
It is further observable, from the current of the Histories of those times, that the Tho. Walsingh. loco citato. Sam. Daniell. History f. 233. Speed's Chron. p. 587. French King, Philip de Valoys, in emulation of these martial associations at Windesor, practised the like at his Court in France, for he set up a Round Table, and invited the Knights and valiant men of Arms out of Italy and Almaine thi|ther, lest they should repair to our King Edward the Third. Which meeting

with success, proved a Countermine to King Edward's main design, who there|by finding, that his entertainment of Stranger Knights, upon the account of re|viving King Arthur's Round Table, was too general, nor did sufficiently oblige them to him, but being free and at liberty, did after their departure take what side they pleased in the following Wars; he at length resolved upon a design, more particular and select, and such as might oblige and tie those whom he thought fit to make his Associates, in a firm Bond of Friendship and Honor.
And having given forth his Cambd. in Attreb. p. 207. own Garter for the signal of a Battel that sped fortunately, (which with Hist. Generale d' Angleterre, c. p. 670. du Chesne we conceive to be that of Crescy, fought almost three years after his seting up the Round Table at Windesor; rather than with the Author of the Tom. 2. p. 1407. Edit. Paris. 1661. Nouveau Theatre de Monde, that of Poicters, which hap|ned above seven years after the Foundation of the Order, and whereat King Ed|ward was not present) the Victory (we say) being happily gained, he thence took occasion to Institute this Order, and gave the Garter (assumed by him for the Symbol of Vnity and Society) preheminence among the Ensigns of it, whence that select number, whom he incorporated into a Fraternity, are frequently stiled Equites Aureae Periscelidis, and vulgarly, Knights of the Garter.
By this Symbol he design'd to Heylin's Cos|mogr. loco su|pra cit. bind the Knights or Fellows of it, severally unto one another, and all of them joyntly to Himself, as Soveraign of the Order. And accordingly (saith an industrious Historian) this did not only serve as a Speed. Chron. p. 588. vehe|ment incentive to Honor and martial Virtue, but also a golden Bond of unity and internal society: it being most just, that those whom equal virtue and fortitude of mind, had joined together, no Fortune should separate or estrange, by occa|sion of any accident or difference.
Whereunto may be added this further consideration; how neerly the Princely Garter (which ennobleth the Order) as it is framed with a Buckle to fasten it close to the Leg, doth resemble the Cambd. in Attrebat. p. 208. Bond of most inward Society; and can be called nothing more aptly, than a Cambd. in Attrebat. p. 208. Badge of Vnity and Concord.
By this Garter Lib. N. in proaemio. the Knights-Companions are admonished, religiously, sincerely, friendly, faithfully, and dextrously, to go through whatsoever they undertake, but not to undertake or attempt any thing, contrary to the Oath, and Statutes of the Order, neither to frustrate the rights of peace and friendship, vilisie the Law of Arms, or to proceed in any thing further than Faith or Compact, or the Bond of Friendship will admit.
And much to this purpose, they who will take the pains to read the Edit. Colon. Agripp. anno 1631. Catechismus Ordinis Equitum Pericelidis Anglicanae, will find the Author [F. Mondonus] Sym|bolically to descant upon the chief Ensigns of the Order.
Moreover Notis Guid. Panciroll. de Rebus deper|dit. p. 170. Salmuthus, out of Stephanus Frocatulus notes, that in the bind|ing of the Leg with this enobled Ensign, there was given this honorable Ca|veat and Exhortation; That the Knights should not cowardly (by running away from Battel) betray the valour and renown which is ingrafted in Constancy and Magnanimity.
Nay, so exactly did the Founder sute the whole Habit unto the signification of this Princely Ensign, that he Ordained His, and the Knight-Companions Robes and Ornaments to be all alike, both for materials and fashion; thereby inti|mating, Lib. N. p. 16. in pro|aemio. That they ought to conserve brotherly love among themselves. And lest at any time there should fall out the least breach of Amity, the great Collar of the Order (ordained to be of equal weight, and composed of a like number of small Links and Knots) was so made, in Lib. N. p. 16. in pro|aemio. witness of the like Bond of Faith, Peace, and Amity, strictly to be observed among them. In fine, all things relating to the Or|der, were so designed and appointed, Ibid. p. 1. Froissart's Chron. l. 1. c. 101. That every one might plainly perceive, how much these things tended to the maintaining of Amity and Concord.
In further reference to the Institution and perpetual establishment of this Or|der, the foresaid King, Ibid. p. 1. Froissart's Chron. l. 1. c. 101. calling together the Earls, Barons, and principal Knights of his Kingdom, freely and obligingly declared his mind to them, concerning this Affair: To which Ibid. all of them being well inclined, entertained the motion with equal joy and applause; considering it would prove a very great advancement to Piety, Nobility, and Virtue, and likewise an excellent expedient for the uniting,

not only his Natives one with another, but all Forreigners with them in the Bonds of Amity and Peace.
And 'tis very improbable, that this prudent Founder should summon his Nobles, solemnly to consult about so high and noble an advancement of an Order, had it taken its first rise from so slight an occasion, as the accidental dropping of a Gar|ter from a Ladies Leg. On the contrary it is manifest from Froissart, that the declaration which the King made to them of his intention and design (when they were assembled) appeared Loco cit. a matter very honorable, and (as hath been alledged) such as contributed to the improvement of Love and Amity among themselves; which we see this Historian assigns to be the only cause, why they joyfully consented to his proposal.
Now to make the Bond and Tye of Love and Friendship yet more close and obliging, the King caused those who were (or should be) of the Order, to be called Lib. N. p. 15. Fellows, Associates, Colleagues, Brethren, and Knights-Companions, and the Order it self Lib. N. p. 15. a Society, Fellowship, Colledge of Knights, and Knight-Companionship; and their Lib. N. p. 15. Habit and Ornaments to be all alike, as to Fashion and Materials: and to no other end, but to represent how they ought to be Lib. N. p. 15. united in all chances of Fortune, Copartners both in Peace and War, assistant to one another in all serious and dangerous transactions, and through the whole course of their lives, faithful and friendly one towards another.
But besides these Authorities, we have met with some other testimonies, much to the same effect; namely, that this most noble Order of the Garter was first instituted, toCaii Antiq. l. 2. c. 217. fortifie the confidence of the King, the Kingdom, and Martial Virtue: that is to say, to strengthen the faith of the subjects towards them, and for their greater security.
The French Orator, who made the Harangue at the investiture of Henry Prince of Orange, seems to account the denomination of this Order, by the stile of the Garter, to be very significant, and only for this reason; MS. in Officio Armor. [L. 18.] circa medium. because it carries with it a Bond or Tye of Fellowship, and a Symbol of Amity and Friendship between Princes, being Companions of the same Order.
In the last place, if we look back upon the Statutes of Institution, as also those that have succeeded, we shall find the Injunctions wholly Military, and so are the words of Admonition, appointed to be pronounced, at the putting on the Ensigns of the Order: and the ground of the Institution (in the Preamble to King Henry the Eighth's Exemplar) is said to be, Article 1. For the honor of God, and exaltation of the Catholick Faith, joined both with Piety and Charity; in establish|ing a Art. 13. Colledge of religious men, to pray for the prosperity of the Soveraign of the Order, and the Knights-Companions, and to perform other holy duties; as also Art. 16. Ordaining sustentation for a company of Alms-Knights, who have not otherwise wherewith to live. But not one word relating to any obligation or ingagement, on behalf of the Feminine Sex.
And whereas King Edward the Third had set on foot a Title to the Kingdom of France, and in right thereof assumed its Arms; he from the Ex Collect. praef. Will. le Neve. Colour of them, caused the Garter of the Order to be made Blue, and the circumscription Gold. And it may, without any straining, be inferr'd from the Motto [honi soit qui mal y pense] Ex Collect. praef. Will. le Neve. that he retorted shame and defiance upon him, that should dare to think ill of so just an enterprise, as he had undertaken for the reco|very of his lawful right to that Crown; and that the magnanimity of those Knights, whom he had chosen into this Order was such, as would inable them to maintain that Quarrel, against all who durst think ill of it. Consonant to this is the conjecture of Hist Anglic. Escles. p. 507. Harpsfield, that this Apothegme was designed to put the Knights-Companions in mind, not to admit any thing in the actions of their lives, or among their thoughts, unbeseeming themselves and their honor.
And here we have a sitting opportunity to inform our Reader, that the Age we speak of did exceedingly abound with Impreses Motto's, and Devises, of which the Rolls of the great Wardrobe will afford variety; and particularly that King Edward the Third (upon almost every occasion) was much inclined thereto, so far, as that his Apparel, Plate, Beds, Houshold-furniture, shields, even the very Harness of his

Horses, and the like, were not without them; many of which, for any man now to descant upon, would be an endless and fruitless attempt, seeing the occasion of their invention, and the circumstances thereupon depending, are irreco|verably lost.
Add to which, that others by reason of their brevity, seem insignificant, in re|gard it is to be imagined, that something was purposely omitted, and left to be understood, which cannot now be rightly supplied, so as to arrive at the mind of the Inventor. Of this number may well be this Motto, Rotul. Libe rat. Draper. Offic. mag. Gardrob. ann. 21.  12. E. 3. membr. 11. pe|nes Rememo|rat. Regis. It is as it is, being embroidered upon a Dublet, made for the King of white Linen Cloth, having about the sleeves and skirt a border of green Cloth, wrought over with golden Clouds and Vines.
But there are others, which seem more easie to be understood, as is that daring and inviting Motto of this King, wrought upon his Surcoat and Shield, pro|vided to be used at a Turnament
Ibidem. Hay bay the wythe Swan,
By Gods Soul I am thy man.
We further observe, that although David Brus King of Scotland was a Prisoner in the Tower of London, yet such was the nobleness of this King, that he sometimes permitted him the use and exercise of Arms; for against a Ibid. Hastilude kept at Windesor, he had a Ibid. Harness made of Blue Velvet (at King Edward's charge) whereon was embroidered a Pale of Red Velvet, and beneath a White Rose. And that it was the custom then to have the Arms of a Knight, set upon his Horse-Harness, to distinguish him from others, appears by those eight Harnesses, which the King gave (and were among the preparations made for the Hastilude ap|pointed at Canterbury, anno 22. Ed. 3.) of Indian Silk, beaten with the Arms of Sir Stephen Cosyngton Knight, of the Prince, of the Earls of Lancaster, and Suf|folk, of Sir Iohn Grey, Sir Iohn de Beauchamp, Sir Robert Maule, Sir Iohn Chan|dos, and Sir Roger de Beauchamp: four of these Martialists being shortly after chosen among the first Knights-Companions of this most Noble Order of the Garter.


SECT. III. The Time when the Order was Instituted.
IN what year of the Reign of King Edward the Third, the Order of the Gar|ter received Institution, cannot certainly be deduced from our Historians, for the difference among them in this point is very wide.
Our most learned Selden would have it, to be in the Tules of Hon, p. 793. 18. year of the Founder's Reign, and relies chiefly upon the authority of L. 1. c. 100. Sir Iohn Froissart, who lived neer that time (for he wrote his History in the Reign of King Richard the Second) But since Mr. Selden does acknowledge him guilty of a mistake in the number of the first Knights-Companions (and a gross one in|deed it is) by making them no fewer than forty; why might he not likewise erre in this point, namely the Time? and as unwarily confound the year of its Ere|ction, with that wherein the Founder renewed the Order of the Round Table? Windesor being the place for holding the grand celebration of both.
For should we admit, that during some part of the great Solemnity held in this Kings 18. year, the accident of the Ladies Garter slipping off happen'd; and that the King taking it up declared, he would make it highly renowned: what other inference can be made, but that he had then only an intention or resolu|tion at most, to do somewhat afterwards, not that there was an Erection or Order actually Instituted at that time.
Besides, if the King had been desirous to fall upon the establishment of the Order, immediately upon the said accident, yet may it well be supposed, that the jollity of the season, and remaining part of the Feast, was too busie a time to admit of much consultation tending thereunto; at least serious enough to mould a design, so compleat and substantial, as it appears to have been, even at first; whether we consider the substance of the Statutes of Institution, or variety of the matter, and so fully, judiciously, and warily contrived, as little of that subject could be found worth the adding in many years after.
To these, if we join the authority of Fabian, he is plain, Chronic. f. 219. that though the King design'd the Institution at the end of the Festival (which he placeth between Can|dlemas and Lent in the 19. not 18. year of this King) yet was it not then (saith he) but afterwards established by him.
As to the testimony given by the Apud Selden, p. 794. Author of Les grandes Chroniques de Bri|taigne, c. who likewise alledgeth, that the Institution of the Order, was in the 18. year of the King: We suppose his best authority was also taken from Frois|sart, supposing him (as Mr. Selden doth) the more to be relied upon, because he wrote so near that time.
But 'tis a fault too frequent among Historians, to run away with what they find spoken by those from whom they collect (especially if such have gained any good opinion or credit in the world) though perhaps erroneous; without making a sufficient enquiry, either into the probability or truth of the thing. And for an instance of some unwariness in collecting, we may trace the now mentioned Author in another passage, relating to this matter, where he tells us it was the day of Ibid. St. Gregory (instead of St. George) whereon the Grand Feast of the Order was ordained to be solemnized.
We now see that Froissart, and with him Mr. Selden, place the beginning of this Order to the 18. year of King Edward's Reign; with whom agrees Thomas Cooper in his Third part fol. 240. b. Edit. Lond. 1560. Epitomy of Chronicles. And yet the same Mr. Selden, in Notes upon Polialb. Song 15. another place, notes, that it took beginning in the 24. year of the said King, and our industrious Stow (with whom Angl. Reg. Chron. p. 44. Lilly, Chron. p. 588. Speed, and Hon. Mil.  Civil. p. 69. Segar agree) tells us, that the first Feast of the Order was celebrated in the year of our Lord 1350. which an|swers to the said four and twentieth year of King Edward the Third.
But Angl. Histor. l. 19. p. 378. Polydore Virgile in the series of his History, placeth it after Henry Earl of Derby was created Duke of Lancaster, and Ralph Lord Stafford, Earl of Stafford, which hapned in Pat. 25. E. 3. par. 1. m. 18. Cart. de ann. 25. E. 3. n. 31. March, anno 25. E. 3.
Thus it appears, that our Historians took little heed to transmit the true time of so famous an Institution to posterity (and their neglect perhaps was the cause why our judicious Cambden became silent herein) yet how this Chronological note slipt all their Pens, is much to be wondred at: We must therefore have recourse to some other proofs, whence our Reader may receive better satisfaction.
Admitting then, that the erecting this Order entered into King Edward's thoughts, at some of those grand Assemblies of the Round Table, held after the French King had set up the like, yet was it not brought to any maturity, till af|ter his glorious Triumphs over the French and Scots, in the Battels of Crescy and Nevils Cross (in which both the French and Scotch Armies were utterly van|quished, and David King of Scots taken Prisoner) and until King Edward had Calais surrendred to him, as will now be manifest.
Among the Rolls of the great Wardrobe, we have met with one which con|tains the Accounts of all the Kings Liveries, from Michaelmas, anno 21. E. 3. to the 31. of Ianuary in the 23. year of the same King: In this Roll are divers things mentioned to be adorned with Garters, which were provided against the first grand Feast of St. George, and among the rest are the Robes for the Sove|raign of the Order; namely his Ex Rot. Compot. Io. Coke Cler. mag. Gardrob. penes Rememor. Re|gis. m. 8. Mantle, Surcoat, and Hood, as also a Ex Rot. Compot. Io. Coke Cler. mag. Gardrob. penes Rememor. Re|gis. m. 8. Bed of Blue Taffaty adorned with embroidered Garters, containing the Motto, Honi soit qui mal y pense. There were then likewise made for the Soveraign m. 10. three Harnesses, whereof two were of White Velvet, wrought over with Garters de blu  diaspriz, per totum compedinem cum Woodhouses, and the third de Velvetto Ynde, cont. Lappekin quisseux,  caligas, wrought over likewise with Garters.
Had this Roll been divided into years, or had there been other notes thereup|on, to have distinguished whether these particulars were made and provided at the beginning of his 22. year against the Feast-day of St. George ensuing, or else towards the later end of that year, against the same Feast-day anno 23. E. 3. we might have been thereby guided with more certainty, as to the right and true year of the Institution.
However, we may thence safely conclude, that this Order was not founded in the 18. year of King Edward the Third, according to Froissart, and his Follow|ers; because we here find, that the Soveraign's Robes were not made until the 22. year of his Reign at the soonest, perhaps not till the beginning of the 23.
But to put all out of further doubt, the Edwardus tertius Rex Angliae, anno reg. ni sui post Conquestum 23. Ordinavit c. Founder's Statutes fix the time of Institution to his 23. year; so do the Edoard apres la conquest D' angleterre l' an de son reigne vingt  trois Ordonne  Estably, c. Statutes of King Henry the Fifth, and the Edwardus tertius, anno regni sui 23. cum de Gallis atque Scotis plus semel illustrissime triumphasset, c. p. 14. in prooemio. Preface to the Black Book; the same also is attest|ed by Ad Cygn. Cant. verbo Windelesora. Leland, and affirmed by Catalog. of Honor, f. 88. Mills, and History of St. George part 3. c. 2. Sect. 5. Doctor Heylin.
To conclude, when this famous King had resolved upon the day and place for keeping the first grand Feast of this most noble Order, which he designed to exhibit with as much glory as could be imagined, Lib. N. p: 20. vide etiam Froissart. Chron. l. 1. c. 100.  102. He sent his Heralds in|to Germany, France, Scotland, Burgundy, Hainault, Flan|ders, and Brabant, to invite all Knights and Esquires who were willing to meet at that grand Solemnity (with assurance to every one of safe conduct and Li|berty for fifteen days, both before and after the same) to shew their Military Prowess and Valour, in all kind of Martial Feats, and other Publick Exer|cises, there to be held, proper to the place and occasion.
According to which Invitation, there came over at the appointed time, sun|dry Knights and other brave Martialisis, out of desire to signalize their va|lour; and what made the Solemnity more glorious, King Edward's Queen, at|tended with Ibid. three hundred of the fairest Ladies, adorned with all imaginable gallantry were there likewise present.


SECT. IV. Of the Patrons of the Order.
KIng Edward the Third, upon his Instituting this Princely Colledge, of a select number of Knights, did (according to the custom and opinion of that Age) make choice of several Patrons to this his most noble Order; under whose protection Himself and all the Knights-Companions, together with the Af|fairs of the Order, might be defended, conserved, and governed.
The first and chiefest Patron that he elected for this end, was the Lib. N. p. 24. in proaemio. holy Tri|nity, which, though indeed it be the Creator and Governor of all things, yet ne|vertheless was in a more especial manner invocated to the aid and assistance of this Order.
Nor was it in those times accounted any derogation to God, or his divine worship, but rather on the contrary a great addition thereunto, that what he is alone the giver of, should be desired and implored, by their means, through whom he is well pleased to be sought unto: Upon which consideration this re|ligious and pious King, being singularly affected to the Ibid. blessed Virgin Mary, though she was accounted the general Mediatrix and Protectress to all men and upon all occasions, yet did he more peculiarly intitle her to the Patronage of this most noble Order.
And no less was King Edward the Fourth in a special manner devoted towards

the same blessed Virgin; insomuch as he thought it necessary, that some additio|nal Ceremonies within the Order, should be observed by Himself and the Knights-Companions to her peculiar honor: and thereupon Ordained, Ibid. p. 37. That on her five Solemnities, the Knights-Companions should annually (as was wont and accustom|ed, at the yearly Feast of St. George) wear the peculiar Habit of the Order, as long as Divine Service was celebrating (unless they had sufficient cause of excuse) bear|ing on the right shoulder of their Robes, a golden figure of the Virgin Mary, and further, that they should go in the same manner and Habit upon all the Sundays throughout the year: and lastly, that on the same days for ever, they should say five Pater Nosters, with as many Ave Maria's.
Thirdly, Ibid. p. 25. Saint George of Cappadocia, a most choice Champion of Christ, and famous Martyr, was also chosen one of the Patrons to this Order; and that Ibid. p. 25. not so much because in his life, he was a Candidate of the Christian Faith, a real Professor, and a sincere Defendor thereof, or for that he was an armed Soldier or Knight of Christ; but much more because in those Wars, which were waged by Christians, against the Infidels, he by several appearances shewed his presence, as a most certain encourager and assistant to the Christians; the relations of some of which Visions may be seen at large Heylins Hist. of St. George, part 2. c. 7. sect. 4.  5.  part 3. c. 1. sect. 6. elsewhere.
There is no need we should in this Work engage at all, in asserting the History of Saint George, against those who will neither allow him either a place in Hea|ven, or a being in the Church; since that is both learnedly and judiciously main|tained to our hand, out of the venerable Records of Antiquity and Church-Hi|story, by the elaborate endeavours of the late reverend Divine, Dr. Peter Heylin, in a particular Hist. of St. George asserted c. Printed 1633. Tract.
The like pains we are eased of, in avouching and assuring him to be the special Patron, Protector, Defendor, and Advocate of this Realm of England, and mani|festing in what veneration he hath been held abroad, especially among the Ea|stern Churches; by the Pen of our most learned Titles of Ho|nor, p. 811. Selden. To whose testimo|nies we shall only add, that this Title of Beatus Georgius invictissimus Christi Athleta, cujus nomen  patrocinia Gens Anglicana veluti Patroni sui singularis, in expeditione presertim Militari invocat  implorat, instinctu divino ut credimus exci|tati. Pat. de anno 25. E. 3. p. 2. m. 12. Patron to our Na|tion is given to St. George by the Founder of this most noble Order, in a Patent granted to the Deans and Canons of the Chappels of St. Stephen at Westminster, and St. George at Windesor, which dischargeth them from payment of Tenths (for the Churches appropriate to those Chappels) that were or should be given by the Clergie to Him and his Successors: As also by The blessed Martyr St. George, Patron of the right noble Realm of England. King Henry the Eighth, in the Preamble of his Statutes: Nay further, that he was likewise called our Nati|ons Patron, in relation to the Sanctus Georgius Martyr, qui totius Militiae Anglicanae Spiritualis est Patronus. Regist. MS. Arundel. Arch. Cant. par. 1. fol. 53. art. 37. Spiritual Militia of this Kingdom.
And though in general he is stiled, the Heylins Hist. of St. George, part 2. c. 7. Sect. 1. Principal Patron of the Affairs of Christendom, and a Tutelar Guardian of mi|litary men; yet among all Christians the English did the best, and in England the Founder of this most noble Order, in making particular choice of such a Ordo est divo Georgio ut Bellatorum praesidi dicatus. Pol. Virg. Angl. Hist. l. 19. p. 378. Captain and Patron, under whose conduct to fight, to wit, a Captain so approved and tryed by such high testimonies as he had given. In particular relation to whom, the Knights-Companions had bestowed on them, the title of Equites Geor|giani, St. George's Knights; and the Order it self came to be stiled, Ordo divi Sancti Georgii, the Order of St. George.
It is worthy of observation that du Chesne (a French Writer) acknowledges, Histire ge|nerale d' An|gletere, c. p. 670. it was by the special Invocation of St. George, that King Edward the Third gained the battel of Crescy, which afterward calling to mind, he founded (saith he) to his honor, a Chappel within the Castle of Windesor. But if we may go higher, and credit our Cap. 72. Harding, it seems King Arthur paid St. George particular honors, for he advanced his Picture in one of his Banners: and this was about 200 years after his Martyrdom, and very early for a Country so remote from Capadocia, to have him in so great estimation.
Lastly, The Founder added to these a fourth Patron, whose Name himself bore,

namely, Lib. N. p. 26. Saint Edward the Confessor, sometime King of England, and his Pre|decessor, by which choice the Patronage of the Order belongs also to him. And we find he was wont to be invocated by this noble Founder (as well as Saint George) at such time as he found himself in any great streight; of which a memorable instance is recorded by Hist. Angl. p. 159. Thomas Walsingham, who reports that at a Skirmish neer Calice, anno Dom. 1349. King Edward in great heat of anger and grief, drew out his Sword, and most passionately cried out, Ha Saint Edward, Ha Saint George, which his Soldiers hearing, ran presently unto him, and rushing vio|lently upon the Enemy, put many of them to the Sword.
But in further declaration of electing all these for Patrons to the Order, we find them ranked together, in the In honorem omnipotentis Dei,  suae Genetricis Mariae virginis Gloriosae, Sancto|rum Georgii Martyris  Edwardi Confes|soris nostris Regiis samptibus focimus, c Pat. 22. E. 3. par. 2. m. 6. Preamble of the Char|ter of Foundation of Windesor Colledge, granted by King Edward the Third; though in the Preamble to his Statutes of the Order, and to King Henry the Fifth's Sta|tutes, Saint Edward the Confessor is omitted; nevertheless, in the Preamble to Henry the Eighth's Statutes, he is there remembred with the rest.


SECT. V. The Honor and Reputation thereof.
BEfore we leave this Chapter, we shall note some few things touching the Ho|nor and Reputation of this most noble Order; and that, either as comparing it with other Orders of Soveraign Foundation, or else in relation to it self.
First then, let what our learned Selden affirms be observed, viz. That this Order of the Garter hath Notes upon Polyalb. Song. 15. precedency of antiquity, before the eldest rank of honor of that kind any where established.
Secondly, The Statutes of Foundation were so judiciously devised and con|trived; and framed upon such solid grounds of Honor and Nobleness, that they afterwards became a Precedent to other Orders, particularly those two of the Golden Fleece, and of Monsieur Saint Michael; as may be readily seen, by any that will take the pains to compare them.
Thirdly, It hath begot no small honor to the Order, that the number of the first Knights-Companions, were never yet increased, but as there were five and twenty of them elected at the Institution, they, with the Soveraign of the Order, made up that E. 3. H. 5. St. Art. 3. Praef. to H. 8. Stat. Pol. Virg. Angl. Hist. l. 19. p. 378. Number, which at no time hitherto hath been exceeded, ut pre|tium faciat raritas, saith Hist. St. George, part 3. c. 2. sect. 5. Heylin, lest being else communicated to many, it might at last become despicable. For it is manifest enough, that an invasion in this particular, hath like an undiscerned Rock, split several other Military Orders into contempt and ruine: nothing so much abasing the worth of Glory and Ho|nor (which are to be desired by all, yet granted to few) than when made common, and given indifferently without choice and merit, to persons of mean condition: as may be sufficiently instanced in the Order of the Andr. Fa|vin en le Theatre d' Hon|neur. l. 1. c. 5. Star in France, un|der the Reign of Charles the Seventh, and the now declining Order of Andr. Fa|vin en le Theatre d' Hon|neur. l. 1. c. 5. St. Michael.
Fourthly, It hath been honored with the Companion|ship of divers Rex instituit Garterium Ordinem, cui tantus deinde accessit honor, ut maximos quos Reges, non paeniterit in id venire Col|legium. Polyd. Virg. Angl. Hist. loco supra cit. Emperors, Kings, and Soveraign Princes of Christendom, who reputed it among their greatest honors, to be chosen and admitted thereinto; insomuch as some of them have with impatience courted the honor of Election. For we find remaining upon this Registry of Honor, eight Em|perors of Germany, three Kings of Spain, five French Kings, two Kings of Scot|land, five Kings of Denmark, five Kings of Portugal, two Kings of Sweden, one King of Poland, one King of Aragon, two Kings of Naples, besides sundry

Dukes and other Free Princes, as one Duke of Gelderland, one Duke of Holland, two Dukes of Burgundy, two Dukes of Brunswick, one Duke of Milan, two Dukes of Vrbin, one Duke of Ferrara, one Duke of Savoy, two Dukes of Holstien, one Duke of Saxony, and one Duke of Wertemberg, seven Counts Palatines of the Rhyne, four Princes of Orange, and one Marquess of Brandenburgh.
Fifthly, It entitles those Knights and Noblemen, whose virtue hath raised them to this degree of honor, to be Companions and Fellows with Emperors and Kings; a Prerogative of an high nature, and a reward for greatest merits.
In the last place, we shall close up all with the Elogie given to this most noble Order, by our learned Selden; Notes upon Polyalb. Song 15. That it exceeds in Majesty, Honor, and Fame, all Chivalrous Orders in the world.



CHAP. VI.
THE Statutes and Annals OF THE Order.

SECT. I. Of the Statutes of Institution.
AMong Societies in general, it hath been found expedient, to plant Rules for them to walk by: Order and Regularity being not only the beauty and Symmetry of Government, but the parent of that Being, which greatly contributes to their perpetuity: Besides, Sta|tutes and Rules, are as well the Bounds to determine, as Bonds to unite Fellowships and Societies together; and if either through negligence fall into disuse, or be unadvisedly broken, they readily open a way to dissolution and ruine.
Upon such like considerations therefore, that most famous, happy, and victo|rious Prince, King Edward the Third (after he had advisedly determined the Erection of this most noble and renowned Order of the Garter) did most pru|dently Lib. N. p. 214. devise and institute several laudable Statutes and Ordinances, to be duly

observed and kept within the said Order; which being collected into one Body, are called the Statutes of Institution.
The original of these was Ordained to be safely kept within the Ed. 3. Stat. Art. 27. Treasury of the Colledge of Windesor, but hath long since wholly perished, yet there is a Transcript of them recorded in the Reign of King Henry the Fifth, at the begin|ning of the old Book, called Registrum Ordinis Chartaceum; a Copy whereof we have placed first in rank of the Infections and Autographs in the Appendix: ne|vertheless, bearing the marks of the Transcribers negligence or inadvertency, as will appear in several places, by the words we have supplied in the margent, warranted by two ancient Exemplars of this Body of Statutes.
The first of which, written in an ancient hand, I had communicated to me by the favour of the late Lord Hatton, that noble Patron of all good learning and learned men. But 'tis evident these were not the Original Statutes, from a part of the 10. Article, where speaking of the penalty for a Knight's not coming to Chapter on the Eve of the Grand Feast, at the assigned hour, it is there added, Concerning which there is a Decree extant. So also in the 12. Article relating to the penalty, where a Knight-Companion is found without his Garter; the pay|ment whereof is there appointed to be made after the same manner, as those who sailing in like sort have been used to pay. And lastly, the 33. Article here is whol|ly added out of King Henry the Fifth's Body of Statutes. This Exemplar next follows the Transcript of the Original Statutes in the Appendix, and where we have occasion, is cited thus, Ordinis Statuta in Bibliotheca Hattoniana.
Another Exemplar of the Founder's Statutes is registred at the beginning of the Black Book of the Order, it being the same in substance, put only into purer Latin, and the Articles rendred in a more eligant stile; yet there is one thing must not slip our observation, that whereas in the 17. Article of the Statutes entred in the Registrum Chartaceum, the Title of Marquess and Viscount, with the propor|tions they were decreed to pay Regist. Chart f. 24.a. an. 24. H. 8. upon the death of each Knight-Companion, are both interlined by another hand, and with fresher Ink, this Exem|plar hath put them into the Text: But the same Titles being not interlined in the 22. Article, in the said Register (where there is a like occasion to speak of the Degrees of Nobility in the Order) are also omitted in that very Article of this Exemplar: which is a sufficient Argument, to manifest that it was compiled from the Statutes in the Registrum Chartaceum; and as to the time, after the 24. year of King Henry the Sixth, at soonest. These also are printed next the former Ex|emplar, and cited under this Title, Ordinis Statuta in Libro Nigro.


SECT. II. Of those other Bodies of Statutes since established.
BEsides these Statutes made at the Institution of the Order, there are two other Bodies or Exemplars established since; the one by King Henry the Fifth, and the other by King Henry the Eight.
King Henry the Fifth, that happy restorer of the honor of the Order, having (at his entrance to the Royal Throne) found its glory upon abatement, not only raised it to its former lustre, but very much increast the honor thereof. For He renewed the Grand Festival and other Solemnities, He commanded a strict obser|vation of all the Founders Statutes, and Lib. N. p. 6 brought many more to a like perfection, which He subjoined to such of them where they properly might be inserted, and are these that follow.

Article
3. That the Knights should make their obeysance in the Choire, first to the Altar, and next to the Soveraign.
8. That the Deputy should elect, if the Soveraign (when abroad) had not six Knights with him.
9. That the Feast of St. George should not be kept on St. Marks day, May-day, c.
12. That when a Knight should ride, he might wear a Blue Ribband instead of his Garter.
14. That the order and manner of offering up the Atchievements of deceased Knights, should be such as is there prescribed.
20. That Knights absent in the Soveraigns service, might be Installed by Deputy.
31. That the Soveraign should take a Signet of the Order abroad with him.
34. That no Charge should be admitted upon the Colledge, by the Custos or Ca|nons, without the Soveraigns consent.

The Statutes of Institution, with these Additions, this King caused to be tran|slated into French, and transcribed into a Roll, the Transcript whereof was lent me by the right honorable Basill Earl of Denbigh, a person who through an in|dustrious search into his own ancient Evidences, is become fortunately happy, by adding thence great light to his From the Earls of Haps|burg in Ger|many, Dugd Antiq. of Warr. p. 57. high and noble Descent; and a no less en|courager of, than really affected with the Studies of venerable Antiquity.
This Roll (as before the Statutes of Institution) was Ordained to issue out thenceforth to the Knights-Companions under the Art. 27. Common Seal of the Order. In af|ter times it was transcribed into Books; and by a Decree pass'd an. 3. H. 7. an Lib. N. p. 168. Ori|ginal Book of these Statutes and Institutions fair written, was to be laid up in the Colledge of St. George; and the Scribe or Register to have Transcripts of it in readiness to present the Elected Knights withall.
The last and largest Body was undertaken and compleated, by that munificent increaser of the splendor of this most Noble Order, King Henry the Eighth; chiefly in regard some of the former Statutes were obscure, doubtful, and need|ed further explication; others wanted reducing and contraction, where the necessity of the case required.
And to set this worthy work on foot, this Soveraign gave Order (in a Chap|ter held at Lib. N. p. 205. Greenwich on St. George's day, anno regni sui 9.) Lib. N. p. 205. That all the Knights-Companions should be carefully summoned, to assemble together in the year then next following (whilst the solemnity of the Feast lasted) to consult and conclude upon the abrogation of such things as tended to the dishonor of the Order (if any such were) and for the advancement of other things that might augment and promote the honor thereof, but it seems there was not any thing done thereupon.
Afterwards, to give greater reputation to this his Royal design, this Soveraign on the MS. in Of|fic. Arm. [M. 17.] p. 26. b. 28. of May in the 11. year of his Reign, entred upon this great and no|ble work, with all magnificent Ceremony, being accompanied with MS. in Of|fic. Arm. [M. 17.] p. 26. b. 19 Knights-Companions of the Order, all MS. in Of|fic. Arm. [M. 17.] p. 26. b. proceeding on Horseback to the Chapter-house at Windesor; where being entred, and consideration had of the old Statutes; the Ibid. p. 27. Knights-Companions, with all due reverence, intreated the Soveraign to reform and explain them, as he should think convenient; who thereupon determining so to do, the whole Company gave their advice and consent. That done, all present be|sought the Soveraign, kneeling, that where any of them had Ibid. p. 27. offended, in breaking any Ordinance concerning the Order, he would please to remit it, and give them a general pardon, which most benignly he granted, and the next day, in Chapter, ratified it to them.
But it seems this undertaking held yet Lib. N. p. 196. three years, before it came to per|fection; nevertheless then, viz. the 23. of April, anno 14. H. 8. the Soveraign out of Ibid. p. 215. right singular, love, good zeal, and entire affection to this most Noble Order, to the estate of Chivalry, and the continuance and increase thereof; as also at the hum|ble request and instant desire of the then Knights-Companions, and by their advice, counsel, and consent did make Interpretation, and Declaration of the obscurities, doubts, and ambiguities of the former Statutes and Ordinances.
And having Ibid. reformed divers things in them, he thereunto made several

Lib. N. p. 21. additions, no less necessary than expedient. The Ibid. 229. Original whereof being signed and sealed, was commanded to be carefully laid up, in the Treasury of the Colledge at Windesor, there to remain to succeeding times, notwithstanding which, it hath not been seen there these many years past.
The Articles and Clauses added to the former Statutes in this last Body are these.

Article
1. That the interpretation of the Statutes, c. belongeth to the Soveraign.
2. The three points of Reproach, declared; and what is meant by a Gentle|man of Blood.
4. Of the Prorogation of the Feast.
5. How the Feast is to be observed by absent Knights.
6. Attendance on the Soveraign, if he be not at the Feast.
7. That the Soveraign's Deputy may correct things in Chapter.
12. The Offering up of Atchievements, and a Taper armed with a Scutcheon.
13. Canons to sit in the lower Stalls, when any Knights are present.
14. That six Knights make a Chapter.
20. The manner of Installation set down.
21. Clause for a forreign Knight's Deputy to be conducted from the Chapter-house to his Stall; and for making an Election void, if the Knight send not his Proxy within seven months.
23. For Advancing and Translating of Stalls.
25. Plates not to be larger than the first Founders, except Strangers.
38. Concerning the Collar of the Order.

This Body of Statutes was compiled in Latin, and is recorded in the Pag. 214. Black Book of the Order; it was translated into Ib. p. 196. French and English by Sir Thomas Wriothesley. Knight, then Garter King of Arms: The English Version is that which hath been since delivered (instead of the former Statutes) to all succeed|ing Knights-Companions, according to the Injunction, but of late times appoint|ed to be sent to Forreign Princes, and other Elect Knights abroad, Lib. R. p. 120. sealed with the Great Seal of the Order, affixed to a Label of Blue Silk and Gold.
Where this Book hath been delivered to a Knight-Companion at the Soveraign's charge, the Knight's E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 28 Executors are obliged to send it back to the Colledge of Windesor, and there to deliver it to the Custos or Register of the Order. And be|cause this Law was defective in point of time, therefore King Art. 31. Henry the Eighth's Statutes appoint the same to be sent to either of them (or to one of the principal Officers of the Order, for the time being) within three Months next after the de|cease of such Knight-Companion.
And yet besides these three Bodies, most eminently known by the title of Sta|tutes, there was another drawn up and published, anno 7. E. 6. the Reformation of Religion here in England giving the occasion; but it being within few Months repealed by Lib. C. p. 6. Queen Mary, his Sister and Successor, before it received the life of Execution, and not since revived, we suppose it not proper to rank it in the Appendix or make any use thereof in the following Discourse.
In the Month of December 1666. the Right Reverend Father in God Matthew Wren, late Lord Bishop of Ely, shewed me a Manuscript, compiled by himself, about the year 1631. being at that time Register of this most Noble Order: where|in by way of Comment upon King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, he briefly shews (out of the Statutes and Annals of the Order) what alteration there hath been in the Law of the Garter, both before and since. It is a work composed with a great deal of judgment, and exceeding useful; and had it been my good hap to have met therewith before I had so neer finished this Work, the ready directions there|in would have eased me of much toil, whilst I was about the composing it.



SECT. III. Several endeavours for Reforming the Statutes, since the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.
AS the Kings of this Realm, immediately at their attaining the Crown, do become Soveraigns of this most Noble Order of the Garter, and conse|quently the Lib. R. p. 119.  122. Supream Law, and Interpreters thereof; so is the regulation of the whole their undoubted Prerogative; and this hath been evidenced in nothing more fully than from their constant course in exercising the power, not only of making and establishing, but changing and altering the Laws and Statutes there|of; which upon interest of Religion, pleasure of the Soveraign, change of times, or any other fit or necessary Occasion, hath from time to time been done by them. Upon this ground was it, that King Edward the Sixth went about to alter and reform such things in preceding Statutes as seemed not consistent with the Re|ligion he had established in England. To which purpose, at a Chapter holden at Greenwich, the 23. of April in the 3. year of his Reign, it was agreed, Lib. N. p. 302. That the Lord St. John, the Earl of Arundel, and Sir William Paget should peruse over the Statutes of the Garter; and that the same should be reformed, and made agreeable to the Kings Majesty's other proceedings, by the advice of the Duke of Somerset Lord Protector, and other Companions of this Noble Order.
This was seconded by another Order, made also in Chapter at Greenwich, on St. Georges day in the following year; where it was agreed, Ib. p. 304. That the Book of Sta|tutes should be reformed, and thereupon the Soveraign delivered to the whole Com|pany, a Book, wherein was contained certain Statutes, by the same to be corrected and reformed as they thought best, until the next Chapter.
But it seems, nothing was as yet done, in pursuance of either of these Orders, for at the next Feast, on the 24. of April, anno 5. E. 6. another Order past, Ib. p. 306. im|powering the Duke of Somerset, the Marquess of Northampton, the Earls of War|wick, Arundel, Bedford, and Wiltshire, to peruse over the Statutes and other Books of the Order, and the same to be reformed; as aforesaid.
This third Order it seems took more effect than the former; for thereupon a new Body of Laws was collected together (wherein some things were reformed, others newly added; but in effect the Laws of the Order very much altered) and published March 17. anno 7. E. 6. But this King dying within four Months after, the very first thing Queen Mary (his Sister) took care for, in reference to the Af|fairs of this Order, was to see these new statutes abrogated and made void.
To which purpose in a Chapter held at St. Iames's House, the 27. of September next following her coming to the Crown, it was among other things Decreed and Ordained, Lib. C. p. 6. That the said Laws and Ordinances, which were in no sort Ibid. conve|nient to be used, and so impertinent and tending to novelty, should be abrogated and disanulled; and no account to be made of them for the future.
And for the speedy execution of this Decree, command was then also given to Sir William Petre (who that Ib. p. 7. day was admitted Chancellor of the Order) to see, Ibid. that they should be speedily expunged out of the Book of Statutes, and forthwith defaced; left any memory of them should remain to posterity: and only those Decrees and Ordinances, which her Father, and his royal Predecessors had established, should be retained and observed.
It may be also noted, that in this particular of Reformation, King Philip her Husband appeared no less zealous: for on the 5. of August, an. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar. (which was the third day after he had been invested, with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order) himself being presnt at a Chapter in Windesor Castle, it was then Ordained; Ibid. p. 12. That all Acts and Decrees being recorded in divers places of the Great Book (to wit, the Black Book of the Order) which were repugnant and

disagreeable either with the ancient and received Statutes of the Order, or else with the Laws of the Realm; should clearly be abolished and taken away; by the Mar|quess of Winchester, the Earls of Arundel, and Pembroke, and the Lord Paget.
And we no sooner see Queen Elizabeth ascending the Throne, but shortly after, on St. George's day in the 2. year of her Reign, a view of the Statutes is com|mitted (by Commission) to four of the Knights-Companions, namely the Lib. C. p. 5. Mar|quess of Northampton, the Earls of Arundel, and Pembroke, and the Lord Howard of Effingham: Lib. C. p. 5. Who were thereby impowered to read over and consider those Statutes, and being so read over and viewed, to consider with a watchful care and diligence, if any of them were disagreeable to the Religion, Laws, and Statutes of this Realm; and if any such were found, the same to be faithfully represented to the Soveraign, to the end that She, with the Knights-Companions, might establish such Decree con|cerning them, as she should think fit.
Whether any thing was done pursuant hereunto, or not, doth not appear in the Annals of the Order, or any where else that we have seen; nor do we conceive there was, or that this Soveraign saw much cause, to alter the frame of those Statutes, which King Henry the Eighth had established, and Queen Mary con|firmed; since the Books of Statutes delivered to the Knights-Companions at their Installations, throughout her Reign, were no other than Transcripts of her Fa|ther's Body of Statutes, and besides, the practice of her time was generally pur|suant to the direction therein; except in some few things, now and then added or altered, at future Chapters, when there arose new cause for so doing; of which we shall give an account as the matter occurs.
After her Reign, King Iames, her Successor, observing the obscurity and dis|agreement of some passages among the Statutes, attempted something towards their reformation, and in reference thereto, the Ibid. p. 173. 14. of May, in the 9. year of his Reign, Decreed, That Commissionary Letters should be made forth to the Earls of Nottingham, Worcester, Pembroke, and Northampton, whereby power should be given them, Ibid. p. 173. to examine the Registers, and other Monuments, which pertained to the Order; and where any thing should be found obscure, to make it cleer, where contrariety appeared, fitly to reconcile it, yet with no endeavour of innovating any thing, but an intention of renewing all things, as neer as might be to the first and most ancient Institution of the Order: Saving always power to himself, as Soveraign of the Order, to add or change any thing (according to the occasion) as it should seem agreeable to his prudence, for the honor of this most Noble Order. What was done hereupon appears not, but some few years after, this Affair was revived, and the following Commission issued forth.

Iames R.
JAmes by the grace of God King of Great Britain, Ex Collect. Guil. le Neve mil. uper Cla R. Armor. France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter,
To our Right trusty, and Right well beloved Cousis and Councellors, Charles Earl of Nottingham, and Edward Earl of Worcester, and to our right trusty, and right well beloved Cou|sin Henry Earl of Southampton, and to our right trusty, and right well beloved Cousin and Councellor Thomas Earl of Arundel, and to our right trusty, and right well be|loved Cousins, Philip Earl of Montgomery, and Robert Viscount Lisle, Knights and Companions of our said Order, Greeting;
Whereas, ever since our coming to the Crown of this our Realm of England, We have had a special care to maintain and up|hold the dignity and honor of our most Noble Order of the Garter, whereof we are Soveraign, as to the world hath well appeared, both by our careful observation at all due times of all the Ceremonies and Solemnities belonging to the same, and also by the choice we have made of Noble and Worthy persons, whether Princes of Forreign Nations, or Subjects of our own Kingdoms, to supply the places which have been void of that Society. Now forasmuch as We are not ignorant that in all humane Consti|tutions, there may be not only Ambiguity, suffering doubtful Interpretation, but also defect, for which addition is requisite, the same best appearing in time, which is the producer and tryer of truth, We have therefore thought fit, out of the knowledge and

experience we have of your understanding and wisdom, and the confidence we repose in your faithfulness and sincerity, being men of honor, and Knights and Compani|ons of our said Order, to nominate you six, and to appoint you, or any four of you, to take an exact view of all the ancient Statutes and Articles of our said Order. And do give unto you, or any four of you, full power and authority to call before you all such persons, whether Officers of our said Order, or others, as can give you light or infor|mation concerning the same; and after a serious consideration thereof had by you all, or four of you, We will and require, that you set down in writing, what in the said ancient Statutes and Articles, you shall conceive meet to be explained, and what to be added, whereby our said Noble Order may be made more famous and illustrious, that the same being presented to us the Soveraign and the Society, at a Chapter holden, may be resolved on, in part or in all, to be put in execution, if to us it shall seem so good. Given under the Seal of our said Order, at our Palace of Westminster, the 26. day of April, in the sixteenth year of our Reign, c.

Notwithstanding the powers and directions given by this Commission, the pro|gress in this business was very slow paced, but towards the later end of his Reign, the Earls of Worcester, Montgomery, Arundel, Surry, and Leicester, four of the six Commissioners above-named, having had divers meetings, and debated se|veral things represented to them; did at a Chapter holden at Whitehall, the 19. of May, anno Iac. Regis 20. present to the Soveraign certain Articles, subscribed with their hands, which for the Honor of the Order they thought necessary to be observed.
By the first of which they endeavoured to provide for a further progress and advance of the same, in proposing, Lib. C. p. 11.  12. that every year a Commission from the Sove|raign should be given or continued to such Knights of the Order, as in Chapter should be thought fit; to consider of all things to the Order belonging; and that the year following an account by the Knights in Chapter should be given of their proceed|ings, by virtue of the said Commission.
This with 8 other Articles, were Ib. p. 12.  13. confirmed by the Soveraign, and twelve of the Knights-Companions, the Ib. p. 12.  13. 22. of May following, in a Chapter held at Whitehall.
And so happily and effectually went this work forward, that on the Feast-day of St. George held at Windesor in the ensuing year, the said Earl of Worcester (be|ing then the Soveraign's Deputy for that Feast) with ten Knights-Companions more, did agree to eight other Articles (most of them concerning the Alms-Knights) which the next morning were Ib. p. 14. approved of by the Soveraign; and that day, be|fore the celebration of Divine Service, by the Soveraign's Deputy, and Compani|ons assembled in the Chapter-house, Ib. p. 14. the observation thereof was also Decreed.
And now to come neerer, even to the Reign of his late sacred Majesty, King Charles the First, of ever blessed and glorious memory, who while it lay in his power, was (and much more would have been, had not the angry Fate of our late times opposed) the greatest Increaser of the Honor and Renown of this most Illustrious Order: He, I say, taking into his princely thoughts all things whatso|ever, which carried any shew or probability of adding lustre thereunto, designed and endeavoured, the most compleat and absolute Reformation of any of his Predecessors.
And first, at the Solemnity of St. George held at Windesor the Lib. R. p. 6. 6. day of October in the 6. year of his Reign, He commissionated nine of the Knights-Companions, namely, the Earls of Molgrave, Pembroke, and Montgomery, Arundel and Surry, Salisbury, Carlisle, Dorset, Holland, Berkshire, and Suffolk, with command to assem|ble four times in a year, to consult and handle the Affairs of the Order.
All these, but the Earls of Molgrave and Dorset, met at Whitehall, the 2. of Ia|nuary following, where some Ibid. p. 67. few things were considered of.
This Commission was seconded by one more ample, about three Months after, and directed to the before-named Knights-Companions, or to any 8, 7, 6, 5, or 4 of them, thereby impowring them, Ib. p. 68. to meet, consult, and take an exact view, and to peruse all the Statutes and Ordinances of the Order; as well such as were esta|blished in the beginning, as such as had been since made by Explanation or Addition,

and to consider advisedly, whether any thing had been Ordered, that had brought Doubt or Ambiguity, or did stand in need of Alteration or Amendment. To the end, that if upon mature deliberation by them, there should appear any contrariety or other defect, by want of plain expression or other omission, which were fit by the Sove|raign to be supplied for the augmentation of the Honor of the Order, that then in such case, He [the Soveraign] might (upon return of their Proceedings) resolve of some general Declaration in Chapter, to reform and reduce into one body all the Statutes and Ordinances thereof, that the same being compiled and setled in a per|fet form, might be so delivered over to posterity, cleered and freed from all future questions and doubts.
We see here the largeness of this noble design: Nevertheless not any thing was done upon this Commission, though it stood in force even from the 6. to the 13. year of this Soveraign's Reign: but where the neglect lay appears not, though it may not untruly be conjectured by that which follows.
At the Feast of St. George, celebrated by Prorogation at Whitehall, for the year Sir Thomas Rowes Iournal p. 8. 1636. upon the 17, 18, and 19. days of April, anno 1637. divers humble Petitions for Ibid. p. 9. Reformation and Renovation, were presented to the Soveraign, the said 18. day of April, by the Chancellor, and them also read; some of which more especially tending to the honor of the Order were accepted and decreed by the Soveraign, and the rest referred and transmitted to the Knights-Commissioners be|fore mentioned.
The first of those Decrees which at this time past, was Lib. R. p. 118. to revive and renew the powers given in the former Commission, and thereupon a new Commission, dated the 7. of May then following, issued under the Great Seal of the Order, having the same Preamble with the former Commission, and was directed to the Earls of Molgrave, Derby, Pembroke, and Montgomery, Arundel, and Surrey, Kelley, Salis|bury, Dorset, Holland, Berkshire, Suffolk, Lindsey, Exceter, Marquess Hamilton, Duke of Lenox, the Earls of Danby, Moreton, and Northumberland, or to three or more of them, to Rowes Iournal, p. 18. meet and consult of any matter, concerning the Statutes, or Honor of the Order. These Knights-Commissioners, were likewise armed with Rowes Iournal, p. 18. all the powers given in the foresaid Commission, dated anno 6. Car. 1. Unto which was added, for the better effecting the Soveraign's royal care; Ibid. p. 19. That three or more of them should meet at the Soveraign's Court, and begin to execute the said Commission, in Whitson-week next ensuing, attended and assisted by the Chan|cellor of the Order, and all or any other Officers, or such of them as they should call and find serviceable. And being met and assembled, to have power to hear, pro|pound, and debate whatsoever should be presented, or that they should conceive con|ducible, to the honor and perfect establishment of the Order. And to prepare all mat|ters of such their consultation to be presented unto the Soveraign, at the next Feast of St. George, and so successively at every Chapter to be held by the Soveraign: there|in to receive his full determination, approbation, and royal assent: with further power to adjourn from time to time, after the first opening and reading of the said Commission, their meetings to such places and days, as to them should seem most convenient.
Now who would think, that, after so noble a designation of the Soveraign, af|ter his care to send forth a second Commission with augmentative powers, after his earnest Ibid. recommending this Affair to their diligence, his pressing their di|spatch for the speedy accomplishment of his Royal Intentions, and lastly, his ex|pecting from them an account of their Transactions, at or before the celebration of the next Feast, these honorable persons who were Companions of so noble and honorable an Order, and at their admission sworn to advance the honor of the same, no less than to defend and maintain it, should need a Spur to so worthy a design? But it was so!
For although the foresaid Commission was opened and read at the Court at Whitehall, the 30. of May following, in the presence and session of the Earls of Pembroke, and Montgomery, Salisbury, Holland, Marquess Hamilton, and Duke of Lenox, Commissioners and Companions of this most Noble Order; yet I find the then Chancellor Sir Thomas Rowe, in an account of that day's proceedings by Letter,

dated the fourth of Iune 1637. and directed to Dr. Christopher Wren, then Regi|ter of the Order (whose attendance was on that day excused) sadly profess; That it was as much as he could do, to procure and draw together five of the Knights-Companions, to open and read the Commission, and this also in haste, quasi in tran|situ; and all that was done, was to appoint another meeting at the Court in Mid|sommer-week, then next ensuing; and to lay a charge upon the Chancellor to pre|pare matter (to wit, Ibid. p. 21. Propositions and Observations upon the Statutes) fit for their Consultation, against that time, according to the tenour of the Commission. And elsewhere he makes this ingenuous acknowledgment, That he found such dif|ficulty to procure meetings, and a certain non-chalance in every one, as if it were but a ceremonious Affair, and so few hearty in it, that he feared, he and the Officers should wait to little purpose.
And so indeed it fell out, for albeit he attended the said Knights-Commissioners in Midsomer-week, according to the appointment at their last sitting; yet there was nothing done, save only the adjourning of their meeting to Ibid. London.
Some little (and but little) progress was afterwards made in this Affair, at another meeting at White-hall, the Ibid. p. 31. 8. of February following; where three of the said Knights-Commissioners were present, namely, the Earls of Berkshire, Lindsey, and Northumberland; who Ordered, Ibid. p. 31. That the Chancellor, Register, and Garter, should prepare an abreviation of the Statutes, and reduce every thing of one-head, in|to an act, to avoid confusion: And this being the half of what they then did, caused this Expression to fall from the Pen of this worthy Chancellor, in another Letter to the Register, of the 24. of Nov. 1637. There is little hopes of the Knights; they never meet, or to no purpose; though I am tired with solicitations.
Finally, the Ibid. p. 36. first of February after, another assembly of seven of the Knights-Com|missioners was held also at Whitehall, in whose presence a few things were debated, but little concluded: and further than this sitting, can I not trace the prosecution of this noble design and intendment of the late Royal Soveraign, all the following years of his Reign; but that here it slept in silence and neglect.


SECT. IV. Of the Annals of the Order.
AND because the several Orders and Decrees occasionally made in Chapters (being of good authority and binding to the Knights-Companion and Offi|cers) with many other Historical and Ceremonial matters, relating to the Order, lye disperst throughout the Annals thereof; it will be requisite here, to give some account of those Books wherein they are so recorded, because we shall make frequent use of them in the progress of our Discourse.
Registrum Or|dinis Char|taceum.The first of these in order of time, is an old Paper Book, written in French (hitherto fortunately preserved in the Paper-Office at Whitehall) which in all pro|bability was begun by Iohn Coringham: for we find him 1414. (which was a lit|tle before the Annals therein entred do commence) made Tho. Frithin suo Canoni|cor. Catal. Canon of Windesor, and constituted Tho. Frithin suo Canoni|cor. Catal. Register of the Order. And in regard that one and the same kind of hand-writing is continued from the beginning of this Book, until anno 16. H. 6. inclusive, where follows an Hiatus till anno 23. H. 6. that the Annals begin to be entred with another hand, and that he shortly after died, viz. Tho. Frithin suo Canoni|cor. Catal. anno Dom. 1445. 'tis very probable, the Book so far was writ by himself.
Hence forward these Annals are entred with several hands, and those gene|rally in use about the times, wherein the Transactions passed, whence may well enough be presumed, that these were the proper hand-writings of each Register of the Order, and that this Book was transmitted from one Register to another, wherein, after their death or other removal, the Annals and Acts were continued

by the hand of the next Successor; and from this conjecture may some light be also given of the time how long each Register or Scribe enjoyed his Office.
After Richard Sidnor was made Register, to wit, Lib. N. p. 245. anno 16. H. 8. (who sub|scribed his name to the foot almost of each leaf) the Annals were written in one hand, until anno 26. H. 8. that Ex Catalog. praed. Robert Aldrydge Doctor of Divinity, and one of the Canons of Windesor Lib. N. p. 265. succeeded him in that Office, and then 'tis evi|dent the hand-writing also was changed, to an old set Roman, which ran on to the end of 29. H. 8. in which year he was advanced to the Bishoprick of Godwins Ca|tal. of Bishops, p. 543. Carlisle, and this Book ends in the 31. of his Reign.
Besides this, there is another Book wherein the Annals of the Order are recorded in Latin, concerning which there past a Decree, anno 3. H. 7. Lib. N. p. 168. That it should be fairly transcribed, and Anno 22.  7. vide Lib. N. p. 181. afterwards, That the Soveraign should be put in mind of it, as being then needful to be renewed; but neither of these Decrees took effect, nor was this done till towards the end of the Reign of King Henry the Eight.
This Book agrees very neerly with the Registrum Chartaceum, for therein is nothing entred relating to the Order (except Lib. N. p. 27. one of the Exemplars of the Foun|der's Statutes, and a Ibid. p. 38. Catalogue of the first 25 Knights-Companions) before the fourth year of King Henry the Fifth; the Annals of the Order until then being wholly lost. It hath the same Hiatus or Intervals, viz. from the 16. to the 23. year of King Henry the Sixth, from the 7. to the 10. of Edward the Fourth, from the 4. to the 7. of Henry the Seventh, and from the 10. to the 14. of the same King; it also runs parallel therewith for the most part, yet where there is any thing more recorded in the Registrum Chartaceum than in the Black Book, we shall note it, as we have a fitting occasion offered.
And that it was compiled by Dr. Aldrydge, while he was Register, may be col|lected from a short Account given in the Pag. 22.  23. Preface, of all the Soveraigns of the Or|der, ending with King Henry the Eighth; with a memorial relating to Cardinal Wolsey, who, as it there appears, was then dead.
The Transcription of this Book was finished anno 31. H. 8. for so far it is writ|ten (as so the Appendix) with one and the same hand (being a middle sized Text Letter) but anno 32. H. 8. 'tis most apparent, another hand is introduced, which with some variation is afterwards carried on to the end of anno 5. E. 6. where this Book ends.
The Register of the Order, by the Constitutions of his Office, was obliged to prouide Lib. N. p. 235. two Books, and therein to enter the Ordinances and Statutes, with other Acts of the Order, whereof one was appointed to be kept in the Chapter-house at Windesor, and called Index Windesorienss; and the other (being a duplicate of the former) to remain in the Register's keeping, ready at hand to shew the Sove|raign whensoever he should require it; and this latter was called Aulae Regisirum.
As to the general directions given for compiling these Books, and of what particulars they are principally to consist, we have some information from the Statutes of the Order, and the foresaid Constitutions; for besides the entry this Officer is enjoined to make of all the Scrutenys taken in Chapter, and Elections thereupon made (which we shall at large discourse of in its Chap. 9. Sect. 15. due place) his duty is to record the E. 3. Stat. Art. 34. Penalties inflicted on Knights-Companions, and the reason thereof, the Ord. Stat. in Bibl. Hatton. Art. 36. reconciliatin of those that have suffered penalties as Delinquent, with other Acts and their causes, appertaining to the Order: All which are Decreed to be E. 3. Stat Art. 34. H. 5. Stat. Art. 36. recited before the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, at the beginning of the Chapter, yearly on the Eve of St. George; to the end they may be corrected, and reduced into Method, if need require.
Moreover, he is, by the foresaid Constitutions, to make entry of all the Lib. N. p. 235. Policies in War, Exploits, Transactions, and memorable Atchievements, both of the Sove|raign and Knights-Companions, according as he can best attain the knowledge of them, either by his own search, or the assistance of Mr. Garter, which having first set down and committed to writting, as passages and accidents happen from year to year, whatsoever is thus noted by him, is to be red and perused at the next Chap|ter, by the Knights-Companions there assembled, that if any thing be found to stand in need of Correction, it may there be forthwith amended, and again in like manner at

another Chapter afterwards; which done, he is to take care, that they be fairly in|grossed in the foresaid Book, for a perpetual memorial.
And because the time assigned for rehearsal of these particulars in Chapter, had in succeeding years been taken up with other Affairs; in one of those Arti|cles, which the Knights-Companions (to whom King Iames recommended the framing of some Articles, necessary for the honor of the Order) presented to the Soveraign the 19. of May, anno Iac. Regis 20. and confirmed the 22. of May following, it was Decreed, Lib. R. p. 13. That nothing of this nature, or any other Act in Chap|ter should be Registered, before it had been perused and considered by the then Knights-Commissioners, or at least sour of them, who when they should set times apart, to consult of the Affairs of the Order, for which they were chiefly con|stituted, might then also make use of such opportunities, as should give this bu|siness dispatch with more conveniency.
Upon due consideration had of these Injunctions, the present Register (at a Chapter held the 19. of November, anno 22. Car. 2.) Lib. Carol. p. 76. exhibited the continuation of the Annals of this Noble Order, which he had prepared to register in the Li|ber Carolinus, and humbly submitted it to the perusal and approbation of the Knights-Companions whom the Soveraign had deputed to take into their conside|ration the Affairs of the Order; which tender when they declined, he proposed that it might be examined by the Prelate, but that not being liked by them (on consideration that the Register was obliged under an Oath, to deal faithfully in his Report) it was Decreed, Lib. Carol. p. 76. That the said Annals should be recorded in the said Book without any further examination.
Besides the above-mentioned particulars, there were materials of another na|ture, ordered to be collected, both from the Chancellor of the Order, and Garter Principal King of Arms, to be digested by the Register, and entred also upon Re|cord; for, whereas one part of the Chancellor's duty was to Lib. N. p. 234. set forth and declare every year in Chapter, at the Feast of St. George, the renowned and praiseworthy Acts of the Knights of this Order, as many as had so merited, and as for those who had deserved the contrary, to make relation also of their scandalous and dis|graceful actions; the Register was to take these in writing, and record them for a memorial of their honor or shame, never to end.
And it is part of the duty of Mr. Garter, Ibid. p. 237. diligently and industriously to make enquiry after the valiant, fortunate, and renowned Acts, both of the Soveraign, and the rest of the Knights-Companions, which having learnt, he is to make a true and faithful relation of them to the Register, to be by him entred upon Record for a per|petual memorial.
But we find very little of this hitherto done, and how sparingly inserted, the Annals themselves are but too evident Witnesses. Nevertheless, the present Garter, Sir. Ed. Walker, hath drawn up a faithful account of the noble Actions and Characters of the Knights-Companions, beginning with Thomas Earl of Straf|ford, and continuing it down to his Son; which he delivered to Dr. Ryves, the now Register, for the use afore directed.
Among the Articles established at the Feast of St. George, anno Iac. Regis 21. the last is, Lib. R. p. 16. That the then Register of the Order should compose a Book, wherein should be orderly transcribed the form and manner of all the Solemnities, Ceremo|nies, and Processions, which were accustomably used at the Feast of St. George, and celebration of the Order, as also of taking down and offering the defunct Knights Atchievements, to the end the Knights-Companions, upon recourse to it, might have full information thereof. But (after much enquiry) we have not heard that such a Book was drawn up by him, or any of his Successors.
And that some course should be taken for the safe custody and preservation of the Annals of the Order, such was the worthy care of the foresaid Knights-Commissioner, that the said 22. of May, anno Iac. Regis 20. it was Ordained, Ibid. p. 13. That a secure and certain place within the Castle of Windesor, should be provided and appointed, in which all Acts concerning the Order, should be kept, and to which every Knight-Companion at all times might have access. And further, Ibid. p. 13. That up|on the remove, or after the death of the Register of the Order, the Book containing

an account of all such acts as had been Registered and there reserved, should be deli|vered to one of the Knights of the Order.
The second of these Books (is called the Blue Book,Liber Coeruleus. and so called from the co|lour of the Cover, being fairly bound in Blue Velvet. It begins with the first year of Queen Mary, and ends at the 18. year of King Iames.
The third,Liber Rubeus. being bound up in Red Velvet, goes therefore under the name of the Red Book; it takes commencement where the Blue Book ends, and contains like Acts and Entries with the former, it ends in the 14. year of King Charles the First of ever blessed memory, having first given a full account of the Ceremo|nies performed at the Installation of the present Soveraign.
And as to a great part of this Book may I justly and without flattery say, (and to the honor of that right Reverend Prelate, Doctor Wren the late Lord Bishop of Ely, let it be remembred) that from the Institution of this most Noble Order, until he was chosen into the Office of Register, the Annals of the Order, were at no time recorded by a Pen neer so judicious or eligant; whose excellent Patern his wor|thy Brother, and Successor into that Office, Doctor Christopher Wren, (who most freely and readily communicated to me, what materials he had, to encou|rage my first design and entrance upon this Work) hath exactly copied in its fol|lowing leaves.
The fourth and last Book commenceth,Liber Caroli|nus. anno 1640. wherein the Annals are continued down to the beginning of the year 1670. according to the English Ac|count, by the learned pains of Dr. Brune Ryves the present Register of the Order. And in a Chapter held at Windesor the 16. of April, anno 13. Car. 2. it was Decreed, Lib. Carol. p. 30. That there should be two of these Books made, the one penn'd in Latin to re|main with the Register at Windesor, and the other in English to be kept at Whitehall, and called Registrum Aulicum.
THE Account drawn up of the Founder and first Knights-Compa|nions of this Noble Order, we designed for the next Chapter, but for some considerable reasons cannot bring it in here; nevertheless we intend it to usher in the Catalogue of their Successors, and join them together in the last Chapter, where our Reader, is hence he cast his eye thi|ther, may read it in due Order.


Of what materials this principal Ensig was at first made, we have not yet found, nor is it described by any, before Plydore irgile, and he, but in general, as to the ornamental part of it, to wit, That it was Angl. Ht. l. 19. p 37. adorned with Gold and precious Stones, and had a Buckle of Gold at the end, wherewith to fasten it about the Leg. But doubtless, it was also wrought with rich Embrodery, and thereon the Symbolical word or Motto was raised with Gold, Pearl, and sundry sorts of Silks; as may be guessed from the Garters anciently placed on the left shoulder of the Knights-Companions Mantles, and these other little embroider|ed Garters, wherewith their Surcoats and Hoods were heretofore adornd, which we shall describe by and by.
But touching those made in the last Age, we have received more particular sa|tisfaction: for we find, that the Garter sent to Emnuel Duke of Savoy, ann. 1  2. Phil.  Mar. was set with Ex Collect. Will le Neve Eq. Aut. nupe: Clarencieux R. Armorum. Letters of Goldsmiths Work the Buckle and Pen|dant of the same, and on the Pendant, a Ruby and a Pearl hanging at the end. The Garter made for Francis the Second, anno 6. Eli. was Ex Collect. Aug. Vincent nuper Winde|sor eraldi. richly wrought with Letters of Gold, garnished with Stones: the Buckle and Pendant weighing MS. fol. pen. Georg. Owen, nuper Yok He|rald. p. 154. three Ounces and a half and half quarter, was richly set with Rubies and Diamonds. The French King Henry the Fourth, had a Garter of Ib. p. 229. Purple Velvet, embroi|dered with Letters of Gold, garnished with Diamonds and Rubies; and the Gar|ter of Christier the Fourth King of Denmark, was Ib. p. 299. embroidered with Gold and Pearls.
But that Garter sent to Gustvus Adolphus King of Sweden, did excel all others, bestowed by former Soveraigns, for richness and glory: each Letter of the Motto being composed of Diamonds. A particular Inventory whereof (taken the 24. day of May, anno 14. Car. 1. when delivered by the Soveraign's Command, to the custody of the Dean and Chapter of Windesor, to be preserved there in memory of that famous King) we here exhibit; it being the transcript of that Counterpart, signed by Doctor Christopher Wren, then Dean of Windesor, and seven Canons of that Colledge, upon the receipt thereof.

Vnder the Letters of the Garter Small Diamonds on [the lower] side
52
Item, on the upper side of the Garter of Small Diamonds
52
In the Letter H Diamonds small
10
In the Letter O Diamonds small
12
In the Letter N Diamonds small
11
In the Letter I Diamonds small
4
The first stop Diamond
1
In the Letter S Diamonds small
11
In the Letter O Diamonds small
12
In the Letter I
4
In the Letter T Diamonds
10
The Stop,
1
In the Letter Q Diamonds
13
In the Letter V
9
In the Letter I
4
The Stop,
1

207
In the Letter M Diamonds small
11
In the Letter A Diamonds small
10
In the Letter L Diamonds small
6
The Stop,
1
The Letter Y Diamonds
6
The Stop,
1
The Letter P
10
The Letter E
9
The Letter N
11
The Letter S
11
The Letter E
9

85
In the first Button, Diamonds
6
In the second
6
In the third
6
In the fourth
6
In the Star of longer Diamonds
7
Small Diamonds.
31
In the Chapes border, Diamonds of a bigger size
32
In the Cross, four faucet long Diamonds, and four three square faucet Diamonds
8
One large Diamond long and fauce encompassed with seven square Diamonds and faucet
8
In the Buckle, one faucet table Diamond in the end, and twenty seven in the compass and tongue
28
In the Hinge of the Buckle, one soul square Diamond, and eleven other faucet and square Diamonds
12

88
Total of the Number
411

See the Trustees Book of Sales.This rich Garter, being (for greater security) buried in St. George's Chappel, at the beginning of the late War, was discovered by Cornelius Holland, and fetch'd thence by Iohn Hunt Treasurer to the Trustees for sale of the late Kings Goods, and sold by them to Thomas Beauchamp their then Clerk.
The Garter which his said late Majesty wore upon his Leg at the time of his Martyrdom, had the Letters of the Motto composed likewise of Diamonds, which took up the number of 412. It came into the hands of Ex relatio|ne praed. Tho. Beau|champ. Captain Preston (one of the late Usurper's Captains of Horse) from whom the said Ex relatio|ne praed. Tho. Beau|champ. Trustees re|received it, and sold to Mr. Iohn Ireton, sometimes Lord Mayor of London for 205 l. But since the happy Restauration of the present Soveraign, Mr. Ire|ton was summoned before the Commissioners, impowered by a Commission un|der the Great Seal of England, to enquire after the Crowns, Plate, Iewels, c. of the said late Soveraign, which had been concealed or imbezeled, and being charged with the buying the foresaid Royal Garter, and not denying it, Com|position was offered him, according to the direction of the Commission (as in all other like cases, where any thing could not be had in kind) but he refusing the offer, the Kings Attorney General proceeded against him in an Action of Trover and Conversion, in the Court of Kings-Bench, which coming to trial in Trinity Term,  upon a full hearing, a Verdict was given for the King, against the said Iohn Ireton for 205 l. and 10 l. Costs of Suits.
The Motto of the now Soveraign's Royal Garter, is set with Diamonds upon Blue Velvet, and the borders wrought with fine Gold Wire; the Diamonds which frame the Letters of the Motto are Rose Diamonds, much of a bigness, but those which make the Stops, table Diamonds; and the number which set each Letter are as followeth.

In the Letter H small rose Diamonds
10
In the Letter O
12
In the Letter N
11
In the Letter I
4
The first stop Diamond
1
In the Letter S
9
In the Letter O
11
In the Letter I
4
In the Letter T
8
The Stop,
1
In the Letter Q
12
In the Letter V
9
In the Letter I
4
The Stop,
1
In the Letter M
13
In the Letter A
10
In the Letter L
6
The Stop,
1
In the Letter Y
8
The Stop,
1
In the Letter P
9
In the Letter E
9
In the Letter N
12
In the Letter S
8
In the Letter E
9
In each of the four Ilot holes six little Diamonds
24
In the Buckle, two very large Diamonds, four somewhat lese, three less than they, and four small Diamonds
13
In the Tab, three very large Diamonds, six a little lesser, one somewhat less, four smaller Diamonds, two less than they, and fourteen small Diamonds
30
Total
250

The Hinge of the Buckle is pure Gold, and thereon the Soveraign's Picture to the breast, curiously cut in flat-stich, crowned with a Laurel, and vested in the Military Habit worn by the first Roman Emperors. The Tab or Pendant is also Gold, and on the back side thereof engraved a Saint George on Horse|back, encountring the Dragon. The order of placing the Diamonds on the Buckle, Tab, and about the Ilot holes, may be seen in the Draught which (with the rest of the Noble Ornaments, that make up the whole Habit and En|signs of the Order, exactly taken from the particulars themselves) is placed at the beginning of this Chapter.
This Noble Ensign [the Garter] was at the Foundation of the Order, appointed to be worn on the Pod. Vgi. Angl. Hist. l 1. p. 378. left Leg, a Lib. N. p. 5 little beneath the Knee, and so hath the usage in all time since continued. And its apparent, that the manner of placing this Gar|ter on the left Leg of the Knights-Companions Sepulchral Portraictures, was very early brought into use; seeing in that Alablaster Figure, of Sir William Fitz Wa|ren (who died a Knight-Companion of this Noble Order, in the Ex vetust Codice de Epi|sps  P|ribus Dunel|mens. Ecclesis. vide Tho. Wal|singh. sub anno 1361. five and thir|tieth year of the Founder's Reign) lying with his Lady on a raised Monument, in the North side of the Chancel of Wantage Church in Berkshire (and yet to be seen) with his Surcote of Arms upon the breast) the resemblance of his Garter (but without any Motto) is carved upon its left Leg. In like manner is the Garter Ex Collect. Silae Tay|lour gen. lib. D. f. 129. b. re|presented on the left Leg of the Alablaster Portraicture of Sir Richard Pembridge, elected Knight of this most Noble Order, in the Founder's Reign, and in the room of Sir Thomas Vfford: whose Monument is erected in the Ex Collect. Silae Tay|lour gen. lib. D. f. 129. b. South side of the Ca|thedral Church of Hereford, below the Pulpit, and encompassed with a Rail of Iron Spikes.
The next Monument in time, whereon we have seen the Garter so represented, is that made for Sir Simon Burley (See the In|script. in Mr. Dugdales Hi|story of St. Pauls Cathe|dral, p. 103.  Placita coram Rege an. . H.  rot. 46. Heres. beheaded anno 1388.) and raised in the North wall siding the Quire of St. Paul's Cathedral London, almost over against the Mo|nument of Iohn a Graunt Duke of Lancaster. Thence forward the usage be|came more frequent (and then the Motto began likewise to be cut thereon) inso|much as even until these days, the Garter is to be seen thus represented, upon all the Monumental Portraictures of those, who were since Companions of this most Noble Order.
And albeit this Princely Ensign of the Order, was at first designed for an Orna|ment to the left Legs of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions; yet was not its use confined only thereto, but extended to some other particulars: For, in the next place it was (and that ancienly also) made use of to incircle the Scutcheon of St. George's Arms, worn by the Soveraign and Knights-Companions on the left shoulder of their Mantles; who within a short time after took it to surround each of their proper Coats of Arms: which usage, their Successors in this most Noble

Order have retained, as a peculiar priviledge, but not permitted to any other, except the Prelate of the Garter their principal Officer.
The first Example which hath occurr'd to our view, is the before mentioned Monument of Sir Simon Burley; where on the front towards the head is a Scut|cheon of his Arms, impaled with his first Wives, set within a Garter (wanting the Impress) but another having the same impalment (placed below the Feet) is surrounded with a Collar of SS, of the fashion with that about his neck.
The Monument also of Ioane Wife to Ralph Nevill Earl of Westmerland, Daugh|ter to Iohn a Gaunt Duke of Lancaster (who died on the Feast-day of St. Brice, anno 1410.) raised on the South side of the Quire in the Cathedral Church of Lincolne, hath the Arms of Nevill, impaled with those belonging to the said Ioane, incircled with a Garter: And by these two (among other Examples) it appears to have been the usage about those times, to surround Scutcheons of Arms, and other Devices, with a Collar of SS also: for so, on this great Ladies Mo|nument, is there such a Collar, fashioned like that of Sir Simon Burley's placed about a square, whereon, what was painted doth not now appear.
Another ancient instance is that Scutcheon, viz. MS. in Bibl. Hatton. Sable, three Ostrich Feathers Argent, surrounded with the Garter, set up in the Glass Windows of Greenwich Church in Kent, by Humfry Duke of Gloucester, and supported with a Grey|hound and an Antilope. It is said, that these three Feathers were the Badge of King Henry the Fourth, which he had from Iohn a Gaunt Duke of Lancaster his Father, who bore them for his Device (as might be seen not long since in the North Window, against his before mentioned Monument, in St. Paul's London) and placed in a Field Sable as here, but the Pens were powdred with Ermyns, for a difference from the Black Prince's Feather. The King likewise, so also the House of Somerset, gave the White Ostrich Feather for a Device; but all the difference lay in the Pen, for the Kings Pen was Or, the Princes Argent, the Duke of Lancasters Ermyn, and the Duke of Somersets Compony, Argent, and Azure.
The Arms of Sir Lewis Robsort Lord Bourchier, one of the Knights of this Order, Elected in the Reign of King Henry the Fifth, are to be seen painted within a Garter, on each side his Monument, in St. Paul's Chappel in Westminster Abbey. Afterwards we find at the Interment of Richard Duke of York, Father to King Edward the Fourth (slain at the Battel of Wakefield) that every corner of the Majesty Scutcheon (set over the Image of the defunct) had MS. in Offic. Am. [I. 3.] f 8 b. vide lib. I. 11. in ead. Offic. f. 84. a Scutcheon of the Arms of France and England quarterly, and four Angels Gold, holding the Arms within a Garter.
In like manner, some of the Scutheons prepared for the Funeral of Iohn Vis|count Wells (who married Cicely, third Daughter to King Edward the Fourth and died the MS. in Offic. praed. [I. 3.] f. 32. 9. of February anno 14. H. 7.) were Ibid. f. 2. surrounded with the Garter; and so were others having his Ibid. f. 2. Ladies Arms, of both Metal and Colour. At the Interment of Thomas Duke of Norfolk in Thetford Abbey (who dyed anno Aug. Vin|cents discove|ry of Errors in Brooks Nobi|lity, p. 356. 16. H. 8.) there was provided a Shield of his Arms Ex praef. MS. [I. 3.] fol. 103. within a Garter, and a Co|ronet set over it. A Target also of the Arms of George Earl of Shrewsbury MS. in ead. Offic. [I. 11.] f. 67.b. with|in a Garter was born at his Funeral, anno 33. H. 8.
It was the custom (begun with us about the Reign of King Henry the Seventh) when the Obsequies of any Forreign Prince were celebrated here in England, to paint the Scutcheon of such Princes Arms within the Collar of that Order, whereof he was Soveraign, or a Fellow-Companion; for instance,
At the Obsequies of the French King Charles the Eighth, celebrated in the Ca|thedral of St. Paul's London, the Scutcheons of the Arms of France, were placed MS. [I. 3.] f. 10. within the Collar of the Order of Saint Michael, of which he was Soveraign. At each end of the Hearse, 18  19. Aug. 1557. MS. [I. 15.] in ead. Offic. f. 246.b. when the Obsequies of Iohn King of Portugal, were kept in St. Paul's Cathedral, there was among others, one great Scutcheon of his Arms, Ibid. within the Collar of the Golden Fleece, wrought with Metal upon Wax, in regard he was one of the Knights of that Order. The Obsequies of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, being performed in Westminster Abbey the 22. and 23. days of December anno 1558. there were ten great Scutcheons, Ib. f. 284.b. compassed with Garters; to shew he was a Fellow, and Knight-Companon of this Order.
And upon the same account, where any Forreign Princes, were not only Sove|raigns of one Order, but Companions of another; their Herses were garnished with Scutcheons of their proper Arms, surrounded with the Collars, or principal Badges of both those Orders. Hereupon we find, at the Obsequies of Francis the First, the French King, celebrated the 19. of Iune in St. Paul's Lon|dn, anno 1. E. 6. the Herse was adorned with the Scutcheons of the Arms of France, placed both MS. [I. 11.] f. 112. within the Garter of St. George, and Collar of St. Michael's Order; in regard he had been a Fellow of the one, and Soveraign of the other.
At the Obsequies performed for Henry the Second of France, on the 9. of Sep|tember, anno 1. Eliz. in St. Paul's also, there were some Scutcheons of his Arms, incircled both with the Lib. l. 13 f. 8. Garter and Collar of the l. 14. f. 7. Golden Fleece, he having been a Knight-Companion of both these Orders; under the Joysts was a Majesty Scutcheon of Black Taffaty, of this Kings Arms within a Garter, crowned with an Imperial Grown: This Scutcheon was garnished in eight places, with eight Rundles, and therein his Impress Donec totum impleat Orbem, with three Cre|scents, and two D's of the Roman Letter, linked back to back; and in several other places of the Herse, were fastned other Scutcheons of his Arms within this principal Ensign of the Garter.
King Henry the Eighth was first of the Soveraigns of this most Noble Order, who introduced into his Great Seal, the Scutcheon of his Arms, incircled within a Garter; as may be Speeds Chrn. f. 765. seen placed on either side of his Portraicture, sitting in his Royal Throne. Since his Reign, all succeeding Soveraigns have born their Arms within the Garter, not only in their Great and Privy Seals, but also in those other belonging to their Courts of Justice; and generally in all things (except Coyns) whereon the Scutcheon of their Arms have been since cut, carved, graved, paint|ed, or wrought (in imitation of whom the Knights-Companions have done the like) But there were an. 21. Car. 1. certain half Crowns stamped in the West of England, having the Soveraign's Arms so encompassed, and this was the first Money, whereon the Royal Garter appeared amongst us.


And the present Soveraign, intending the augmentation of the Honor of this renowned Order, as in many other things, so in advancing the reputation of this Noble Ensign by a more publick way; hath caused the irradiated Cross of St. George, encompassed about with the Royal Garter, to be stamped in the Center of his Silver Coyn made upon the alteration of it, anno 14. Car. 2.
There were likewise Medals, heretofore stamped upon several occasions, wherein the Garter was designedly added, some of which are here exhibited; As that in the year when Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, was crowned King of Bohemia, and Robert Cecil Earl of Salisbury, made Lord Treasurer of England, both Knights-Companions of this most Noble Order.


We have seen Gold Rings cast into the Figure of Garters, the ground on the outside enamelled with a deep Blue, through which the golden Letters of the Motto appearing, set them off with an admirable beauty. And it seems such Gar|ter Rings have been of ancient use, since the Preface to the Black Book of the Or|der, taking notice of wearing the Garter on the left Leg and Shoulder, adds al|so the Interdum Pollice gesta|re. lib. N. p. 15. Thumb; by which we suppose is meant Gold Rings, made into the fashion of Garters, and bestowed by some new installed Knights upon their Relations and Friends, to wear in memorial of so great an honor conferred upon them.
Among the Officers belonging to the Order, the Prelate is allowed to bear his proper Arms, (impal'd with those of his See) within the Garter: and the rest of the Officers are permitted only to wear the Badges of their Office, surrounded with the same, to express their peculiar relation to this most Noble Order.
Besides the manner of bearing Arms within the Garter of this Order, the Garter, either in whole or part, hath been given by way of Armory, (but without the Motto) and in sundry manners of bearing. As in the Seal of Arms, belonging to the Office of Garter, Principal King of Arms; where the Garter (surrounding a Crown) is placed in Chief, between one of the Lions of England, and a Flower de Lis of France. And to instance in Families; we find, Pat. 17. H. 7. pars 2. m. 1. vide porro MS. Offic. Arm. [G. 15.] Argent, three demy Garters Azure, buckled and garnished Or, granted by King Henry the Seventh, to his Servant Peter Nerborne: and Ibid. See also Glovers Ordinary, p. 419. Sable a Garter Or, between three Buckles of the second, to be born by the name of Buckland or Bowland in the County of Northampton.




SECT. II. Of the Mantle.
IN the Founder's Statutes, mention is made of no other Robe among those ap|pointed for the Habit of this most Noble Order, but only an upper Garment, to which is there given the name of Mantle; and is the chief of those Vestments, which the Soveraign and Knights-Companions wear upon all solemn occasions re|latng to the Order.
That this kind of Mantle was transferred and derived to us from the ancient Greeks and Romans, is not to be doubted; since it so little differs in fashion from their Pallium or Toga. For the Panciroll. lib. 1. rerum memorab. de|perdit. Tit. 4. Grecian Pallium, was a kind of long Cloak, which only wanted a Coller or Cape: and the Car. Sigonius de Iadiciis, l. 3. c. 17 p. 459. Roman Toga, a Garment as common in fashion with, and proper to them, as the Pallium to the Grecians; and the use so ancient, as Romulus is noted by In Vit Ro|mali. Plutarch to have worn it.
We find the Pallium further described to be Panciil. eod. lib. Tit. 43. a kind of upper Robe, that cover|ed the whole Body, made fast on the right shoulder with a Fibula, or Clasp: It was usually worn over the Tunica, or short Coat, whence grew the Proverb, Tunica Pallio propinquior est; and is more particularly observed by Eq. Aur. An|glo. Wittemb. p. 137. Erhard. Cellius from

the authority of Livie, Suetonius, Tacitus, and other Latin Authors to have been a Garment, made without Sleeves, that reached down to the Ancles.
In describing this upper Robe called the Mantle, (the Soveraign's being dif|ferenced from the Knights-Companions, only by a long Train) we shall first set down the various Names given it in the Records of the Order, secondly the Ma|terials whereof made, thirdly the Colour, fourthly the Quantity, and last of all the Ornamental Trimming used about it. Wherein, though some things hereaf|ter inserted, may perhaps to some seem light and trivial, and fitter to fill up a a Taylors Bill, than have place in a serious Discourse; yet well knowing they will be thought to others worthy remembrance, and as much esteemed, as ne|cessary to be known; we thought good, not to omit the least particular, that might contribute to the satisfaction of any enquiry.
In the Founder's Statutes it is called Ed. 3. Stat. Art. 3.9.11.16.20 c. Mantellum,1.  Name. and in Henry the Fifth's Man|te, both which in English we render a Mantle. But the Exemplar of the Foun|der's Statutes entred in the Black Book, and the Statutes of Henry the Eighth call it Trabea, which Lib. 5. c. 32. vide etiam Rom. Hist. An|thologia, p. 154. Trabea qun Toga erat, Panciroll. Rer. memor. deperd. L. 1. Tit. 45. Rosinus also reckons among the different kinds of Man|tles or Gowns. And in the 20. Article of King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, it is applied both to the Mantle and Surcoat. Sometime it is called Lib. N. p. 30.31.310. Chlamyda, sometime Lib. R p. 120. Stola, but in other places (and more agreable to the Greek and Latin denomination) Lib. N p. 209. Pallium, and Ib. p. 317. Toga.
In the second place,2. Materials. as to the Materials; That Mantle made for the Founder, against the first Feast of this Order, appears to have been of Ex Rotul. Comp Io. Cok Cler. mag. Gardrob. ab an. 21. ad 23. E 3. m. 8. penes Re|mem. Regu in Saccario. fine Wollen Cloth. And it is not unlikely, the Founder made choice of Cloth for the Robes of the Or|der (rather than any richer material) to the end he might give a reputation to that our homebred and native Commodity: albeit we find in the Statutes of In|stitution, a permission for the Proxies of Forreign Princes, to bring over with them Mantles of Ed. 3.Stat. Art. 20. vide H. 5. Stat. Art. 20. Silk or Velvet, when they came to receive the possession of their Principals Stalls; either because other Countries were better furnished with such Commodities, than our English Cloth, or that it might rather stand with the liking or esteem of Forreign Princes, as accounting Silk or Velvet the nobler material.
How long the Soveraigns of this most Noble Order continued wearing of Cloth, we cannot directly say, the first time we discover their Mantles to be made of Ex lib. vocat. Coom, in Offic. mag. Gardrob. f. 47.  52. Velvet, is about the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Sixth; which sort of Silk hath thence continued in use until this day. About this time also we ob|serve the Mantles of Forreign Princes, were likewise made here of Velvet; for so was Ibid f. 92. that sent to the King of Portugal, elected Lib. N. p. 91. anno 13. H. 6.
As touching the Mantles of the Knights-Companions, there is no question, but they were of the same materials, with those made for the Soveraign of the Order; namely, at first, of fine Wollen Cloth, and when the Soveraign changed Cloth to Velvet, they did so likewise: But we cannot meet with equal satisfaction in this particular, as we have done in the Mantles belonging to the Soveraign, because the Knights-Companions provided this Robe at their own charge, and their pri|vate accounts, through many casualties were of no great durability; but their Surcoats were of the Soveraign's donation, and consequently the particulars of them remain on Record, in the Rolls and Accounts of the great Wardrobe.
The Colour of these Mantles is appointed by the Statutes to be Ed. 3. Stat. Art. 11.H. 5. Stat. Art. 11. Blue;3. Colour. and of this coloured Cloth, was the Ex praed. Rot. Comp. Io. Coke m. 8. first Robe made for the Founder; by which, as by the ground-work of the Royal Garter it is not unlike, he alluded (in this no less than that) to the Colour of the Field in the French Arms; which a few years be|fore he had assumed in Quarter, with those of his Kingdom of England: But the Colour of the Surcoat was changed every year as will appear by and by. Of the same De Velvet blodio, vid. lib. praed. vocat. C|tom. f. 47.54. Colour were the Velvet Mantles made in King Henry the Sixth's Reign, who though he changed the Stuff, yet did he not vary the dye.
It is also manifest, that the Blue Colour was retained to King Edward the Fourth's Reign, for when this Soveraign sent the Habit and Ensigns of the Order to Iulianus de Medicis, the Mantle was made of Ex Coll. Iac. Ware Eq. Aur. Blue Velvet.
But in King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, there is no mention at all of the Colour of this upper Robe, save only of the Mantle, which a Forreign Princes Proxy is enjoined to bring along with him, when he comes to assume the Stall of his Prin|cipal, which though it be not directly to the point, yet is it there noted to be of Hen. 8. En|glish Statutes Art. 21. Blue Velvet: and it is more than probable, that the Blue Colour continued still in use; for within a few years after the compiling this last mentioned Body of Sta|tutes, it appears, the Mantle sent to Iames King of Scotland, was of Autogr. in Bibl. Hatton. Blue Velvet. And Ututur Pallio coeru|leo. Angl Hist. l. 19 p. 378. Polydore Virgile, who wrote his History about that time, affirms as much. Moreover in the ancient form of admonition and signification, appointed to be spoken at the Investiture of Forreign Princes, and then in use, it is called the Mantle of Accipe Chla|mydem hanc coelii coloris. lib. N p. 310. Celestial Colour.
If we pass from the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, to the first and second years of King Philip and Queen Mary, it will appear, the Mantle sent to Emanuel Duke of Savoy was likewise of Ex lib. Warr. Dorm. temp. H. 8. E. 6. Ph.  Mar.  liz. Reg. in Offic. mag. Gardrob. pag. 364. Blue Velvet.
But in Queen Elizabeth's Reign (upon what ground is no where mentioned) the Colour of Forreign Princes Mantles, was changed from Blue to Purple: for of that Colour were the Mantles sent to the French Kings, Ex lib. Warr. particular. temp. Eliz. R. in Offic. praed. p. 85. Charles the Ninth, anno 6. Eliz. and Ib. p. 201. Henry the Third, an. 27. of the same Queen: So also to the Emperor Ib. p. 17. Maxi|milian, an. 9. Eliz. to Ex lib. 4. in Offic. praed. p. 446. Frederick the Second King of Den|mark, an. 24. Eliz. to Ib. p. 157. Iohn Casimire, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, an. 21. Eliz. and to MS. fol. penes praef. Geo. Owen, York fol. 299. Christierne the Fourth King of Denmark, an. Iac. R. 4. but that sent to Erh. Cellius in Eq. Aur. Anglo. Wirtemb. pag. 135. Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg in the same year, was of a mixt Colour, to wit, Purple with Violet.
Thus the Purple Colour came in, and continued till about the 12. year of King Charles the First, when that Soveraign (having determined to restore the Colour of the Mantle to the primitive Institution, namely a rich Celestial Blue) gave di|rections to Ex Autogr. penes Iac. Pal|mer Eq. Aur. nuper Cancell. hujus Ord. Mr. Peter Richant Merchant (afterwards Knighted by him) to furnish himself with a parcel of Velvets of that Colour from Genoa, and upon their ar|rival into England commanded 3. Ian. 1637. Sir Thomas Rowe, then Chancellor of the Order, forthwith to signifie by Letters to all the Knights-Companions his Soveraign Plea|sure; that every one of them should take so much of that Velvet as would make new Robes, against the following St. George's day, and satisfie for them; in obe|dience to this command the Chancellor within ten days gave notice thereof to the Knights-Companions.
Hereupon all the Knights furnished themselves with new Mantles at the rate of thirty seven shillings a yard, being the price the Soveraign paid to Mr. Richaut for the Velvet of his own Robes; and the first time these Mantles were worn, was to honor the Installation of the present Soveraign.
And because there were many Knights-Elect to be Installed, after the happy re|turn of the present Soveraign, it was therefore Ordered, at a Chapter held at Whitehall, the 14. of Ianuary, an. 12. Car. 2. (called to consider what prepara|tions were fit and necessary to be made, against the grand Feast of St. George then at hand) That directions should be given to the Master of the Wardrobe, to send abroad for special good Velvets, of Skie-colour and Crimson, and other materials of the proper Colours for the Mantles and Surcoats, both of the old Knights-Companions, and those that were then to be Installed; which was ac|cordingly done, and they brought over in time to accommodate them at the said Feast.
4. Quantity.Albeit the just number of Ells of Cloth, which went to the making the Foun|der's first Mantle, are not set down, yet in gross for his Mantle, Hood, and Sur|coat, there was allowed Ex praed. Rot. Camp. Io. Coke, m. 8. 10 Ells of long Cloth. The Mantle of King Henry the Sixth took up Ex lib. praef. vocat. Cotom. f. 52. one Piece, 5 Ells and 3 quarters of Blue Velvet; and those sent to Ex lib. 4. in Offic. mag. Gard. p. 446. Frederick the Second, and MS. fol. penes Geo. Owen nuper York Heraldi. p. 299. Chri|stiern the Fourth, Kings of Denmark, and to the French King Ex lib. Warr. particular temp. Eliz. R. in Offic. mag. Gardrob. p. 201. Henry the Third, contained each 20 yards of Vel|vet. This we find to be the allowance for the Mantles of

Forreign Princes, and are the more large by reason of their long Train, which being wanting in the Mantles of Knights Subjects, 18 yards served to make one of them. The full length of the present Soveraign's Mantle, from the Collar be|hind to the end of the Train, is 3 yards; the length of the foreside 1 yard and 3 quarters; from the foot along the bottom to the setting on of the Train is 2 yards; and from thence, the length or compass of the Train is 2 yards.
The left shoulder of each of these Mantles have (from the Institution of the Order) been adorned with one large fair Garter, 5. Trimming. containing the Motto, Honi soit qui mal y pense: These were distinguished from the lesser Garters, anciently embroidered upon the Surcoats and Hoods, of the Soveraign and Knights-Compa|nions, by the name of Ex eod. lib. voc. Cotm. f. 43.47.12.92.96. b  99. Garters gross.
Within this Garter was embroidered the Ib. f. 2. b. Vid. Hist. Th. de la Mar p. 156. b. MS. Arms of St. George, viz. Argent a Cross Gules; and was heretofore wrought upon Ib. f. 2. b. Vid. Hist. Th. de la Mar p. 156. b. MS. Satin, with Gold, Silver, and Silk; but in succeeding times, more cost was bestowed upon this Ensign; the embroi|dery being curiously wrought upon Velvet, with Damask, Gold, and sundry sorts of Purls, Plates, Venice Twists and Silks; and the Letters of the Motto and Borders of the Garter, composed of fair Oriental Pearl. The Garter fixt upon the Mantle of the present Soveraign, is encompassed with large Oriental Pearl, so also are the Letters of the Motto, and the Cross within the Garter (an exact Figure whereof is to be seen in the Plate set at the beginning of this Chap|ter) the Diameter of this Garter is seven Inches, but the depth, from the upper part to the end of the Pendant, ten Inches.
In the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, it seems to have been the fashion to gar|nish the Mantle with three or four Welts drawn down the sides, and round the bottom; for so have I found it exprest on the Monument of Iohn Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury, set in the South Wall of the Chancel in the Church of Whithurch in Shropshire.
About this time also the Lining of this Robe, was Ex od lib. f. 47.92.  96 b White Damask, and af|terwards Ex vet. per|gam Cod. in Of|fic. mag. Gard. p. 47. White Satin; but of later times, it was lined with White Lab. Warr. Drm. temp. H. 8. c. f. 264 Tassaty, which continues yet in fashion.
For further Ornament, the Mantle had fixed to its Collar, a pair of long strings, anciently woven of Ex lib. praed. voc. Ctom. f. 52 b.  96. b. Blue Silk only; (called Cordans, Robe-strings, or Laces) but of later times Ex Collect. praef. Aug. Vin|cent. twisted round, and made of Venice Gold, and Silk of the Colour of the Robe; at each end of which, hung a great Ex eod. lib. voc. Cotom loco nuper cit Knob or But|ton wrought over and raised with a rich Caul of Gold; and Tassels thereunto of like Silk and Gold.
Lastly, at the Collar was usually fixed, an Ex lib. terti in praed. Offic. p. 17. Hook and eye of Gold; for the surer fastning it about the shoulders.


SECT. III. Of the Surcoat.
WE observed before, that the Mantle or upper Robe is only taken no|tice of in the Founder's Statutes, but not the Surcoat or Kirtle; never|theless this part of the Habit, is as ancient as the other, being made use of at the Institution of the Order: For such a Garment the Founder then made, together with his Mantle (as also a Hood) to wear at the first Feast of this most Noble Order.
And as the Mantle was derived from the Greeks and Romans, so was the Panciroll. li. 1. ver. deperdit. Tit. 44. Sur|coat also; it being not much unlike the Tunik or upper Coat, now in fashion with us, and worn over the Vest. This Garment among the Romans was called Tunica, and worn, Rosin. an|tiq. Rom. l. 5. c. 33. next under the Toga, but both Rosin. an|tiq. Rom. l. 5. c. 33. narrower and shorter than it; it was girded close to the Body with a Girdle, and so girded, that the Quintil. . 11. Hem of it reached

a little below the Knee, or to the middle of the Ham. Rosin. loco cit. Baisius de re Vestiar. p. 212. It was the proper Mode of the Roman Citizens, and by its trimming were the three degrees among them known: For the Rosin. loco cit. Baisius de re Vestiar. p. 212. Senators Tunicks, were embroider'd or purfel'd over with broad purple Studs, the Knights with narrow ones, and the Plebeians plain, and without any such embroidery.
In seting forth the Surcoat which was heretofore annually bestowed by the Soveraign on the Knights-Companions, and therefore called his Liberationes dicuntur res necessariae quae vel ex debito, vel honori grati, Ma|giratui, Hospitibus, seu Peregrinantibus ministrantur. Spelman. Glossar. verbo Li|beratio. Livery, we shall follow the method used in describing the Mantle, and say something of the Name, Materials, Colour, Quantity, and Garnishing.
As to the Name, 1. Its Name. we observe, this Garment hath had sundry denominations; that bestowed on it in the old Rolls of the great Wardrobe is Ex Rot. Com|pot. Iohan. Newbury, an. 34. E. 3. m. 1. penes Rmem. Re|gis in Scaccario,  Rot. Compot. Hen. de Snaith, an. 37. E. 3. m. 3. Vide porro Rot. Com|pot. Alani de Stoke an. 7. R. 2. m. 9.  15.  lib Comp. de liberat. Pannorum, c. temp. R. 2. in Offic. mag. Gardrob. f. 155.167.173.184.194. Roba, a Robe; but more properly (as the Founder's first Surcoat is called) Rot. Compot. Iohan Coke, ab anno 21. ad annum 23. E. 3. m. 8.  lib. R. p. 120. Tunica, which Name is also given it, in the Red Book of the Order. In English it is rendred Gown, Kirtle, MS. in Offic. Armor. [L. 1.] f. 19. Surcoat, Sir Tho. Rowes Iournal. p. 35. Vndercoat, and Robe.
The first of these English Names, [Gown] is attributed to the Surcoats of the Soveraign and Forreign Princes, in the times of Ex Lib. praed. vocat. Cotom. Henry the Sixth, Ex Autogr. penes Iac. Ware Eq. Aur Edward the Fourth, and Ex vet, MS. penes praef. Will. le Neve Eq. Aur. f. 295. Henry the Seventh; but since his Reign, and (till very lately) it hath been bestowed also on the Surcoats of Knights-Compa|nions; and that of Kirtle sometimes given to those sent to Forreign Princes, as doth almost every where appear among the Books of Warrants, in the great Wardrobe; but the rest are terms made use of in our Age.
2. Materials.As the first Mantles, so the first Surcoats were made of Ex praef. Rot. Comp. Io. Coke, m. 8. vide etiam lib. Comp. de Liberat. pannor. temp. R. 2. f. 124.155.167.173.184. c. Woollen-Cloth: and though the Cloth of the Mantles, was in time changed to Velvet, yet were the Surcoats for some time after made of Ex lib. vocat. Cotom. f. 47.  92. Cloth, at least till after the Office of Chan|cellor of the Garter was erected by King Edward the Fourth, as appears by the Ex vet. per|gam. Cod. in Of|fic. mag. Gard|rob. p. 12. Precedent of this Livery, in the Soveraign's great Wardrobe; where after the distribution of materials for this Garment, proportionable to each Degree of Nobility, the like follows for the Liveries, given to the Officers of the Order, among whom the Chancellor is there mentioned. But at length they also came to be made of Velvet, which sort of Silk is still retained.
3. ColourThe Colour of this Vesture was anciently changed every year, commonly in|to one of these four Colours, either Blue, Scarlet, Sanguine in grain, or White; but the Colour of the Mantles remained one and the same, as at the Insti|tution, until Queen Elizabeth's Reign, namely Blue: and note that the Surcoats of the Knights-Companions, were always changed to the same Colour with the So|veraign's.
The Founder's first Surcoat was of the same Cloth and Colour with his Mantle, viz. Ex pread. Rot. Compot. Io Coke. m. 8. Blue; but that Surcoat provided for him in the 34. year of his Reign, was Ex rot. Io. Newbury, m. 13. Black Cloth. And of the Ibid. m 1. same Colour were those he bestowed (against the So|lemnity of the Feast held that year) upon these following Knights-Companions, namely, the Ibid. m. 1. Black Prince, the Earls of Vlster, Richmond, and Salisbury, Edmund of Langley (his Son) Sir Richard la Vache, Sir Hugh Wrotesley, Sir Reignald Cob|ham, Sir Bartholomew Burgherst, the Lord Mohun, Sir Walter Manney, Sir Nele Loring, Sir Walter Paveley, Sir William Fitz Waryn, Sir Miles Stapleton, the Earls of Stafford, Warwick, and Suffolk, and Sir Thomas Vghtred. But we conceive this mourning Colour was then assumed, because the Pestilentia minor. Pestilence began again to encrease; the dreadful remembrance of that great Pestilence, which so furi|ously raged eleven years before (called Pestilentia magna) inviting to all kind of humiliation. The Surcoats which the Soveraign gave the Dukes of Lancaster and Clarence, and 14 other Knights-Companions, Ex praef. Rot. Compt Hen. de Snaith, m. 3. an. 37. E. 3. were of Cloth, San|guine in grain.
Those 24. provided for the Feast of St. George, an 7. R. 2. were Ex praed. Rt. Comp. Alani de Stke, m. 15. Violet in grain; whereof one was for the Soveraign, the other 23. for these Knights-Companions

following, Ib. m. 9. Iohn King of Castile and Leon, Duke of Lancaster, the E of Cambridge, Buckingham, Derby, Kent, Warwick, Stafford, Salis|bury, Northumberland, and Nottingham, the Lords Nevil, Basset, and Iohn Hol|land, Sir Guy Bryan, Sir William Beauchamp, Sir Thomas Percy, Sir Nele Loring, Sir Iohn Sulby, Sir Lodowick Clifford, Sir Simon Burley, Sir Richard Burley, Sir Bryan Stapleton, and Sir Soldan de la Trane.
Anno 11. R. 2. there were made against St. George's Feast, three and twenty Surcoats of De Panno Blank long. Videsis lib. Camp de Libe|rat Panror.  tem R. 2. f. 155.  167. White Cloth, for the Soveraign and 22 Knights-Companions. And in the 12. and 19. year of the same King, the Soveraign bestowed on the same num|ber of Knights, Surcoats of Ib. f. 155.  173. b. long Blue Cloth, as were the first.
The 23 Surcoats provided for the Feast of St. George, an 1. H. 5. were of MS. in Bibl. Hatton. White Cloth.
Anno  H. 6. the Soveraign's Gown or Surcoat was made of Ex lib praed. vocat. Cotom. f. 47. Scarlet; and so was that sent to the Ib. f. 92. King of Portugal in the 13. year of the same King. Anno  H. 6. the Soveraign had Ib. f. 51. White Cloth; and of Ib. f. 71. b. like Colour were the Surcoats provided for 20 Knights-Companions in the  year of his Reign.
Afterwards the before mentioned four Colours, began to be laid aside, and others brought into use; for the Surcoat sent to Iulianus Medices, in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, was Ex Autogr. penes Iac. War Eq. Aut. Purple Velvet.
And by the Soveraign's Warrants entred in the great Wardrobe, towards the latter end of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and since; it is manifest the Surcoats of the Soveraign, and all the Knights-Companions were Crimson Velvet: Nor was this Colour altered in the Surcoat, though the late Soveraign restored the Mantle to its first and ancient Colour, an. 12. Car. 1.
It is evident that in provisions of Surcoats made for the Knights-Companions, 4. Quantity. against one and the same Feast, there hath been some difference in the Quan|tity of the Cloth allowed: for we find, an. 34. E. 3. the Earls of Stafford, Warwick, and Suffolk, as also Sir Thomas Vghtred, had then allowed for each of their Sur|coats, Ex Rot. Compos. I. Newbury. m. 1. 6 Ells of Cloth (perhaps the tallness of their stature required it) when the other 15 Knights-Companions were allowed but Ex rot. Compos. I. Newbury. m. 1. 5 Ells, being the Ibid. m. 13. same quantity put into the Soveraign's Surcoat at the same time.
The Dukes of Holland and Clarence (an. 1. H. 5.) with the Earl of Arundel, were allowed Ex lib. MS. in Bibl. Hatton. 8 Ells of Cloth apiece, the Dukes of Bedford, Gloucester, and York, the Earls of Westmerland and Warwick, the Lords Grey, Fitz-Hugh, and Roos, Ex lib. MS. in Bibl. Hatton. 6 Ells apiece, the Earls of Dorset, with six Barons, and five Knights-Bat|chellors, but Ex lib. MS. in Bibl. Hatton. 5 Ells apiece.
Afterwards, when the number of Ells of Cloth, Garters, and Furrs came to be ascertained for each Degree, all the Knights-Companions (even the Prince of Wales) were stinted to a certain allowance of Ex vet. per|gam. Cod. fol. in Offic. mag. Gardrob. f. 1. 5 Ells of Cloth. But since Velvet came into use, the allowance for Surcoat and Hood (as appears by the Soveraign's Warrants) hath been eighteen yards; that is, while the Surcoat reached down to the feet, but now it being the fashion to wear it shorter, the allowance is but ten yards.
The length of the now Soveraign's Surcoat, is one yard and a half; and of the sleeve one yard wanting a Nail.
In the last place, 5. Trimming. the ornamental Trimmings of these Garments, especially at the time of Instituting the Order, are worthy observation; for they were then, and for a long time after, garnished or Ex praed. Rot. Comp. Io. Coke m. 8. powdered all over with little Gar|ters, embroided with Silk and Gold Plate; in each of which was neatly wrought the Motto, Honi soit qui mal y pense. Besides, the Buckles and Pendants to these small Garters were Silver, gilt. Of these embroidered Garters, there were laid upon the first Surcoat and Hood made for the Founder, no less than Ex praed. Rot. Comp. Io. Coke m. 8. 168.
In King Richard the Second's Reign, the little Garters that adorned the Surcoats of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, were wrought in embroidery upon Lib. comp. de Libera Pannor. c. temp. R. 2. f. 155.173.184:  Ret. Comp. Alani de Stoke m. 15. Blue Taffaty, with Cyprus and Soldat Gold, and Silk of divers Colours; and the Letters Lib. comp. de Libera Pannor. c. temp. R. 2. f. 155.173.184:  Ret. Comp. Alani de Stoke m. 15. Gold.
And as the Soveraign was not limited in the proportion of Cloth or Velvet for his Surcoat; no more was he confined, to a certain number of Garters, wherewith

to adorn it: nor do I find, that any of the Knights-Companions were, until the Precedent of the Livery of the Garter was setled. For an. 1. H. 5. the Dkes of Holland and Clarence, the Earl of Arundel, the Dukes of Bedford and Gloucester, had each of their Surcoats adorn'd with MS. in Bibl. Hatton. 120 Garters: but the Duke of York, and the rest of the Earls, Barons, and Knights-Batchelors wore but 100.
The setlement in the Precedent of the Livery was made in relation to the De|grees of honor of each Knight-Companion, according to which, they had an al|lowance of a greater or lesser number of Garters, that is to say

A Duke 120 Garters.
A Marquess 110 Garters.
An Earl 100 Garters.
A Viscount 90 Garters.
A Baron 80 Garters.
A Baneret 70 Garters.
A Knight-Batchellor 60 Garters.

About the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, the Soveraign's number of Garters did not much exceed those which the Founder allowed to himself at the Institu|tion; for the Surcoat and Hood of the said King, took up but Ex praed. lib.  Cotom. f 52. b. 173. and the King of Portugal, an. 13. H. 6. Ib. f. 92. 120 Garters. But this manner of adorning these Gar|ments, grew at length quite out of fashion (perhaps when Cloth was altered to Velvet) and the plain Surcoat hath to this day continued in use.
In the second place it is to be noted, that all these Surcoats (whilst made of Cloth) were lined with Fur, of one and the same kind, to wit, with Bellies of pure Miniver; only the Soveraign's were E praef Rot. Compot. Io. Newbury m. 13.  Lib. Comp. de liberat. Pan|, remp. R. 2. f. 129 vid por|ro lib. praed. vo|cat Cotom. f. 51 b.  f. 104. purfled with Ermyn; and of these it seems a like proportion was at first allowed to all the Knights-Companions, viz. Ex eod. Rt. Comp Io. New|bury m. 1.  Rot. Comp. praef. H Sith m. 3.  Rot. Comp. praed. Al. de Stoke m. 9. 200 Bellies.
Yet in the Reign of King Richard the Second, some difference began in the allowance to the Knights-Companions; for a Baron and all Degrees upward had the same allowance of Ex eod. lib. Comp. de liberat. Pan|nor f. 167.173.  184. 200 Bellies, but the Degrees under a Baron only Ex eod. lib. Comp. de liberat. Pan|nor f. 167.173.  184. 120. Howbeit an. 1. H. 5. the Barons were equalled to the Knights-Batchellors, for all Degrees MS in Bibl. Hatton. above a Baron were allowed a Fur of 200 Bellies, but the Barons and Knights Batchellors Furs were only of 120 Bellies.
Afterwards by the Precedent of the Garter, there was another Proportion set; the Prince, a Duke, a Marquess, an Earl, had each of them Ex vet. per|gun. Codic. in Offic. mag. Gardr. p. 12. 5 Timber of pure Miniver allowed to a Surcoat, but the Viscount, Baron, Baneret, and Batche|lor Knight, but 3 Timber apiece. In time these Furs also were laid aside, and then the Surcoats came to be lined with White Sarcenet, to which, in Queen Eli|zabeth's Reign, White Taffaty succeeded, and that still continues.
What became of these Surcoats heretofore, seeing the Knights-Companions had new ones every year, appears from this Note entred in the Black Book of the Order, Pag. 318. That on the Eve of the Feast of St. George, the Knights wore to Vespers the Soveraign's Livery or Surcoats used by them the preceding year, which after that night they did not wear (for the new Surcoats were first worn on the Feast-day) but the Ensigns and Ornaments of this kind, were afterwards disposed of to the use of the Colledge.


SECT. IV. Of the Hood and Cap.
THE Hood comes in the next place to be spoken of, which in King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, and the Black Book of the Order, is called Humerale;

but in the Rolls of Accounts in the Soveraign's great Wardrobe, Capucium. In the French it is Chaperon, a word used in the Statute, an. 1. Ric. 2. c. 7. and also retained in an old English Draught of Henry the Eighth's Statutes, that seems to have been prepared for the view of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, at their solemn meeting in Chapter at Windesor, an. 11. H. 8. for it carries the date of 29. of May, in that same year; on which day that memorable Chapter was held, for Reforming and Explaining the Statutes of the Order.
Hoods were anciently worn for defence of the Head, against the inconveni|ences of weather, c. but in later times Caps and Hats have supplied their place. How they were then worn and sat upon the Head, may be observed in that Vide infra Chap. 26. Plate, which exhibits the Portraictures of the first Founders of the Order, standing compleatly robed. As also with some variety of fashion in succeeding times, in the Pictures of Dugdales Antiq. of War|wickh. p. 121. William Beauchamp Lord Bergaveny, Richard Earl of Warwick, Humfry Earl of Stafford, and Iohn Duke of Norfolk. Yet is not the Hood quite laid aside, since still kept hanging down the back (almost like a Pil|grims Hat) as if put in hopes (being so ready at hand) that it may again be re|stored to its former use.
This Hood was Ordained, and is yet retained as part of the Habit of this most Noble Order: And though neither it, nor the Surcoat is remembred in the Sta|tutes of Institution, or in either of its Exemplars, nor doth King Henry the Fifth's take notice of it, yet is it of equal antiquity with the rest of the Habit; as ap|pears from several places before cited, out of the Rolls of the great Wardrobe; and Henry the Eighth's Statutes have made special observation of it, as part of the Habit, for there the Mantle, Surcoat, Hood, and Collar, are called Art. 3. the whole Habit of the Order. Nay, before this time, mention is made of it in the Black Book anno 22. H. 7. where at the Investiture of Philip King of Casile, the Mantle, Kir|tle, Pag. 184. Hood, and Collar, are exprest to be the whole Habit, wherewith he was invested.
The form of this part of the Habit is perfectly described in the Plate at the be|ginning of this Chapter. It was heretofore, and now is, generally made of the same materials with the Surcoat, and consequently of the same Colour. More|over it was anciently trim'd and garnished, with a proportion of little embroi|dered Garters, lined with Cloth of a different colour, and such as would best set off to view; but now with Taffaty, as is the Lining of the Surcoat; of all which mention is made, in those authorities cited before, and relating to the Surcoat.
As to the Cap, which in use and place succeeded the Hood, we shall brief|ly say thus much: That it hath been, and yet is made of Black Velvet, lin'd with Taffaty, but the fashion hath several times varied: for in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, the Cap was flat, as appears in a Proceeding of that Soveraign, and the Knights-Companions, fairly limned in the Pag. 19. Black Book of the Order. In Queen Elizabeth's time, it was a little raised in the head, as may be seen in ano|ther Proceeding in her Reign, which Chap. 20. hereafter follows. But in King Iames his Reign, they were much more high crown'd; and the present fashion is shewn in our before mentioned Plate.
This Cap hath been usually adorned with Plumes of white Feathers, and Sprigs, and bound about with a Band, set thick with Diamonds; Lib. R. p. 146 so was that Cap provided for the Installation of the present Soveraign: And sometimes the Brims have been tackt up with a large and costly Jewel.
It seems the custom of wearing Caps and Feathers at the grand Solemnities of the Order, had for some time (about the beginning of King Iames his Reign) been neglected; and thereupon, in a MS. penes Edw. Fancon|bridge gen. Chapter held the 13. of April, an. 10. Iac. Regis, this laudable usage was re-established.
To all these may be fitly added, the Cross of the Order, encompassed with a Garter, which by King Charles the First was Lib. R. p. 29. Ordained to be worn, upon the left side of the Soveraign's and Knights-Companions Cloaks, Coats, and Cassocks, when they did not wear their Robes. The Order for which we shall here insert.


Charles R.
Ex Collect. Praef. Will. le Neve.WHereas the Robes concerning the Order, first, having the same ordinary use which Cloaks have at this time, and now are worn only at the Feast of St. George, Installing of Knights, and holding of Chapters, so that the Arms of the Garter, not being daily worn thereon, may be thought an omission, whereby the Order doth receive some diminution of honor, contrary to the intention of the Foun|der. King Charles out of his princely desire by all due means to advance the honor of the said Noble Order, at a Chapter holden at his Palace of Westminster, on the 27. day of April, in the 2. year of his Reign of Great Britain, the same day, being by Prorogation appointed for the day and Feast of St. George, for that year, His Majesty, with eleven Knights of the Order, viz. Edward Earl of Worcester Lord Privy Seal, Robert Earl of Sussex, William Earl of Pembroke Lord Chamberlain of his Majesties House, Philip Earl of Montgomery, Francis Earl of Rutland, George Duke of Buckingham Lord high Admiral of England, William Earl of Sa|lisbury, James Earl of Carlisle, Edward Earl of Dorset, Henry Earl of Holland, Captain of his Majesties Guard, and Thomas Earl of Berkshire, hath Ordered and and Ordained, That the Knights and Companions of the Order, and the Prelate and Chancellor of the same, shall after three months next ofter the date before men|tioned of the said Order, wear upon the left part of their Cloaks, Coats, and Riding Cassocks, at all times when they shall not wear their Robes, and in all Places and Assemblies, an Escotcheon of the Arms of St. George, that is to say, a Cross within a Garter, not enriched with Pearls or Stones; that the wearing thereof may be a te|stimony apert to the World, of the honor they hold from the said most Noble Order, Instituted and Ordained for persons of the highest honor and greatest worth.

And it seems it was not long after e're the Glory or Star (as it is usually called) having certain beams of Silver that spread in form of a Cross, was introduced and added thereunto, in imitation (as is thought) of the French, who after that manner wore the chief Ensign of the Order of the Holy Ghost, being the resem|blance of a Dove, irradiated with such like beams.
And whereas some allow this Symbol of the Holy Ghost, to be properly enough surrounded with a Glory, like as are the representations of the Heads of our Saviour and his Apostles, by a general consent among Painters, yet censure it altogether improper for a Garter to be so adorned; let them consider that King Edward the Fourth, encompassed his White Rose with the like Glory (whereof both the Stone-work, and Wood-work of St. George's Chappel in Windesor Castle afford divers instances) and then there will be found something of Precedent for it, long before Institution of the Order of the Holy Ghost, as also of its appli|cation to other no less than sacred things. But this King assumed this Devise, upon the Sun's appearance like three Suns, which suddenly united together in|to one, immediately before his fortunate Victory at the Battel of Mortimer's Cross: an occasion, which he thought himself much obliged to perpetuate.
And they mistake, who take it to be the Garter, in this new Ornament, that is thus irradiated, but there is something else in it, which was then thought more worthy of the Glory, and from it, not the Garter, do the beams and rays spread; namely the Cross of the Order, esteemed glorious, since it shined so in Heaven, at its appearance to Constantine the Great; which that it may more evidently appear, a draught of the Medal stamped in memorial of adding this honorable Devise is here repre|sented, whereby it is manifest, the Glory issues from the Cross, not Garter.





SECT. V. The Robes anciently assigned to the Queen and great Ladies.
HAving thus dispatcht our discourse concerning the Robes of the Order, we shall next give some light to a Custom taken up shortly after its Instituti|on, of honoring the Queen, some of the Knights-Companions Wives; and other great Ladies, with Robes and Hoods, of the gift of the Soveraign, and of the same materials, as were the Soveraign's and Knights-Companions Surcoats; garnished also with little embroidered Garters, and lined with rich Furs; which Robes they likewise wore during the Solemnity of the Feast of St. George.
The first mention of this, which hath occurr'd to us, is Ex praed. Rot. Comp. Alani de Stoke m. 9. an. 7. R. 2. (though we conceive tis elder) where, against the Feast of St. George, appointed to be held that year, such kind of Robes and Hoods were provided for the Ex praed. Rot. Comp. Alani de Stoke m. 9. Queen, the So|veraign's Mother, the Dutchess of Lancaster, the Countesses of Cambridge, Buck|ingham, Penbroke, Oxford, and Salisbury, the Ladies Philippa and Katherine, Daughters to the Duke of Lancaster and the Lady Mohun.
They were made of Cloth Ex praed. Rot. Comp. Alani de Stoke m. 9. Violet in grain, like as the Soveraign and Knights-Companions Surcoats that year. The Robes lined with Ex praed. Rot. Comp. Alani de Stoke m. 9. Fur, but the Hoods, with Ex praed. Rot. Comp. Alani de Stoke m. 9. Scarlet, and both embroidered over with Ex praed. Rot. Comp. Alani de Stoke m. 9. little Garters; and the proportion of Cloth, Furs, and Garters were allowed according to their several Degrees. For the Queens allowance was Ex praed. Rot. Comp. Alani de Stoke m. 9. 8 Ells of Cloth, and half an Ell of Scarlet, for the lining of her Hood; the Soveraign's Mother had allowed her one whole Cloth, and a double proportion of Scarlet: but we conceive she had two Robes and Hoods made at this time, in regard so large quantity of all things were assigned her, besides the particular number (accounting the Queen for one) are but 11. and cannot else reach the total of Robes provided for them, and expresly set down to be Ibid. m. 1. 12.
The Dutchess of Lancaster had the allowance of half a Cloth, and half an Ell of Scarlet, the Couness of Cambridge 7 Ells of Cloth, and half an Ell of Scarlet; and the rest of the Ladies the same proportion of Cloth with the Knights-Companions; that is, each of them 5 Ells apiece, and half an Ell of Scarlet.
According to their proportion of Cloth, was also their proportion of Mini|vers, the Queens allowance was two Furs, each of them containing 300 Bellies of pure Miniver; the Soveraign's Mother had double that proportion; the Dut|chess of Lancaster, and Countess of Cambridge a like proportion of Minivers as had the Queen, but all the rest of the Ladies had only one Fur, consisting of 200 Bellies of pure Miniver Besides, the embroidered Garters provided to adorn and garnish the Ibid. m. 1. 24 Surcoats of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, and the Ibid. m. 1. 12 Robes for the Queen and other Ladies, amounted to the number of Ibid. m. 1. 2900 Garters.
In like manner were there prepared against the Feast of St. George, an. 11. R. 2. Lib. Comp. de Liberat. Pannor. temp. Ric. 2. in Offic. praed. f. 167. 15 Robes and Hoods for the Queen and other Ladies, of the same livery and sute, which the Soveraign and Knights-Companions then wore: namely, white long Cloth, and blue Cloth for the lining of their Hoods: the proportion in all things being like the former: Lib. Comp. de Liberat. Pannor. temp. Ric. 2. in Offic. praed. f. 167. The Dutchess of York having here the like allowance as had the Dutchess of Lancaster above mentioned.
Anno 13. R. 2. the Ladies Robes and Hoods were Ibid. f. 184. Sanguine Cloth, and the lining of their Hoods Cloth in grain; and in the 19. year of the same King they were Ib. f. 173. Blue Cloth, and long Cloth in grain for lining their Hoods. In both these years we find the Dutchess of Aquitane had double the proportion of Cloth allowed her (as had also the Dutchess of York) viz. 14 Ells (the Queen having then but the former allowance of 8 Ells) and yet her proportion of lining both for the Robe and Hood, was no more than is mentioned before be allowed the Queen.
But an. 1. H. 5. the proportion of Cloth, Minivers, and Garters were alike to Ladies

of all Degrees, whether Dutchesses, Countesses, or other Ladies, and that was to each 5 Ells of White Wollen Cloth, (only the Queen Mother had 8 Ells of White Cloth, and 8 Ells of Black Cloth) a Fur containing 200 Bellies of Mini|ver pure, and 100 embroidered Garters. And by a Ex Collect. Guil. le. Neve Eq Aur. nuper Clarenc. Letter dormant, under the Privy Seal, dated the 3. of November an. 12. H. 6. and directed to the then Ma|ster of the Soveraign's great Wardrobe, the like Livery (both for Colour of Cloth, number of Ells, Bellies of Miniver, and Garters) is commanded to be provided, for the Countess of Suffolk, against the succeeding Feast of St. George.
The last mention we find of these Liveries was MS. penes Hen. St. George Ar. Richmond Herald. an. 16. E. 4. when at the Feast of St. George, held the Sunday after the 27. of February at Windesor, the Queen, the Lady Elizabeth the Kings eldest Daughter, and Dutchess of Suffolk the Kings Si|ster, had for their Livery Murrey Gowns embroidered with Garters.
Besides, these Robes worn by the Ladies, at the Festivals of the Order, there seems to be some intimation of wearing a Garter also on their left arms, in like manner as the Knights-Companions do on their left Legs; for it is observed to our hand, from the Countess of Ex praef. lib. vocat. Com. f. 92. Tankerviles Monument, that she is portrayed with such a Garter on her left Arm.
After a long disuse of these Robes by the Queens of England, and Knights-Com|panions Ladies, there was (at the Feast of St. George, celebrated an. 14. Car. 1.) endeavour used to have them restored; for the then Deputy Chancellor moved the Soveraign in Chapter (held the Sir Iames Palmers large Iour|nal, p. 16. 22. of May) Sir Iames Palmers large Iour|nal, p. 16. That the Ladies of the Knights-Companions might have the priviledge to wear a Garter of the Order about their arms; and an upper Robe, at Festival times, according to ancient usage. Upon which motion the Soveraign gave Order, Sir Iames Palmers large Iour|nal, p. 16. That the Queen should be acquainted therewith, and her pleasure known, and the affair left to the Ladies particular suit.
The See his Iournal pro anno 1639. p. 59. 10. of October in the following year (the Feast of St. George, being then also kept at Windesor) the Deputy Chancellor, See his Iournal pro anno 1639. p. 59. reported to the Soveraign in Chapter, the Answer which the Queen was pleased to give him to the aforesaid Order; See his Iournal pro anno 1639. p. 59. Whereupon it was then left to a Chapter to be called by the Knights-Com|panions to consider of every circumstance, how it were fittest to be done, for the ho|nor of the Order; which was appointed to be held at London, about Alhollantide after: but what was then, or after done, doth not appear; and the unhappy War coming on, this matter wholly slept.


SECT. VI. Of Collars in general.
THE Collar is an Ornament, not of late, but ancient invention; and cer|tainly, could we not deduce its antiquity very high, yet the wonderful consent of most Nations therein, would sufficiently plead for it, since such a consent can scarce be found, unless in things most ancient.
As to its Antiquity, the Author of the first Book of   Gen. 41. v. 42. Sacred Writ, setting down the Ornaments bestowed by Pharaoh on Ioseph, mentions the Collar to be one, and of Gold; that being the Metal whereof it was in all times ordinarily made: And it may be inferr'd, the use of it in that, was the same as in this Age, viz. to be worn about the neck; in regard Pharaoh put it about Ioseph's Neck.
Again, the Draught of that most ancient Hierogliphical Table, reserved of old in the Temple of Isis in Aegypt, and most happily conserved till of late years (when, though it unhappily perished at the Athan Kir|cher. Oedip. Tom. 3. p. 80. sacking of Mantua by the Spaniards, an. 1630. yet was fortunately set forth before in Picture by Laurentius Pignorius) doth evidence the great antiquity of this Ornament among them; for there are to be found incircling the Necks of the Images of Isis and Osiris such like Collars, in a

manner extending to their shoulders: Their workmanship seems curious, being intersected with various lines, and divided with Tablets and precious Stones.
The Collar became first and principally famous among the Romans, for having given a Liv. l. 7. c. 10. Surname of perpetual memory to one of the chiefest Families in Rome, derived unto it from T. Manlius Torquatus, who fought with a Champion of the Gauls, neer the River Anio, Anno V. C. 392. and having vanquished him, Gell l. 4. c. 14. cut off his Head, then pluckt off his Collar, and (bloody as it was) put it about his own neck. Livy saith, Lo itato. the Soldiers, when they presented him to the Dictator, were heard to Surname him Torquatus, and from him that honorable name de|scended to his Posterity.
In further memory of this gallant action, and to shew the original of this Surname, the representation of the Collar of this Gaul, is found stamped upon some Roman Coyns, in particular that referring to Fuv. Vrs. de Familiis Romanor. p 152. L. Torquatus, Consul with Fasti l. 1. L. Cotta, An V. C. 688. which we have here inserted, to the end its fashion may be the better known.





And we shall herewith note, that when one of another Tribe became adopt|ed into this Family, he also did assume this Badge of Honor; as may be seen in another Coyn relating to D. Iunius Silanus, sometime Flor. Epit. L. 54. Pretor of Macedonia, adopted into the Manlian Family of the Torquati; though the fashion of the work be somewhat differing from the former.
In eldest times, none but Kings and Princes wore Collars, and therefore their first use seems to be a note of Dignity and Power: as is evident out of Daniel, where is noted, that the Assyrian Kings used this Ornament. Afterwards men fa|mous for wisdom, excelling in Counsels, and thereby beneficial to their Country, had Collars bestowed on them, for tokens of Reward; and this is plain, as in the Example of Ioseph, so likewise from the Dan. c. 5. . . Proclamation of Belshazzar King of Babylon, among the Rewards proposed to him, that could read and interpret the Writing on the Wall. But the Collar was bestowed as a Reward also upon those, whose famous actions and military enterprises merited well, and rendered them deserving of eminent recompences, though otherwise persons of no great or ex|traordinary note.
Thus the Romans among the Such were the Coronae, Armillae, Ha|stae, Phalerae, Vexilla, c. Dona  Praemia Militaria, those solemn Re|wards, wherewith they honored Virtue, which upon occasion of merit and de|sert, they bestowed among such of their Commanders and Soldiers, as had gal|lantly exposed their lives to dangers for the service of that Common-wealth; and no less to excite others to like performances, than to recompence the deserving for great services done; among these (we say) Collars were of the number, and the honor of receiving them thought worthy to be preserved for the notice of Po|sterity, in Marble Inscriptions; of which sort there are many collected by the in|dustrious Pag. 358, Inscr 2. p. 391. Inscr. 4. p. 443. Inscr. 2. p. 1102 Inscr. 4. Gruter, out of whom, for a specimen of this kind, we have transcrib|ed this that follows,
Pag. 429, Inscr. 1. M. LICINIO. MVCIANO. c.
DONIS. DONATOob vir+
TVTEM. ET. FORTITVDINEM.
BELLO. DACICO. AB. IMP. TRAIANO.
CORONA. VICTRICI. PVRA. HASTA. TOR|QVIBVS.
ARMILLIS. PHALERIS. c.
This custom of bestowing Collars, as a peculiar Reward for military and me|morable services, was continued down to, and used by the later Emperors, as the learned Budaeus observes. And we read of Investing a Knight of the Sepulchre

with a Collar, at his Creation: where assoon as the Ceremony of his Ordina|tion is finished, the Padre Guardian kisseth the new made Knight, and Fr. Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 46. puts about his neck (according to the manner of Ancients) a Golden Collar, with a Cross hanging thereat.
Most fitly therefore have the Soveraigns of Military Orders, added this Orna|ment of the Collar to their Habit, and bestowed it on the Fellows and Compani|ons; many of whom have meritoriously deserved it, upon account of those an|cient qualifications, Wisdom and Valour.


SECT. VII. The Collar of the Order.
HEreupon also, in addition to the Ensigns and Ornaments of this most Noble Order of the Garter, there was instituted a Collar, composed after a peculiar manner, exactly relative to the name and title of the Order; to the wearing of which, the Soveraign obliged both himself, and Knights-Companions, and His and their Successors.
This Collar was Ordained to be Hen. 8. Stat. Art. 38. Gold, 30 ounces Troy weight, but not above: howbeit, that Collar sent to Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, weighed 34 ounces and a quarter; and that belonging to the late Soveraign King Charles the First, 35 ounces and a half; which after his Sufferings coming into the hands of Ex Rela|tione Tho. Beauchamp gen. Thomas Harison, sometime called Major General Harison, was by him delivered to the Trustees for sale of this Kings Goods, who Ex Rela|tione Tho. Beauchamp gen. Anno 1649. sent it to the Mint with the Ex Rela|tione Tho. Beauchamp gen. Regalia here particularized to set the Stamp on work for the first Gold that the upstart Common-wealth coyned, viz.

The Imperial Crown,Inventory Book of the late Kings Goods, fl. 36.a. weighing 7 l. 6 ounces, enriched with 19 Saphirs (3 of which were exceeding large) 232 Pearls, 58 Rubies, 28 Diamonds and 2 Emeralds.
The Queens Crown, weighing 3 l. 10 ounces 1 half, enriched with 20 Sa|phirs, 22 Rubies, and 83 Pearls.
An ancient Crown weighing 2 l. 1 ounce, enriched with one fair Diamond (valued by the Trustees, who rated such things far beneath their worth, at 200 l.) 13 other Diamonds, 10 Rubies, 1 Emerald, 1 Saphir (valued by them at 60 l.) and 70 Pearls; which Stones and Pearls weighed 3 ounces.
The Globe or Orb,Fol. 37. weighing 1 l. 5 ounces 1 quarter.
Two Coronation Bracelets (adorned with 3 Rubies Ballas, and 12 Pearls weighing an ounce) in all 7 ounces 1 quarter.
Two Scepters, weighing 18 ounces 1 quarter.
A long Rod Silver gilt, weighing 1 l. 5 ounces.
One Gold Porringer and Cover, weighing 15 ounces 1 half.
One Chalice, adorned with 2 Saphirs and 2 Ballas Rubies, weighing 15 ounces 1 half.
Two Patena's enamelled, weighing 25 ounces 1 half.
Two Spoons, with flat heads, weighing 5 ounces 1 quarter.
One Taster, enamelled with a Phenix, weighing 5 ounces 1 half.
Two Offering Pieces and a Sey of Gold, weighing 10 ounces 1 quarter.
Queen Edith's Crown (formerly thought to be of massy Gold,Fol. 40. . . but upon tryal found Silver gilt) enricht with Garnets, Pearls, Saphirs, and other Stones, weighing 50 ounces.
King Elfrid's Crown, of Gold Wirework, set with Stones, and two little Bells, weighing 79 ounces  half.
A Patena enamelled, set with Stones, weighing 23 ounces 1 half.
The Ampulla, set with Stones and Pearls, weighing 8 ounces 1 half.
A large Staff, with a Dove on the top, the upper part Gold, the lower part Silver gilt, weighing 27 ounces.
A small Staff, with a flower de Lis on the top, being Iron within, and Silver gilt without.
Two Scepters, one set with Pearls and Stones, the upper end Gold, weighing 23 ounces, the lower end Silver gilt. The other Scepter Silver gilt, having a Dove weighing 7 ounces 3 quarters.
The Gold of the Tassels of a Liver-coloured Robe (adorned with Pearl) weighing 4 ounces, also the Gold of the Neck Button of the Coat, weigh|ing 1 ounce.
A pair of Silver gilt Spurs, set with 12 Stones, (having Straps of Crimson Silk) weighing 6 ounces 3 quarters.

Besides these, there were other parts of the Regalia fetcht from Westminster-Abbey, and sold by these Trustees, namely

One large Chalice of Glass, wrought in Figures, and set in Gold, with Stones and Pearls, weighing 68 ounces 1 half.
A Staff of black and white Ivory, having a Dove on the top, the binding and feet Gold.
A Silver Spoon gilt weighing 3 ounces.
One Crimson Tafsaty Robe.Ibid. f. 41.
One Robe trim'd with Gold Lace.
One Liver-coloured Silk Robe.
One Robe of Crimson Tafsaty Sarcenet.
One pair of Buskins Cloth of Silver.
One pair of Shoes Cloth of Gold.
One pair of embroidered Gloves.
Three Swords, with Scabards Cloth of Gold.
One Horn Comb.

It was further appointed by King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, that this Collar should be composed ofArt. 38. pieces of Gold in fashion of Garters, the ground enamelled Blue, and the Letters of the Motto Gold. In the midst of each Garter, two Art. 38. Roses placed, the innermost enamelled Red, and the outermost White; contrarily in the next Garter, the innermost Rose enamelled White, and the outermost Red; and so alternately continued: but of later times these Roses are wholly Red.
The number of these Garters are so many, as be the ordained number of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, by the Institution of the Order, viz. Twenty six; being tyed together with as many Knots of Gold: and this fashion hath in all particulars hitherto continued invariable.
Nor ought the Collar to be garnished or enriched with precious Stones (as may the George which hangs thereat) such costly embelishments being absolutely pro|hibited by the Ibid. Law of the Order.
At the middle of the Collar before, is to be fastned the Image of St. George arm|ed, sitting on Horseback, who having thrown the Dragon upon his back, en|counters him with a tilting Spear. This Jewel is not surrounded with a Garter, or row of Diamonds, as is the lesser George, but made according to the representa|tion in the Plate above, and called the Great George. It is allowed to be Ibid. gar|nished with Diamonds, and other enrichments, at the pleasure of the Knight-Companion who owns it; and upon that license, hath been frequently adorned with variety of costly art, whereon the Diamonds and other precious Stones are so disposed, as may upon its motion and agitation cast out the greater lustre.
But before the establishment of this Article by King Henry the Eighth, it appears the Knights-Companions were invested with Collars at their installations; for the Black Book takes notice of a Propriam Or|dini Togam Trabeam Hu|merale ac Col|lare statim induit. p. 84. Collar among the Ensigns of the Order, wherewith

Philip King of Castile was invested, an. 22. H. 7. but whether a Collar of SS, or other fashion, doth not there appear. Nevertheless this doubt is in part cleared, by an old memorial of the ceremonies used at the MS. in Of|ic. Arm. [L. 12.] f. 27. Creation of Henry Lord Staf|ford Earl of Wiltshire (Brother to Edward Duke of Buckingham) 3. Feb. an. 1. H. 8. where it is noted, that after he was invested with the Robes of his State and Dignity, MS. in Of|ic. Arm. [L. 12.] f. 27. The Collar of the Garter was put about his neck, denoting him a Knight of that Order.
And to make it yet more evident, there is found in a Penes Arthur. Com. Anglesey. Vellom Book of Statutes in French, sent to Maximilian the Emperor, signed the 5. of Ianuary 1508. by T. Rowthale then Register of the Order. And in In Biblioth. Haon. another belonging to Edward Stanley Lord Mounteagle, elected Lib. N p. 202. an. 6. H. 8. a particular Article (namely the 41.) that Ordains a Collar to be publickly worn by each Knight-Companion, there called the Collar of the Order, which though it be not in all respects agreea|ble to the fashion of that prescribed by King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, yet comes it very neer, and said to be a Gold Collar, coupled together by several pieces of Links in fashion of Garters, with a Vermilion Rose, and the Image of St. George hung thereat. The reason of the Knights-Companions wearing it, the times appointed therefore, the License for putting it to mending, the command not to enrich the Collar, but the George only, and obligation not to sell, pawn, or alienate it for any necessity whatsoever, are wholly the same, as were afterwards enjoined by Art. 38. King Henry the Eight; so that in truth he did no more but adjoin to his Body of Statutes, a Decree, which (for the main) had been in practice be|fore. Besides, an. 11. H. 8. upon interpretation of the 11. Article of the Statutes for wearing the Habit of the Order, at the grand Feast of St. George; the Ibid. p. 209. Collar is there enumerated among those Ornaments (as part of the whole Habit) that a Knight-Companion is obliged to wear.
In further proof that the Collar of Garters was used before King Henry the Eight's Reign, let us offer here the Monument of Sir Giles Daubeney (who died an. 22. H. 7.) erected in St. Paul's Chappel seituate on the north side of St. Ed|ward's Shrine in Westminster Abbey, whereon his Portraicture, in his Robes of the Order, is adorned with such a Collar, as King Henry the Eighth's Statutes do af|terwards describe.
As the Garter sent to Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, so the great George (pendant at his Collar, weighing seven ounces) was set with large and resplen|dent Diamonds; the particulars and order do fully appear, out of the Counter|part of that Inventory (mentioned at the beginning of this Chapter) taken upon its delivery into the custody of the Dean and Canons of Windesor, and were as followeth.

In the three Chains of the George, small Diamonds
10
In St. George's Feather, three small, middlemost wanting
2
In his Forehead
1
In his Breast-plate, four faucet Diamonds, of a reasonable bigness
4
In the right Arm, faucet big
4
In the left Arm
4
In his Baces, of a big sort
4
Thigh, Knee, Leg, and Foot, one in each
4
The Horses head, in the forehead a faucet Diamond
1
In his Crest, very small, beside two wanting
5
In his Mane, four lozenge Diamonds
4
In his Neck
1
In his Bridle [4] small, one wanting
3
On his shoulder, two square, and two lozenge Diamonds of a bigger size
4
On his buttock, one square Diamond, and eight about, on his Traps and Crupper six, four wanting on the border of his saddle behind
21
Four square Diamonds large, at the skirts and leg
4





Between the fore legs, one fair square Diamond
1
The Dragon's forehead
1
In his Wing and Body, faucet Diamonds, one wanting
9
Total of the George are just
87

This George (with the Collar) was sold by the Trustees for sale of the late Kings Goods, to the before named Thomas Beauchamp.
Of what account this Noble Ensign of Honor [the Collar] hath been with the Soveraigns, and Knight-Companions, not only of the Order of the Garter, but other Military Orders; may be observed from the Pictures of some of them, as al|so their Seals, Coyns, and Medals: which later passing up and down, after a pub|lick manner, proclaim its honor throughout the world: for in these they have been pleased to exhibit as well their Effigies, as Scutcheons of Arms, incircled there|with; and also the Symbols of their several Orders pendant thereto.
There is a Picture (hanging in his Majesties Gallery at Whitehall) of Philip Duke of Burgundy, Founder of the Golden Fleece, adorned with the Collar of that Order. And the leading example of the like representation in Seals, was first given by a Successor of his, above 180 years since, as appears from the great Seal of Sigilla Co|mit. Flandria. p. 116. Maximilian and Philip his Son, Archdukes of Austria, Burgundia, c. fixed to the agreement of Peace made between them and the Flemings, an. 1485. wherein the Pictures of both these Princes are represented, wearing their Collars of the Golden Fleece; and this fashion hath been since continued in Seals, by their descendents Kings of Spain, Soveraigns of that Order.
The French King Lewis the Eleventh, after he had instituted the Order of St. Mi|chael, caused his Picture to be drawn (hitherto preserved at Fountain-bleau) with the Collar of that Order; the Copy of which Franois de Mezeray, having ex|hibited in his Tom. 2. p. 98. History of France, we thence made a draught of it.
In like manner, in a Picture of Ame the Tenth Duke of Savoy (now hanging in the Gallery at Whitehall) is represented the ancient Collar of the Annunciade, and thereon the Motto in old Characters, used at the Foundation of that Order: All which we have caused to be etch'd (Tab. 1.) for the Readers satisfaction; to|gether with the Medals made upon the Coronation of King Charles the First at Westminster, and of the present Soveraign there also, on the Feast day of St. George (Patron to this most Noble Order of the Garter) an. 1661. in both which, the Collar of the Garter may be seen placed over their Royal Robes.
Soon after the Institution of the Order of the Holy Ghost, the French Kings were represented wearing the Collars both of St. Michael and the Holy Ghost; it being Ordained by the Statutes of the later Order, Art. 37. that whosoever should be ho|nored with both Orders, should wear their Collars, together: and perhaps, upon the same ground it was thought fit, that the Collars of both the Garter and the Thistle, should be exprest in the Coronation Medal of King Charles the First in Scotland, an. 1633.
And as the Soveraigns, so the Knights-Companions of several Orders, have as|sumed this manner of adorning their Effigies with the Collar of that Order, where|of they were Fellows: the Copies of some of their Medals and Coyns, are also exprest in Tab. 2. that is to say, the Funeral Medal of Sillage Nu|mis. elegantic um. p. 62. Lewis King of Hungary, Knight and Companion of the Golden Fleece, another Medal of Ibid. p. 27.. Iames the Fourth King of Scotland, Knight of the Order of St. Michael, stamped at such time as he invaded England, an. 1513. one of Ib. p. 4. Christierne the Second, King of Denmark, upon his Expedition against the Swedes: as also the Dollars of George Duke of Saxony, Henry Duke of Brunswick, and a piece of Gold of Sigismund the Fourth King of Poland; which last is now in his Majesties rich Cabinet of Me|dals. And in like manner are extant the Pictures of divers Knights-Companions of the Garter in Painting, Limning, and Sculpture, adorned with the Collars of that Order.
And to make this Noble Ensign become ornamental to the Arms also both of Soveraigns and Knights, they have been placed (sometimes with their Quarterings)

within it; the first we find ordered in this manner, was a Seal of Sigilla Com. Fland. p. 95. Charles the bold, Duke of Burgundy, Chief and Soveraign of the Order of the Golden Fleece, put to an Instrument, dated anno 1470. and whom we observe to have adorned the neck of the Lion of Flanders therewith, in another of his Ibid. p. 107. Seals, as in Tab. 3. The Chiefs of other Orders did the like, as may be seen from other ex|amples of Coyns and Medals in the same Table: But the Soveraigns of the most No|ble Order of the Garter, usually incircled their Arms, not within the Collar of the Order, but the Royal Garter, that being its principal Ensign.
This led on the custom to the Fellows and Companions of other Orders, to en|compass their Arms with the Collars, both in Coyns, Medals, c. examples of some are added by the Graver, in Tab. 4. Among these is the draught of a Seal of Charles Count Palatine of the Rhine, incircled both with the Garter and Col|lar of the Order, and is the first example we have met with, wherein both these Ensigns are used together. The last in the 4. Table, is the full Atchieve|ment of Bernard de Foix de la Valette Duke of Aspernon, c. set beneath his Effi|gies, graved at Paris by P. Van Schuppen, where his Arms and Quarterings are en|compassed with the chiefest Ensigns of those three Orders, whereof he was a Bro|ther and Companion.
And here it is proper to observe, that the more ancient the Order, whose chief Ensign is after this manner represented, the neerer ought it be set to the Scutcheon of Arms being the more honorable place: and consequently, a great mistake was committed, in marshalling the Collars of the several Orders, about the Arms of the Duke of Chevereux, in his Plate remaining over his Stall at Windesor, where the Collars of St. Michael and of the Holy Ghost are both placed neerer to his Scutche|on, than is the Garter.


SECT. VIII. Collars of SS.
IT will not be amiss in this place, since there are now in use with us several sorts of Collars, worn as Badges of lower and inferior Honors (some of which are adorned with part of the Collar of the Garter) and vulgarly called Collars of SS: to note down a few things concerning them: having first given a more ex|act account, as to their antiquity, than yet hath been made publick among us.
Histor. de Di|vis am vet. quam novi Te|stamenti. Edi|ta Basiliae, an. 1557. p. 258. Georgius Wicelius informs us, that he found a Book remaining in the Library at Fulda, where (in the life of the two Brothers Simplicius and Faustinus, both Se|nators, and Videsis Baro|nii Annal. ad annum Chri|sti 30. ne|non Surium, Tom. 3. ad di|em 31. Mait. suffered Martyrdom under Dioclesian) is a description of the Society of Saint Simplicius, consisting of persons noble in their own Families; and so coming to describe the Collar used, as the Note and Badge of their Society, he says thus: It was the custom of those persons to wear about their necks Silver Collars, composed of double SS, which noted the name of Saint Simplicius: between these dou|ble SS the Collar contained 12 small plates of Silver, in which were engraved the 12 Articles of the Crede, together with a single Tresoyle. The Image of Saint Simplicius hung at the Collar, and from it 7 Plates, representing the 7 gifts of the Holy Ghost.
As to the manner of their suffering, it is thus set down in an old Legend; MS in Bib|lioth. Coton. They were commanded to undergo the sentence of death, their Bodies to be bound together by the neck to a Stone, and sent to the Bridge over the Tiber in Rome, and thence thrown into the River: All which was executed upon them, the MS. 287. year after the Incarnation of our Saviour.
How long since the Collar of SS came into use here in England, we no where find, though we have done our endeavour to be satisfied: But if credit may be given to a Monument, standing at this day entire, in the Collegiate Church at Warwick it will appear, to have been at least 300 years since, and worn as an





Ornament for Women as well as Men: for there the Portraicture of Margaret Wife of Sir William Peito (said to be buried in the Reign of King Edward the Third) hath a Collar composed of SS, drawn about and set close to her neck; which the Graver, in the Pag. 350. Antiquities of Warwickshire, hath tugh mistake, represented like to a set Ruff. There was to be seen a Collar of SS, also about the neck of Sir Simon Barley's Statue in St. Pauls Cathedral London, but the Monument perished in the dreadful fire anno 1666.
And 'tis probable, that to these Collars, the passage in Walsingbam (cited by Titles of Ho|nor, p. 835. Mr. Selden to this purpose) should refer; where speaking of the Earl of Kent's coming to Sunning neer Reading in Berkshire, where Richard the Se|cond's Queen then lay, to comfort her with the assurance, that her Hus|band was then at liberty; Walsingh. Ia anno 1400. to the end he might gain credit to his relation, forthwith pluckt off the Collars from some there present that wore them, leting them know, they ought not to wear a Badge, so particularly relative to Hen|ry the Fourth.
In the ancient creation of an Esquire in England, part of the Ceremony was, that the King put about his neck a Cambd. Brit. p. 128. Silver Collar of SS, as an Ensign of that Dig|nity: and our learned Selden contemns not the authority of that old Ballad, The Canner of Camworth, to Titles of Ho|nor, p. 836. prove the making of Esquires in King Edward the Fourth's Reign, by bestowing such Collars.
But that the Golden Collar was the undoubted Badge of a Knight, may be in|stanced in a multitude of Examples, deduced from the Monuments of persons of that Degree in the Reigns of Henry the Sixth, Edward the Fourth, Henry the Seventh, Henry the Eighth, and since: and so justly and legally appropriate thereto, that in the Anno 24. H. 8. cap. 13. Act of Parliament made for reformation of Apparel, there is a Proviso entred, That Knights, notwithstanding, might publickly wear a Gold Collar of SS, though since it hath grown out of fashion.
Theatre d' Honn. . 9. c. 2. Andrew Favin tells us, that our King Henry the Fifth Instituted an Order, sur|named Knights of the SS, on the day of the Martyrs St. Crispine and Crispianus: of which Institution, though he found nothing mentioned in our English Histories, yet out of the Chronicle of I. Iuvenal des Vrsins, where it treats of the Battel of Agin-Court, he collected this following relation.
Ibid. The King of England exhorted his men, and commanded, that if any of them had trespassed against another, they should be reconciled, and confess to the Priests, that were in their company, otherwise no good could happen to them in their undertak|ings: He further exhorted them to be civil in their march, and to do their duty well, and thus agreed with them: That all those of their company who were not Gentle|men, he would make them so, and give them Warrants for it, and have them thence forward enjoy such Priviledges as the Gentlemen of England had; and to the end they should be particularly known from other, he gave them leave to wear a Collar pow|dered with the letter S.
Among the variety of Collars of SS now in use with us, there are these follow|ing differences in Figure and Fashion.
The Lord Mayor of London's Collar is Gold, having a knot (like one of those which tye the Garters together, in the great Collar of the Order) inserted between two SS, and they again placed between two Roses, viz. a White Rose within a Red; and in the middle before the Breast, is a large Portcullis, whereat hangs a most rich Jewel, set with fair and large Diamonds
The Collars of the Lords Chief Iustices of both the Benches, and the Chief Baron of the Exchequer, are (in Camb. Re|mains, p. 13. Edit. an. 1639. memory of the before mentioned Saint Simplicius, a Senator and consequently a Gown-man) formed of the Letter S and a Knot al|ternately; having a Rose set in that part of it, which falls out to be in the mid|dle of their Breasts, and another on their Backs: the five Flowers of these Roses, are made of five large Pearls.
Those Collars which appertain to the Kings and Heralds of Arms, so likewise to the Serjeants at Arms, having been bestowed by former Kings, and renew|ed to them by his present Majesty, to be worn upon all days of solemn atten|dance for his honor, are also composed of SS, linked together; in the middle of the

Breast is a Rose, and another in the middle of the Back, at each of which hang three small drops of Silver. But the SS in the Collars worn by the Kings of Arms, are made somewhat bigger than the others; and in that part lying on either shoul|der,  a Portcullis taken in between the SS, which are wanting in the rest.
The general difference between the Collars, appropriate to the Degrees be|fore named, is this: All such persons as are honored with Knighthood, have al|lowed them Collars of Silver gilt, but to Esquires those of Silver only: and therefore he that is created an Herald is also in part of that Ceremony made an Esquire, by putting on a Collar of SS of Silver about his neck: and so is a Ser|jeant at Arms.
The Kings of England have sometimes heretofore drawn a Collar of SS about their Arms, in like manner as we have shewed, how the Garter doth surround them: and we have seen impression of King Henry the Eight's Privy Signet, whereon his Royal Arms (crowned) are incircled with a Collar of SS, to the lower end of which is affixed two Portcullisses.


SECT. IX. The lesser George.
WE do not find among the Records of the Order, that the Image of St. George was at any time worn by the Soveraign, or Knights-Companions before the Breast, or under the right Arm, as now used, until the 13. year of King Henry the Eighth: But then that Soveraign past a Decree in Chapter held at Greenwich, the morrow after St. George's day, with consent of the Knights-Com|panions, present to this effect. Lib. N. p. 212. That every Knight of the Order, should wear loosely before his Breast, the Image of St. George in a Gold Chain, or otherwise in a Ribband, the same to be thence forward placed within the ennobled Garter; to the end a manifest distinction should thereby appear, between the Knights-Companions and others of the Nobility and Knights, who according to the fashion of those times, wore large Gold Chains, the ordinary Ensign of their Knighthood. And thus the wearing the Medal or Jewel (usually called the Lesser George, to distin|guish it from the other George worn at the Collar of the Order) was first enjoined, and hath since been constantly so used.
This George was for the most part made of pure Gold, curiously wrought by the hand of the Goldsmith, but we have seen divers of them exquisitely cut in oni's, as also in Agats, and therein such happy choice of the Stones, that by joining thereto the Workmans skill, in designing and laying out the Figures, to express the History, the natural tincture of the Stones have fitted them with Co|lours, for Flesh, Hair, and every thing else, even to admiration. In this Jewel is St. George represented in a riding posture, encountring the Dragon with his drawn Sword.
By the last Article of King Henry the Eighth's Statutes this George is allowed to be enriched and garnished at the pleasure of him that wears it (as is the great George) which for the most part hath been curiously enamelled, and the Garter about it set with Diamonds, in the best order either art or invention could de|vise. And of what weight and bigness these lesser Georges formerly were, may be judged from that sent to the French King Charles the Ninth, being MS. fol. penes. praef. G. Owen. p. 154. an ounce and a half, and half quarter weight.
The variety of Workmanship shown in those Gold Chains, whereat this Jewel hung, was usually great, and the Artists upon all occasions express much inge|nuity and skill in them, according to the fancy or pleasure of the persons for whom they were made.
But within a short time, wearing the lesser George in Silk Ribbnds, as well as Gold Chains was indifferently used and at pleasure (so were the Symbols of Forreign Orders, as appears from sundry Coyns and Medals) but the Colour of these Rib|bands at their first use were Black, as is noted of those belonging to the Georges, wherewith Ex Collect. praef Wle Neve. Eq. A. Iohn Dudley Viscount Lisle, the Lords Saint Iohn and Parr were in|vested, an. 35. H. 8. and in the Pictures of several Knights-Companions about that time (both painted in Oyl, and limned with Water Colours) the Ribbands of their Georges are visibly Black.
That small Chain, whereat hung the lesser George sent to Emanuel Duke of Sa|voy, an. 1.  2. Phil amp; Mar. was formed of Ex. Collect. praef Wle Neve. Eq. A. twelve pieces of Gold, in every of which were set three small Diamonds; and of twelve other like pieces, wherein were three Rubies and twenty four Pearls.
It appears by a Letter sent from MS. in Of|fic Armor. [L. 2.] p. 2. Sir Richard St. George Knight Clarenceux, and the Heralds of Arms, to Henry Earl of Holland, dated the 10. of Iuly 1627. MS. in Of|fic Armor. [L. 2.] p. 2. that the Blue Ribband had some years before been added to the Ornaments of the Or|der. And 'tis said Ex relatione Will. Dugdale Ar. Nooy. that Robert Earl of ssex being in France, and observing the Jewels of the Order of St. Michael and St. Esprit, worn in Blue Ribbands, upon his return did occasion the altering those Ribbands, whereat the George hung, into that Colour: And I have seen the Penes Erasm. Moyse nuper de Toenham in Com. Mid. Ar. Picture of Queen Elizabeth drawn towards the end of her Reign, wherein was represented the Lesser George, hanging before her Breast at such a Blue Ribband.
It was not long e're this Colour grew into great estimation with the Soveraign and Knights-Companions; the rather, for that it was the ground of the Garter, and colour of the Mantle of the Order. And toward the 22. May an. regni sui 20. later end of King Iames his Reign (because the Colour of the Ribband had not been peculiarly exprest in any Article of the Statutes, and the Blue or Sky Colour used for some years past) it was Decreed, Lib. R. p. 12. That for the future it should always be of a Blue Co|lour, and no other: Lib. R. p. 12. nor in time of mourning for any of the Knights-Companions, of what Degree soever, should the Colour be changed.
The ordinary manner of wearing this Ribband in time of peace, was (till of late) about the neck, down to the middle of the Breast, where the lesser George hung; but now for the more conveniency of riding or action, the same is spread over the left shoulder, and brought under the right arm, where the Jewel hangs.


But where the Pictures of the Soveraign, or any of the Knights-Companions are drawn in Armour, there, even to this day, the George is represented, as fixed at a Gold Chain, instead of the Blue Ribband, and worn about the neck (not brought under the right arm) which also was so exhibited in the three pound pieces of Gold, stamped at Oxford by the command of his late Majesty of ever blessed memory King Charles the First, whereby he published to the world, that the true and just occasion of his taking up Arms in the late War, was to maintain the Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Land, and the Priviledge of Parliaments. And in like manner is the Gold Chain represented in a Medal of Charles Count Pa|latine of the Rhyne, now senior Knight-Companion of this most Noble Order.
Among those rich and invaluable Jewels, and other choice Curiosities of his said late Majesty, which came to the hands of the Trustees appointed for sale of his Goods, there were several of these lesser Georges 15. Oct. 1651. sold by them to the foresaid Thomas Beauchamp, the particulars whereof, how low they were valued, and for what sold, appears thus from the Book of Sales.



Valued at
Sold for


A George containing 161 Diamonds, which came from the Countess of Leicester, and was discovered by Cornelius Holland.
60
00
00
71
02
00


A George cut in an Onix, with 41 Diamonds in the garnish.
35
00
00
37
00
00


A small George with a few Diamonds
8
00
00
9
00
00


A George with 5 Rubies and 3 Diamonds, and II Diamonds in a Box.
10
00
00
11
00
00


A George cut in a Garnet
7
00
00
8
00
00


Total
120
00
00
136
00
00


The George which his said late Majesty wore at the time of his Martyrdom, was curiously cut in an Onix, set about with 21 large Table Diamonds, in the fashion of a Garter: On the back side of the George was the Picture of his Queen, rarely well limn'd set in a Cafe of Gold, the lid neatly enamel'd with Goldsmiths work, and surrounded with another Garter, adorned with a like number of equal sized Diamonds, as was the foreside. A Draught of this Jewel, in three parts, open and shut, we have exhibited to the Readers view, among the Ensigns of the Order, at the beginning of this Chapter.
Nor will it be unfitly here remembred, by what good fortune the present Sove|raign's lesser George set with fair Diamonds was preserved, after the defeat given to the Scotch Forces at Worcester, an. 4. Car. 2.
Among the rest of his Attendants then disperst, Ex relatione Geo. Barlow gen. 11. Inii 1660. ac Roberti Milward ar.  Isaaci Wal|ton gen. Colonel Blague was one, who taking shelter at Blore-pipe House (within two miles of Eccleshall in Staffordshire) where one Mr. George Barlow then dwelt, delivered his Wife this George to secure. Within a week after Mr. Barlow himself carried to Robert Milward Esquire (now second Justice of the great Sessions of the County Palatine of Chester, one of the Commissioners of the Privy Seal, and Son unto Sir Thomas Milward Knight, late Chief Justice of the said great Sessions, both persons of known loyalty, and great sufferers for his late Majesty) he being when a Prisoner to the Parliament, in the Garrison of Stafford; and by his means was it happily preserved and restored: for not long after he delivered it to Mr. Isaac Walton (a man well known, and as well beloved of all good men, and will be better known to posterity, by his in|genious Pen, in the lives of Doctor Donne, Sir Henry Wotton, Mr. Richard Hooker, and Mr. George Herbert) to be given to Colonel Blague then Prisoner in the Tower; who considering it had already past so many dangers, was perswaded it could yet secure one hazardous attempt of his own, and thereupon leaving the Tower without leave taking, hasted the presentation of it to the present Soveraign's hand.
We shall hereunto subjoin this Observation: That other Princes in Christen|dom





(besides the Soveraigns of the most Noble Order of the Garter) have assumed the bearing St. George encountring the Dragon, and in like posture (though not so anciently, nor upon the same account) as they: probably having chosen him Patron of their Countries or Families, as namely the Emperors of Russia, the Dukes of Mantua in Italy, and the Counts Mansfield in Germany, which will bet|ter appear by the exhibits of some of their Seals and Coyns here.
The first is the Great Seal of Borice-Feodorwiche Emperor of Russia, affixed to his Letters sent to Queen Elizabeth, dated at his Imperial Palace of Mosko the 12. of Iune 1602. and 39. year of his Reign: A Translation of which was most courteously afforded me by Mr. Ia. Frese (Interpretor to the Russian Ambassa|dors, sent over hither to his now Majesty, an. Dom. 1660.) and is as followeth.
By Gods providence, We the great Lord, Emperor, and great Duke Boreece Feo|dorwiche of all Russia Self-upholder, of Wolodeemer, Mosko, Novograde, Emperor of Kazan, Emperor of Astracane, and Emperor of Seebeeria, Lord of Psokosske, great Duke of Smolenskee, Twerskee, Ugarskee, Permskee, Va|ticekee, Bolgarskee and other; Lord and great Duke of Novagradia, the lower Countries, Cheringoskee, Rezanskee, Rososkee, Yaroslaveskee, Beloozerskee, Leeflandia, Udorskee, Obdorskee, Kondinskee, and Com|mander of all the Northern parts, and Lord of all the Iverskee Countries, and Granziskee Empires, and of the Caberniskee Countries, Cherkaskee, Igorskee, and of many other Kingdoms, Lord and Conqueror.
We have likewise seen another of this Emperors great Seals, fixed to his Letters, bearing date the 31. day of May, an. Dom. 1594. which he also sent to Queen Elizabeth, and was presented to her at Richmond, the 14. of October fol|lowing, by his Ambassador Evanowich: the Circumscription containing the same Stile and Titles above set down.
There is preserved in the Archives at Oxford, an Instrument containing Letters testimonial of this Emperor, given to Doctor Christopher Ritinger his chief Phy|sician, the Seal whereof is Silver gilt, but differs in size and design from the for|mer, and contains on the reverse the Figure of St. George and the Dragon only. A translation of the whole Instrument I have transcribed hither, as it was com|municated to me by my worthy friend Mr. Thomas Hyde, the present Library-Keeper of that famous Vniversity, a Gentleman of eminent Learning, in all kinds, and especially in the Oriental Tongues.
By the great mercy of God, We, great Lord, Emperor and great Duke Bor|rys Feodorwich of all Russia sole Commander, of Volodemersky, Mosco|vesky, Novogorodsky, King of Cazansky, King of Astracansky, King of Sibersky, Lord of Vobsky, and great Duke of Smolensky, Twersky, Ugor|sky, Permesky, Votsky, Bulgarsky, and many others, Lord and great Duke of Novogorod, Levelandsky, Udorsky, Obdorsky, Kondnisky, and all the Nor|thern parts, Commander. Lord of Iverskyland, King of Grusinsky, Caber|dinsky Country; Chercasky, and the Country of Iversky, and of many other Kingdoms Lord and Commander, together with our princely Son Pheodor Bur|rissiwich of all Russia, do by these our princely Letters, given unto Doctor Chri|stopher Ritinger Physician, Hungarian born, acknowledge his true, faithful, and willing service unto our Highness: in which his profession, We Lord, King and great Duke Burrys Feodorwich of all Russia, have sufficiently tryed his skill, on our princely person, which he carefully performed for the better preser|vation of our health: and through Gods great mercy, by his diligent and faith|ful service hath cured our Highness of a dangerous sickness. And therefore we Lord King and great Duke Borys Feodorwich of all Russia sole Commander, with our princely Son Pheodor Burryssiwich, in regard of his great learning and faithful service to us, have admitted him to be our Princely Doctor, to mi|nister Physick, and attend on our royal person: to which end we have granted him our Letters, and hereby we testifie his sufficient knowledge and practice in

Physick, who hath by our selves well deserved, to publish and make known the same. And if the said Doctor Christopher shall repair to any other Princes, Countries, Emperors, Kings, Curfists, Arch-Dukes, or Dukes, to offer his service unto them, We do by these our princely Letters wheresoever they shall come, give true testimony on the said Doctor Christopher's behalf, to be of great learning, sufficient knowledge, well practised in Physick matters: as also in that profession, careful, diligent, and trusty to be credited, We having had suffi|cient tryal of his faithful carriage, in all true and honest services towards us. These our Princely Letters, given in our great and chiefest Palace in the King|dom of Mosco, in the year of the creation of the World 7109. and in the moneth of August.

The Style about the Seal.
By the great mercy of God, We great Lord, Emperor, and great Duke Borys Feodorwich of all Russia sole Commander, Lord and Governor of many other Countries and Kingdoms.
The third, is the great Seal of Alexeye Michailowiche, the present Emperor of Russia, wherewith was sealed the Letter sent to his now Majesty, an. Dom. 1660. by his Ambassadors, Duke Peter Semoenowiche Prosoroskee, Lord and Pos|sessor of the Dukedom of Toole, and Evan Offonosyewiche Zelabuskee, Namestinck of Coormeskee. Which having obtained by the favour of Sir William Morice Knight and Baronet, late principal Secretary of State, we also here exhibit to publick view, with a translation of this Emperor's Style, rendred into English by the said Mr. Ia. Frese.
By Gods mercy, We the great Lord, Emperor, and great Duke Alexeye Mi|chailowiche of all the great and lesser and white Russia Self-upholder, of Mos|covia, Kneveskee, Wolodeemerskee and Novagardskee, Emperor of Ka|zan, Emperor of Astracan, Emperor of Siberia, Lord of Pscosskee, and great Duke of Lettow, Smolenskee, Twerskee, Wolniskee, Podolskee, Ugarskee, Permskee, Waticekee, Bolgarskee, and others. Lord and great Duke of No|vogradia, the lower Countries, Cheringoskee, Rezanskee, Polotskee, Ro|stosskee, Yaroslasskee, Belozerskee, Udorskee, Obdorskee, Kandinskee, Weetepskee, Meestesloskee, and of all the Northern parts Commander. Lord of the Iverskee Countries, Cartalinskee, Groonsiskee, and Igerskee Empires, and of the Kabardinskee Countries, Cheringosskee, and Igorskee Dukedoms, and of many other Dukedoms Eastern, western and northern, from Father and Grandfather heir apparent Lord and Conqueror.
This representation of St. George and the Dragon we find assigned for Arms to Anne de Russie, Daughter to Iaroslaus King of Russia and Moscovia, married to Henry the First King of France, in the year of our Lord 1051. and thus blazoned. S. Marthe Hist. Geneolog. de la Maison de France. Tom. 1. l. 12. c. 4. p. 453. De Gueules,  un homme  Cheval, d' Argent, tenant une Lance en la main, qu'il darde en la gueule d'un Dragon renverse.
The Counts of Mansfield in Germany, have likewise frequently stamped on their Coyns, the Figure of St. George killing the Dragon: from which we have sin|gled out one, bearing the name of St. George, and placed it under the Number IV.
In the last may be seen the Effigies of Vincentius Duke of Mantua and Montserat, a Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece, and on the Reverse thereof, St. George encountring the Dragon, in the manner generally worn by the Soveraign and Knights-Companions of this most Noble Order of the Garter.




SECT. X. When the Habit, or part of it, ought to be worn.
THere are several solemn days and occasions, on which the Soveraign and Knights-Companions of the Garter are enjoined to wear, either the whole Habit of the Order, or some part of it.
The more solemn, and which require a full conformity, as to wearing the whole Habit, that is, the Garter, Mantle, Surcoat, Hood, Collar, Great George, and Cap, are first, the high Festival of the Order (commonly called St. George's Feast) whether it be solemnized on the 22, 23, or 24. days of April annually, or any other days within the following year by Prorogation. And for this there is cleer Text, in all the Bodies and Exemplars of the Art. 3 Statutes; as also to the time how long they ought to be worn on every of those days, before the Soveraign or Knights-Companions put them off.
For first, it was Ordained, Art. 3 That the Knights-Companions should put on the whole Habit, on the Eve of St. George, before the Soveraign proceeded to the Chap|pel, to hear Divine Service; and being so habited, should attend the Soveraign to the Chapterhouse, thence to the Chappel, and return with him back, continu|ing in the same manner habited (as well such of them as should be minded to Sup, as those that should not) until after Supper; Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 3. nor might they put off their Robes until the Soveraign or his Deputy had put off his, or declared it time for his or their so doing.
By the same third Article of the Statutes, the wearing of the whole Habit was also enjoined on the Feast day of St. George, both at their Proceeding in the morning to the Chapterhouse or Chappel, at their return to Dinner; from thence to the second Vespers, and back to Supper; as also till Supper should be ended, and until the Soveraign or his Lieutenant took leave of the rest of the Knights-Companions.
Secondly, it is manifest from King Henry the Eighth's Art. . Statutes, that the Eve the day of St. George, and morrow following, were appointed to be kept with solemn service, and holding of Chapters, wheresoever the Soveraign should then be, though the Grand Feast and Solemnity of St. George were prorogued, to some further time in the year: And therefore, when by reason of such Prorogation, the Knights-Companions do meet in any other place besides the Castle of Windesor, to attend the Soveraign for the observation of St. George's day only, they then are appointed to wear the whole Habit of the Order, from beginning of the first Even|ing Service, until the last Evening Service on St. George's day.
Thirdly, on such other days of the year, whereon the Grand Feast is held by Prorogation; and during such part of the Eve, and day of the Feast, as is before appointed, when the said Feast is held on its proper day.
Fourthly, by absent Knights, whensoever the Grand Feast of St. George should be celebrated, and E. 3. H. 4. Stat. Art. 11. H. 8. Stat. Art. . wheresoever they should at such time happen to reside or be Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 9. if at liberty, and not under restraint) in like manner, as if then present with the Soveraign or his Deputy, in the place where he should celebrate the Feast. The time of wearing the whole Habit in this case, extends but to the end of the se|cond Vespers, as in the second instance above.
Fifthly, in like manner are the Knights-Companions to wear the whole Habit of the Order, at the Feasts of Installation, I mean such of them as are appointed by the Soveraign to assist at that Ceremony; where, if it begin in the Evening, then are they not disrobe themselves, till after Supper; and being the next morning habited as before, then to proceed to the Chapterhouse or Chappel, and not put off their Robes till Dinner be ended.
The less solemn Occasions, are those which require wearing the Mantle, or Col|lar of the Order only.
And they are, first, upon the  8. Stat. Art. 12. morrow after the Grand Feast day, when the Soveraign and Knights-Companions proceed to the Chappel, and make their Of|fering of Gold and Silver; for it then suffiseth that they put on the Mantle only: which (service being finished) they were wont to leave at the Chapterhouse door, as they went out of the Chappel.
Secondly, as often as E. 3. H. 5. Sat. Art. 3. Chapters are called, and in what place soever held, ei|ther for Elections, or other Causes, as it shall please the Soveraign to name.
And also as often as it is requisite for the Soveraign, or any of the Knights-Companions, to Ed. 3. Stat. Art. 16. enter into the Chappel of St. George at Windesor: and with refe|rence hereunto was it Ordained; E. 3. Stat. Art. 1. H. 5. Stat. Art. 15. That every one of the Knights-Companions, should leave a Mantle at Windesor, to the end, that upon any sudden and unex|pected occasion of access thither, there might be Robes found in readiness for the due observing the Statutes in this point, with all the Commands and Decrees of the Soveraign.
Its manifest that anciently (in pursuance of this Article) both the Soveraign and Knights-Companions left Mantles in the Vestry at Windesor, for such acciden|tal Occasions: for in the Inventory of Ornaments belonging to the Chappel ta|ken an. 8. Ric. 2. We find remaining at that time in the Vestry, a Mantle be|longing to the Soveraign, another to Iohn Duke of Britain, a third to Iohn Hol|land Earl of Huntingdon, another to Edmund Langley Earl of Cambridge, and one to Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, all of them then alive. And by a Decree past, at the Grand Feast, anno 1. H. 6. the Lib. N. p. 75. Mantle of the young Soveraign was appoint|ed to be left at Windesor, as the Statutes required. It is further to be noted, that this Article of the Statutes was confirmed by King Henry the Eighth's Art. 15. Statutes: by force whereof the Mantles of the Emperor Ex. Autogr. pnes Christ. Wen nuper hu|jus Ord. Regist. Charles the Fifth, and Anna Duke of Montmorency Constable of France, were left in the custody of the Dean and Canons of Windesor. And heretofore, in the general Bill drawn up of things ne|cessary to be prepared for Installation of a Knight-Companion, there were usually MS. in Bib|lib. Coton [sub effigie Iu|lii F. 11. vide Collect. Aug. Vincent. two Mantles set down, the use of the one being therein expresly mentioned to remain in the Colledge at Windesor, and the other for all other occasions else|where.
These Mantles thus enjoined to be left in the Colledge for sudden chances, the owners living; were anciently committed to the Custody of the Black Rod, as we find it granted by Pat. 1. H. 5. pars. 3. m. 18. Letters Patent to Iohn Athelbrig, with the grant of that Office, and fell after the death of the Owners, to the Dean and Canons of Windesor, being then reserved, either for publick use of the Knights-Companions, when they casually came to Windesor, or else sold, sometimes to the Heirs of the Deceased, or other Knights-Companions, who succeeded in the Order (as that of Charles the Fifth was to the Earl of Bedford, and that of the Constable of France lent to the Earl of Warwick, an. 7. Eliz.) which appears from the Ex. Collect. G. Evans modo unius Ca|nic Colleg. Windesor. Ac|counts of the Chanter of the Colledge, in the Reigns of King Henry the Fourth, King Henry the Fifth, King Henry the Eighth, Queen Elizabeth, and King Iames, who in all times answered the full benefit thereof to the Colledge; as Ex. Collect. G. Evans modo unius Ca|nic Colleg. Windesor. being a certain and unquestionable due to the Dean and Canons; and this they have accordingly had and enjoyed.
And yet we find some of the Colledge made over bold with the Robe of Sigis|mond the Emperor and Videsis In|junct. Ebo|rac. Archiep. Art. 19. sold it while he was yet alive: But the Archbishop of York (who, as Chancellor of England, was Visitor of the Colledge) upon a Visita|tion made by him shortly after, viz. the 22. of February, anno 1431. Videsis In|junct. Ebo|rac. Archiep. Art. 19. kept the Mo|ney from being distributed among those who had sold it, and reserved the divi|dend to the Dean and Canons, who should happen to be of the Colledge at the time of that Emperors death: and withall commanded for the future, under pain of Excommunication, Ibid. That no Dean and Canon should presume to withdraw or aliene any of the Knights-Companions Mantles, while he was alive, but the same as+much as possible, should be well, decently, and faithfully kept and preserved.
But we are informed, that the before mentioned Statute was altered Ex. Autogr. per Sacra|ment. praef. D. Christ. Wren at|testat. 12. Mar. 1651. anno 9. Eliz. and a new one made to this effect, Ex. Autogr. per Sacra|ment. praef. D. Christ. Wren at|testat. 12. Mar. 1651. That the Knights-Companions should be bound by Oath, to take care by their Wills, that after their decease, all the Ornaments

which they had received, should be restored; the Robes to the Colledge, and the Jewels to the Soveraign that gave them.
We come, in the last place, to the times of wearing the Collar of the Order, with the Great George thereunto appendant, which is not only enjoined to be worn (as part of the Habit) at the Grand Feasts, and Feasts of Installation, but also at other times, when not any of the rest of the Habit (saving the Garter) is appointed to be worn, as in special, at the H. 8. Stat. Art. 38. principal and solemn Feasts of the year: and other Feast days, to which a particular Order in Chapter, anno. 4. Eliz. thus directs.

The Holy days, and Sundays, within the twelve days.
Saint Matthias day.
Holy days in Easter week.
Saint Marks day.
Saint Philip and Iacobs day.
Holy days in Whitson week.
The Feast days of

St. Peter.
St. Iames.
St. Bartholomew.
St. Matthew.
St. Luke.
St. Simon and Iude.
St. Andrew, and
St. Thomas.


Besides these, the Soveraigns and Knights-Companions have been accustomed to wear this Noble Ensign, upon the Aniversary of the Soveraign's Coronation, of the Gunpowder Treason, and now lately, on the present Soveraign's Birth day. So also heretofore, upon some occasional Ceremonies, not relative to the Order; as when a Knight-Companion hath been created into Titles of Dignity and Honor, he had the MS. in Offic. Armor. [L. 12, f. 27.] Collar of the Garter added to his Investiture, as appears in the case of Henry Stafford, created Earl of Wiltshire, ano 1. H. 8. And at a Chapter held the twenty second of May 1622. it was Ordained, Lib. R. p. 13. That such Knights-Com|panions of this most Noble Order, as should afterwards assist at the Funeral of any Knight-Companion, should wear the Collar apert, at the said Funeral: and it was so observed by the Dukes of Ormond and Richmond, the Earls of Manchester and Sandwich, at the solemn Funeral of his Grace George late Duke of Albemarle.
Howbeit, the custom is otherwise, as to wearing the Garter, that principal Ensign of the Order; for though it be enjoined to be worn, especially at the Ed. 3. Stat. Art. 3. Grand Feast, and all times of entring into St. George's Chappel, or holding of Chapters; yet doth not this imply, that it may be left off, at all other times as may the rest of the Habit: for indeed it ought daily to be worn, both by the Soveraign and Knights-Companions. And therefore was it Decreed, even at the Institution of the Order: Ibid. Art. 12.  H. 5. Stat. eod. Art. That if any of the Knights-Companions should in publick be found without his Garter, and that the same was not buckled about his Leg, in deoent and usual manner; upon challenge thereof, he should presently pay, a Ibid. Art. 12.  H. 5. Stat. eod. Art. Noble to the Dean and Colledge of Windesor. By King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, the Fine was raised to a Art. 10. Mark: the same to be paid forthwith after challenge made, by any of the five Officers of the Order, or as before, by the Dean of Windesor; beside which Art. 10. Fine, the Knight lies liable to a Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 10. check.
But the Article in the Statutes of Institution being pen'd too strictly, and with|out any exception, the several occasions of military or necessary affairs discover|ing the inconvenience; King Henry the Fifth admitted of a qualification, and in case of riding with Boots, Ordained, That it might suffice, if the Knight-Com|panion wore some H. 5. Stat. Art. 12.  H. . Stat. Art. 10. Ribband or Silk Lace, to represent the Garter: nevertheless in this very Article there is a Proviso added, That no Knight-Companion should enter into Chapter, without his Garter buckled about the Leg.
To conclude, King Henry the Eighth's Statutes provide, that the Gold Chain, whereat the Lesser George (in that Age) hung, should be worn Art. 38. all other days of the year, except the Art. 38. principal and solemn Feasts, whereon the Great Collar was Ordained to be worn, and except in time of War, Sickness, or long Voyage; in any of which cases, it should suffice the Knight-Companion concern'd, to wear only a Silk Lace or Ribband, with the Image of St. George thereat: and the Blue Rib|band, having since succeeded in place of the Gold Chain, the Injunction of this Statute, extends to it in all particulars.



CHAP. VIII. THE Officers APPOINTED FOR THE SERVICE OF THE Order.

SECT. I. The Prelate's Institution his Oath, Robe, and Priviledges.
TO give increase and augmentation to the Honor of this most Noble Order, the Founder constituted certain Officers, namely, a Prelate, Register, and Vsher, to whom he assigned several and particular duties: Some of his Successors added the Chancellor, and Garter, upon the same account, and all of them sworn to be of the H 8. Stat. Art. 15. Council of the Order. Among these, the Prelate and Chancellor are usually called the Lib. N. p. 237. principal, the other three, the inferior Officers of the Order; known and di|stinguished by the Robes or Ensigns of their peculiar Offices.
In this Chapter, we shall only give some account of their Institution, Oath, Ha|bit, Ensigns, Priviledges, and Pensions; for as to the nature of their Offices, so far as they relate to the Duties enjoined them within the Order, they are, for the general, set down in that ancient Establishment, recorded in the Pag. 32. Black Book, Entituled, Constitutiones ad Officiales Ordinis [Garterii] peculiariter attinentes, c. established by King Henry the Eighth, in the MS. in Offic. Armor. [M. 8.] f. 31. 13. year of his Reign, an. Dom. 1521.


The ancient Habits and Ensigns assigned to the Officers of the Order.



The present Habits Ensigns and Badges belonging to the Officers of the Order


and adjoined to his Body of Lib. N. P. 232. Statutes, from whence we have transcrib'd them into the Appendix. But more particularly their duties are to be met with in several places of the ensuing Discourse, where they properly fall in to be treated of.
The Prelate is the first and principal Officer belonging to the Order,His Institu|tion. and in the Founder's Statutes is called Art. 18. Prelatus Ordinis; thus we see his Office is as ancient as the Institution of the Order, and that the then Bishop of Winchester [William de Edyngton] was the first Prelate, is as apparent Art. 18. thence. He is an Officer of honor only, and hath not either Pension or Fees allowed him.
By the said Constitutions this Office is vested in the Bishops of Winchester for the time being; and from sundry passages in the Annals of the Order, it is fur|ther manifest, that the Successors to William de Edyngton, have continued Pre|lates to this day, except the interruption only of a few months, anno 7. E. 6. im|mediately after publishing this Kings Statutes; wherein the other four Officers were constituted anew, to attend the service of the Order, but the Chap. 8. Prelate wholly set aside.
Of what estimation this See hath been, may be collected from the precedency granted to the Bishops thereof, by an Act of Parliament, Entituled, Rot. Parl. an. 31. H. 8.n. 10. An Act con|cerning the placing of the Lords in Parliament Chamber, and other Assemblies and Conference of Councel, wherein it is Enacted, that this Bishop shall sit next to the Bishop of Durham, who hath place (by that Act) assign'd him next the Archbi|shop of York: though before, in Constitut. u Officialis Ordi|nis attinentes. cap. 1. respect of the honor and preheminence of this most Noble Order, he had precedence and place, granted above all Bishops, and next unto the Archbishops.
At this Officer's admittance,Oath. he is obliged to take an Oath in the presence of the Soveraign or his Lieutenant, which consists of these particulars.

1. Vide Append. Num, VI. To be present in all Chapters, whereunto he is summoned.
2. To report all things truly, without favour or fear.
3. To take the Scruteny faithfully, and present it to the Soveraign.
4. To keep secret and not disclose the Counsels of the Order.
5. To promote and maintain the honor thereof.
6. To withstand and reveal, what is design'd to the contrary.

This Oath is read or pronounced in Chapter by the Register of the Orde, the Lib. R. p. 39.  84. Gentleman Usher of the Black-Rod holding the Book, whilst the Prelate kneels between the Soveraign's knees.
As the Knights-Companions had their Surcoats bestowed on them at the Sove|raign's charge,Robe and therefore called the Kings Livery; so had the Officers of the Order, their Liveries or Robes, out of the Soveraign's Wardrobe likewise, and in particular the Prelate of the Order: For in the Rolls of the Great Wardrobe we find that Domino Willielmo de Edyngton Episcop Winton. ad unam Robam sibi, de Libera|tur Domini Regis, contra Feslum Sancti Georgii, de secta Militum de Garterio, sa|ciend.  Furrurand. per Literam Privati Sigilli, Scilicet,  Pannus Sanguin. in grano.  Mantell. de 454 Ventr. Miniver pur.  Furrura de 244 Ventr. Miniver pur.  Furrura de 270 Ventr. Miniver pur.  Capucium de 154 Ventr. Miniver pur.  Furrura dimid. de Biss, furr'ata de Biss. Ex Ro Compoti Hen. de Snaith Custodi mag. Gardrob. Regis an. 37. E. 3.m. 3. William de Edyngton had allowed him for his Robe of the Soveraign's Livery, against the Feast of St. George, anno 37. E. 3. one Cloth of Sanguine in Grain, and a large quantity of Furs, for trimming it up.
We have had occasion in the Sect. 3. last Chapter to observe, that the word Roba in the Rolls of the Wardrobe, is used to sig|nifie a Surcoat (being there applied to the Knights-Compa|nions Surcoats) not Mantle, which in reference to the Pre|late is to be understood by it. And we find this Robe, so assigned to the Prelate, noted to be of the Sute or Colour of the Knights-Companions Surcoats, the foresaid year, viz. Rotul. praed. m. 3. Sanguine in grain. But whereas each Knight-Compa|nion had Ibid. 5 Ells of this Cloth for a Surcoat, the Prelate's al|lowance is said to be, one Cloth of the same Colour: Yet what difference there was in Measure, between one Ell, and so many as made one Cloth, we have not hitherto learnt: but in Fur the Prelate much exceeded them, every Knight-Companion then having but Ibid. one Fur of 200 Bellies of Miniver pure.
Anno Ex Rotulo Compori Alani de Stoe Cu|stod mag. Gardrob. Regis m. 8. 7. Ric. 2. we meet with the same allowance of Cloth and other materials to William de Wyckham (then also Pre|late) but the difference lay in the viz.  Pannum Violettum in grano.  Mantellum de 600 Ventr.  Capucium de 140 Ventr. Miniver pur.  Furrura de 400 Ventr.  Furrura de 360 Ventr. Miniver gross.  Furrura de Biss de 40 Best. Ibid. Bellies of Minivers, whose number now was much encreased: and that the same allowance was made him, in the 11. and 19. years of the said King. But in these three Instances, the Colour of the Cloth was different, and changed to that assigned for the Knights-Companions Surcoats those very years, to wit, Ibid. Vio|lt in grain, Lib. Compt. de Liberat. Pannorum, c. temp. R. 2. f. 167. White, and Iid. p. 173. Blue. And anno 12. H. 6. the Robe of Henry Beaufort Cardinal and Prelate, was F Lib. vocat. Ctom. in Offic. mag. Gardrobe, f. 91.b. White, as then were the Surcoats of all the Knights-Com|panions; whence it is evident, the Livery anciently allow|ed the Prelate, annually varied in Colour, as did the Knights-Companions Surcoats.
In that ancient Precedent of the Liveries of the Garter, recorded in an old Velam Manuscript, remaining in the Soveraign's Great Wardrobe, wherein the Surcoats bestowed on the Knights-Companions are reduced to a certainty, as to the measure of Cloth, number of Furs and Garters, nevertheless propor|tioned according to their several Degrees; there the Prelate hath the following allowance for his Livery.

Fol. 12. 24 Yards of Woollen Cloth.
18 Timbr. pur. Miniver.
18 Timbr. gross. Miniver.
3 Timbr. de Biss.

By all which it is manifest what Materials and Colour the Prelate's Robe was of, as at the Institution of the Order, so for a long time after; nor can we find, any alteration therein, until the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and then his Ha|bit was Constitutio|nes ad Offici|al. Ord. atti|nentes. cap. 1. ordained to be of Crimson Velvet, lined with White Taffaty, faced with Blue, and thereon richly embroidered, sundry royal Cognizances, such as ap|pear on the front of the Prelate's Robe, in the Draughts of the Officers ancient Ha|bits placed at the beginning of this Chapter.
The first of which is the Rose of England crown'd.
The second, one of King Edward the Fourth's Badges; and may be seen in se|veral places of the Stone-work, in and about St. Georges Chappel at Windesor.
The third is the Flower de Lis of France, crown'd.
And the fourth King Edward the Third's peculiar Badge, viz. the Sun Beams issuing out of a Cloud. Ex Rot. Comp. Ioh. Coe Cle|rici Provisionis mag. Gardrob. m. 9. Forty of these Clouds, embroidered with Gold, Silver, and Silk, having in the middle the Saxon Letter E of Gold, were provided to trim several Garments made for this King in the 21. year of his Reign, and garnish|ed with Stars.
As the left shoulder of a Knights-Companions Mantle, so the right shoulder of the Prelate's Robe, is ordained to be embroidered with a Ibidem. Scutcheon of St. George's Arms, encompassed with the Garter; and Ibidem. adorn'd with Cordons of Blue Silk mingled with Gold.
After a while (though we find not the certain time) the Colour of this Robe be|came changed to Murrey, the allowance of Velvet Ex vetust. pergam MS. in Offic. mag. Gardrob. p. 46. 16 yards, of White Sarcenet for lining 12 yards, and a Garter for the shoulder embroidered with Purls of Da|mask Gold. But by a Warrant dated the 22. of March anno 23. Eliz. directed to the Master of the great Wardrobe, for the Livery of the Order for Bishop Watson, then newly admitted Prelate. The quantity of Velvet was encreased to Lib. Warrant. particul. temp. Eliz. Reginae in Offic. mag. Gardrob p. 232. 18 yards, but the lining and Garter as before, so also the Cordon, having Buttons and Tassels of Blue Silk and Venice Gold. The like Robe in all particulars was made for his Successor Bishop Cooper, upon the Soveraign's Ibid. p. 359. Warrant (11. April an. 26. Eliz.) and for Bilson, by a Ex lib. partic. Warrant. ab an. 1593. ad ann. 1603. p. 167. like Warrant an. 41. of the same Queen.
About the 12. year of King Charles the First, the Prelate and Chancellor peti|tioned the Soveraign to restore them their ancient right and estimation, in

relation to their Robes and Badges of Honor, upon their outward Garments; whereupon it was Ordered in a Chapter held the 18. of April, an. 13. Car. 1. (be|ing the Feast-day celebrated by prorogation for the year 1636.) among many other things relating to the Honor of this most Noble Order, Lib. R. p. 122. That the Knights-Commissioners (newly established by Ibid. p. 118. that Chapter) should consider of the Robes to be worn by the Prelate and Chancellor, and certifie the Soveraign the ancient Co|lour and Form.
But we have not met with any thing further done in relation thereunto, during that Soveraign's Reign; nor until after the happy Restauration of the present So|veraign, and then by Warrant under the Signet of the Order, (dated Feb. 19. an. 13. Car. 2.) the Prelate had assigned him for his Livery of the Order one Robe of Appendix Num. IX. Purple Velvet, containing 18 yards, and 10 yards of White Taffaty for lining, as also a Scutcheon of St. George within a Garter, wrought with Letters and Purls of Damask Gold and Pearls, having Laces, Buttons, and Tassels of Purple Silk and Venice Gold; but what inducements the Soveraign had, for changing the Colour from Murrey to Purple we have not heard.
An Account being thus given of the Prelates Robe, it follows that we note, at what times he is enjoined to wear it, concerning which it is set down in ex|press Text, Constitut. ad Offic. Ord. atti|nentes. cap. 1. That he should be obliged to wear it yearly on the Vigil and day of St. George, wheresoever he is at his Liberty, whether it be in Parliament, or any other solemn occasion, or Festival whatsoever.
The Honors conferr'd on this Officer are,Priviledges. That his Place in all Proceedings and Ceremonies of the Order is on the Ibid. right hand of the Chancellor. That he may Ibid. marshal his Arms within the ennobled Garter, and accordingly hath it been cu|stomary for the Prelate, to surround them (impaled with those of the See of Win|chester) with this Noble Ensign. He hath allowed him convenient Ibid. Lodgings within the Castle of Windesor, and these are in a Tower, situate on the North side of the Castle in the middle Ward, called Lib. R. p. 55. Winchester-Tower. And as often as he shall come thither, or to any other place at the Soveraign's command either to celebrate the Solemnity of St. George, or do any act or thing belonging to the Order, he ought to have allowed him of the Ex praef. Con|stitut. c. 1. Court-Livery for himself and Ser|vants, according to the rate that Earls resident in Court are used to have.
Lastly, at a Chapter held the 27. of April, anno 2. Car. 1. this Officer (so also the Chancellor) had the Priviledge granted to Vide supra cap. 7. Sect. 4. p. 216. wear upon the left part of his Cloak, Coat and Riding Cassock, at all times when he should not wear his Robe, and in all Places and Assemblies a Scutcheon of the Arms of St. George, but not enriched with Pearls or Stones, That the wearing thereof might be an open testimony to the World, of the honor he held from this most Noble Order.
But not long after there was some restraint put upon this Act, though I do not find it repealed.


SECT. II. The Institution of the Chancellor's Office, his Oath, Robe, Badge, and Pension.
AT the Institution of this most Noble Order,His Institution. E. 3. Stat. Art. 26. The Common Seal was ordained to remain in the custody of whomsoever the Soveraign should please; never|theless, such person is expresly appointed to be Art. 30. one of the Knights-Companions. Among them in after times Sir Iohn Robertsack (to whom its custody was commit|ed, by Decree in Chapter an. 1. H. 6.) is stiled Lib. N. p. 74. Custos Sigilli Ordinis; and within a few lines in the Book and Page now cited (the same Chapter still sitting) there is men|tion made also of the Dominus Guliel. Ha|ryngton per Cancellarium excusatus est. Ibid. Chancellor: where though the reference be not to Sir Iohn Ro|bertsack by express Name, yet in all likelihood is intended to him, the Seal of the Order being at his Nomination delivered into his keeping. And though in

the course of the Annals there recorded, this Title is given to Sir Iohn Robert|sack, preceding the entry of the Ibid. p. 75. Decree, which constituted him Keeper of the seal, yet is it probable his nomination past one of the first things in the Chapter; after which, the Register might justly afford him that Title, though not as yet drawn up into an Order: That work being commonly done after the Chapters were broke up.
But King Edward the Fourth, finding it necessary to settle the Office of Chan|cellor of the Garter, in a person distinct from the Knights-Companions, and sub|servient to them, Ordered, in a Chapter held at his Palace of Westminster the 4. of November, in the 16. year of his Reign, Lib. N. p. 141.That the Seal of the Order should be de|livered to Richard Beauchamp then Bishop of Salisbury to keep during pleasure; and he to be called Chancellor of this most Noble Order.
Not long after, this King by Appendix. Num. IV. Letters Patent under the Great Seal of England, bearing Teste at Westminster, the 10. day of October, in the 15. year of his Reign, declared, That though among the Officers of the Order of the Garter, the Office of Chancellor was not appointed by the Founder's Statutes, yet was it nevertheless very lawful and necessary. And therefore did Ordain, that for the advance|ment and good of the Order in those Affairs, there should be constituted an Offi|cer named Chancellor. And forasmuch as this Office was great, and of great charge, and required an able and dextrous person, it was his further pleasure, that none should be admitted thereinto, unless he were of Ecclesiastical Dignity, that is to say, a Bishop. Moreover, considering the Chappel of St. George in the Castle of Windesor, was founded and established within the Diocess of Salisbury, and ha|ving regard to the prudence and diligence of Richard Beauchamp then Bishop of that Diocess, who out of meer love towards the Order, gave himself the leisure daily to attend the advancement and progress of that goodly Work, wherewith the King was then in hand, in the Castle of Windesor, for enlarging the Chap|pel there, He did therefore likewise Ordain and Establish the said Bishop for the term of his life Chancellor of the Order, and did further Will and Ordain, that after his decease his Successors Bishops of Salisbury should always have and hold the said Office of Chancellor. Nevertheless, in this Patent there is a Proviso, that the Kings Concession, should be put in execution by the advice of the Knights-Compaenions, and without prejudice of the Bishop of Winchester in those things, which, touching the Order, ought by the Statutes of Institution to belong unto him.
This Office being thus conferred upon Richard Beauchamp personally, for term of life, and perpetually, to the succeeding Bishops of the See of Salisbury, di|vers of his Successors (some of whom are remembred in the Black Book, though the names of special Officers are seldom set down in Chapter Acts) were, by vir|tue of this Grant, continued therein, and executed the Office; nor doth it ap|pear by the Records of the Order, that any other person had been invested there|in, besides the Bishops of Salisbury, until an. 7. E. 6. that Sir William Cecil, then Principal Secretary of State, was made Chancellor; concerning which more by and by.
If recourse be had to the Constitutions peculiarly relating to the Officers of the Order, it will appear, Cap. 2. That this Office is very noble and honorable, of great trust and care, requiring a person of much Honor and Reputation to exercise and manage it: In which regard it is therein provided, that no man should be ad|vanced to this Dignity, unless he be a Prelate of the Church, viz. Archbishop, or Bishop, or of some other such like eminent preferment therein: Or if a Lay-man, then to be a Knight of known Extraction, expert, learned, and of un|tainted Reputation.
By this Clause, a Lay-man no less than a Clergy-man was made capable of this Office, nevertheless it amounted not to a devesting the Bishop then living, or excluding any of his Successors, unless it had pleased the Soveraign after making that Constitution, to have passed by the Bishop of Salisbury, and be|stowed it elsewhere, which he did not; for Edmund Audeley the then Bishop, some time after the establishing these Constitutions, and his immediate Successor Cardinal Campeius (till he went to Rome) if not more of them, enjoined and exe|cuted the same.
But upon Reformation of the Order by King Edwrd the Sixth, his Statutes wholly leave out the Ecclesiasticks, and Cap. 9. appoint that the Chancellors Office should be executed by a Knight, qualified as before. And thereupon Sir Wil|liam Cecil was constituted Chanellor, whose Patent bears date the Pat. 7. F. 6. pars 12. of April anno 7. E. 6. And here first entred a secular person, though he enjoyed the Office but a while, for the Lib. C p . 27. of Septmer following, Sir William Petres was admitted thereinto, since which time, until now, the Chancellorship hath continued in the execution of persons of that rank and quality.
Notwithstanding which, in a Charter granted to the Bishop of Salisbury the . 4. Eliz pars pri|ma first of Dec an. 4. Eliz. (confirming the Charters of Queen Mary, King Henry the Eighth, and King Henry the Seventh) as also in another by the late Soveraign King Charles the First, (Pat. 4. C. 1. p. 25. 6. Mar. an. reg. sui 4.) the forementioned Letters Patent made to Bishop Beauchamp by King dward the Fourth, are therein recited totidem ver|bis, and confirmed, as a tacite Reservation of the right and title of the Bishop of Salisbury, whensoever the favour of the Soveraign should grow propitious to that See.
It doth not appear that any of the Bishops of Salisbury, after the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, concerned themselves for recovering the Execution of this Office to their See, until the Ib. p. 165. sixth year of King Iames, that Henry Cotton then Bishop, upon the death of Sir Edward Dyer sometime Chancellor, set forth by Petition to the then Soveraign, That this Office belonged to him and his Succes|sors Bishops of Salisbury, and therefore humbly prayed Restitution thereof to the Church of Salisbury.
But before the Soveraign would determine any thing hereupon, he was pleased to call the two Chief Justices and Chief Baron to advise with, who were of opinion (saith the Blue Book) Ibidem. That this Office ws not compleatly or sufficient|ly annexed to the Bishoprick of Salisbury by King Edward the Fourth. But Sir Ed|ward Cooke, one of those Judges, Reports the point upon which it was void, to be 4 part Insti|tut. p. 200. the incertainty of the Grant, for that a new Office was erected, and not defined what Iurisdiction or Authority the Officer should have. And yet we find elsewhere this third reason given, MS. de Fe|stis temp. Iac. Regis f. 147.  penes Ed. Wal|ker Eq. Aur. modo Garter, Princ. R. Ar|morum That the Grant was in the Soveraign's disposition, because the Patent was granted without Fee. With one, or more of these opinions, the Sove|raign's judgment being swayed, He forthwith nominated Sir Iohn Herbert one of his Privy Council to the Chancellorship, and so this Affair slept, until anno 12. Car. 1.
When Iohn Davenant Bishop of Salisbury (Sir Francis Crane Chancellor being lately dead) with all due humiliation remonstrated to the Soveraign, That the Office of Chancellor was perpetually annexed to his See, by the foresaid Letters of King Edward the Fourth, and though in following times it had been bestow|ed upon Lay-men, yet he humbly desired his right might be restored. Where|upon at a Chapter of the Order held in the Chapterhouse within the Castle of Windesor, the 5. of December in the year aforesaid, the Soveraign proposed to the Knights-Companions present, Sir Thomas Rowes Iour|nal. p. 2. vide etiam Lib. R. p. 115. That though he had of his especial Grace, made Election of Sir Thomas Rowe Knight for his Chancellor at that time, yet having understood a Claim made by the Bishoprick of Salisbury, that the place was annexed to that See. He commanded the Lords-Companions of the Order, to take the pretence of right into their considerations: To which proposition of his Majesty, the Lords humbly answered, That they thought it was not their part to search for the Title of any; but that if the Bishop of Salisbury did produce his Evidence, and the proofs thereof, he might present it in Chapter, to his Majesty, to be considered.
Upon this encouragement, the Bishop prepared a Petition, which was Ibid. p. 12.  Lib. R. p. 121. pre|sentd and read in Chapter, held at the Feast of St. George celebrated at Windesor, the 18. of April ensuing, and here inserted.


Ex. Autogr. penes Iac. Pal|mer Eq. Aur. nuper hujus Or|din. Cancell. To the King's most Excellent Majesty Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter. The humble Petition of John Bishop of Sarum, your Majesties Chaplain in Ordinary.
Sheweth,
THat whereas your Majesties most noble Progenitor, King Edward the Fourth, did by Letters Patent, erect and establish one Office of Chancellor of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and did then also grant a Charter unto Richard Beau|champ Bishop of Salisbury, and his Successors for ever, that they should execute that Office, in consideration that the Chappel of St. George in your Majesties Castle of Windesor, was within the Diocess of Sarum, and for other considerations in the said Charter specified. Which Office was enjoyed by the said Richard Beauchamp, and divers of his Successors in the See of Sarum, according to the Charter, which Charter hath also been confirmed under the great Seal of England, by some other Kings and Queens since the Reign of King Edward the Fourth. And was lastly most graciously confirmed by your Royal Majesty, in the fourth year of your happy Reign. But to the great prejudice and dishonour of the See of Sarum, the use and exercise of the said Office, hath been for many years discontinued from the Bishops of your Majesties said Church.
May it therefore please your most Excellent Majesty, out of your accustom|ed goodness to the Church, graciously to consider of your Petitioners Claim and Charter, and if your Majesty shall so think fit, to vouchsafe your Pe|titioner a hearing, or to refer the examination thereof to some others. That thereupon such course may be taken for the restoring and preserving of the right of the said Church herein, either for the present or future time, as your Majesty in your Princely wisdom shall find agreeable to honor and justice.
And the Petitioner according to his duty, shall pray for your Majesties long, happy, and glorious Reign.

To the substance of this Petition it was objected
1. Rowes Iour|nal  Lib. R. Locis cit. That the Great Seals of England, did not work within, or upon the Statutes and Rules of the Order of the Garter.
2. That no Grant could prescribe or limit the present Soveraign; it being a Fundamental Law within the Order, Suprema Lex, was Supremi voluntas.
3. That it did not appear by the Records of the Order, that the place of Chan|cellor was any otherwise conferred upon Richard Beauchamp Bishop of Salisbury, than, quam diu Regiae celcitudini complaceret: So as the free disposition thereof did remain with the Soveraign.
To the first; It was Ex Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Palmer. answered by way of exception, as to the Grant of Offices: forasmuch as the power of the Great Seal of England, was anciently took into, and became legal within the Order in like Cases, and not any Patent for an Office, from the Institution of the Order unto that time; had past under the Seal of the Order, but under the Great Seal of England, and in particular the Office of Chan|cellor (as was manifest enough from their Enrolments) For besides the first Grant made by King Edward the Fourth, when the Office came afterwards into the hands of Lay-men (from the Patent granted to Sir William Cecil to that made to Sir Thomas Rowe) all past under the said Great Seal; which had not been done, if any legal defect had been therein.
To the second; it being so as was objected, it thence appeared, that the Sove|raign was as much at liberty to restore this Office to the See of Salisbury, as continue it to secular Dignities.
To the third; What was alledged out of the Records of the Order, related

only to the time of delivering the Seals to Bishop Beauchamp, but when after|wards the Office was erected by Letters Patent, it was then granted to him during life.
Something was replied from the Judges opinions, given in this case, an. Iac. Regis 6. but the Soveraign thought it was not then well considered, to permit the Chapter Acts of this Order, which hath Statutes and Rules of its own, and wholly independent from other Laws, to receive construction and determination from the Measures and Rules of our Common-Law, and therefore notwithstanding what had been objected against the Bishops Claim, the Soveraign was pleased justly to pronounce; R I+nal. pag. 12. That he ought to be heard: and to that purpose, gave the Chancellor order to signifie unto him, that he should prepare and set down in writing, a brief of the Vouchers and Proofs of his Pretentions, in verification of his Petition, and send them to the Chancellor, to be delivered to the Knights-Commissioners (appointed for the Affairs of the Order) to consider of them, and present them at the next Chapter to the Soveraign, who would therein take such Order, as was conformable to his most impartial and untainted Justice.
The 4. of October after, in a Chapter held at Windesor during the Feast of St. George, the Chancellor represented the said Bishop's Petition, with the Vouchers to his Pretensions, which the Bishop exhibited no otherwise than as Inducements and humble Motives, for restoring the ancient right of the Church of Salisbury, and perpetually re-uniting the Chancellorship of the Order to that See, if it should seem agreeable to his Will, Wisdom, and Justice.Ibid. p. 27. But the Knights-Commissio|ners having not to that time met, the business was again referr'd to them to be considered prepared and abreviated for the Soveraign's consideration and final judgment. All which the Chancellor by Letter thus signified to the Bishop.

Ibid. p. 3. Right Reverend and my very good Lord,
I My have justly incurred the censure of your Lordship, either of want of manners, or prevarication, that I have not given you an account of the trust you pleased to repose in me, and that I so willingly undertook, both out of true respect I bear to your Lordship, and duty and service to the Church, whose cause you solicite; but I hope your goodness will acquit me of any of these crimes, and be pleased to take my just excuse, that I deferred only, to give you a more certain answer than yet I am able,  left a longer delay might endanger the good opinion, which I desire to preserve with ou, you may be pleased to know; that at the last Chapter of the Order held in Octo|ber at Windesor, I represented your Lordships Petition, and all the several Vouchers and verifications of your demand and pretension, but his Majesty having not leisure at that time to enter into a full debate, did refer it to the Knights-Commissioners standing for the Order, both to consider and to deliver their opinions, and to make report to him at the next Feast, reserving to Himself the final judgment. Of this I have made a Record and registred it in the Acts of the Order for continuance of your Claim. I have since solicited the Knights-Commissioners often to meet upon it, and other occasions of the Order, but hic labor hoc opus, I cannot procure them till af|ter the Term, when I beseech you to believe, that I will be a faithful Remembrancer, and Advocate of your cause, and that as soon as I can get any resolution, I will thereof render you an account: and if they will do nothing therein, I will again bring it to his Majesty. In this business, I cannot omit to let you know, the care of his Grace my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury in your behalf, who doth often call upon me, and if you please to take notice thereof to him, and to desire him to move his Majesty to command some of the Knights to meet and to hear it, it will procure both a quick and effectual dispatch, and there shall be of my part no manner of omission, to testifie to your Lordship both my reverence to your person, and desire to deserve of you the name of
Your Lordships most humble servant Tho. Rowe
St. Martyns-Lane
29 Nov. 1637.

Nor was this worthy Chancellor unmindful of his promise, for the next time the Knights-Commissioners sat, which was the first of February following at Whitehall, Rowes Iour|nal. p. 36. He to their considerations presented the foresaid Petition, Claim, and Vouchers, to be heard by them according to the former Order: But it was their opinion, That unless the Bishop were himself present, it would be labour lost, and that they could not conclude in the cause, without hearing his own Reply: And there|fore they entred not into the debate, but Ordered the Chancellor to write a Letter to his Lordship, that whensoever he came up to London, he should be heard per|sonally, and his reasons considered, and to the Soveraign represented.
The Letter upon this occasion was as followeth.

Ibid. p. 37. My Lord,
IT hath pleased the Lords Knights-Commissioners for the Garter, to meet upon Thursday last, the first day of this Month: where in the first place I presented your Lordships Petition to his Majesty, and read the Order of Reference upon it made in Chapter, and offered unto their consideration the authentick Vouchers to every part, sent me by your Lordship, and urged your Claim as far, as if it had been my own, both by succession of Bishops of Salisbury in the Office of Chancellor until Henry the Eighth, and of the first Grant made under the Broad Seal, and of continual renewing thereof in all the Charters of Bishops since, to your Lordship, and all other arguments, which either my wit could present, or to which by sincerity, and your trust, I was ob|liged. But could not induce their Lordships to view them, nor to make any report upon the cause, all the answer I obtained, was, that it was not proper for me to be the Advocate, nor for them to hear, where I could not be furnished with a reply on your part, if they found cause to except against any part of the title, and so they would not judge you by any prejudice: But commanded me to signifie to your Lordship, that whensoever your occasions should bring you to London, or the Court, that they would hear you, and from you only receive the information. And that when your Lordship should call upon them, they would give you such an answer as the justice of your cause should merit.
I am sorry to write your Lordship so weak effects, but I desire you to believe, that I have proceeded with all faith and integrity, and that I could do no more: Of this proceeding I acquainted his Grace my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, who did think it fit that I should signifie to you, how the business stood, that you might be the better prepared against your coming to London, where I shall be ready to do you all service in my power, and until then will keep your Papers safe for your use: Vnless his Majesty, to whom I purpose to render an account of the business, make a new Order for more expedition, which I believe will not be done before your coming, or the next Chapter. In hope and desire to be of more use to your Lordship when you shall make your own Claim, or in any other of your commands, I shall ever rest
Your Lordships most humble servant Tho. Rowe.
St. Martins-Lane
6. Feb. 1637.

After which we find not, that the Knights-Commissioners met, either upon this or any other Affair relating to the Order, before the Feast of St. George, begun to be held at Windesor the 20. of May, an. 14. Car. 1. and to that, being added the Ceremonies of the present Soveraign's Installation, the Bishop of Salisbury thought it not convenient to interrupt any part of that great Solemnity, with the consideration of this Affair; and the Scotch War shortly after breaking forth, and troubles growing high at home, the further prosecution was laid aside, and not revived until the 19. of November, an. 21. Car. 2. when Seth Ward now Lord Bishop of Salisbury took encouragement upon the former grounds and the Sove|raign's favour, to set on foot this Claim by a Petition presented in Chapter then held at Whitehall, where after a full debate and consideration had of the justness of his Claim, he obtained the following Decree for re-establishment of this Office on the Bishop of that See upon the first vacancy.
Vide Lib. Ca|roin. p. 65. At a Chapter of the most Noble Order of the Garter, held by his Majesty Sove|raign, and the most noble Companions hereafter named, in the Red Chamber next the Bed-Chamber in Whitehall, the nineteenth of November 1669.

Present His Majesty Soveraign.
His Royal Highness the Duke of York.
Duke of Ormond.
Earl of Oxford.
Earl of Manchester.
Prince Rupert.
Earl of Bristol.
Earl of Sandwich.
Duke of Monmouth.

Officers Prelate the Bishop of Winchester.
Officers Register, Garter, Usher.


The Soveraign then declared, That the reason of calling this Chapter was to con|sider of the pretensions of Dr. Seth Ward Bishop of Salisbury, exhibited in a Petition, concerning the Title and Claim of himself and his Successors, unto the Office of Chan|cellor of the most Noble Order of the Garter (when the same should become void) the Bishop grounding the equity of his Claim, upon a Charter first granted by King Ed|ward the Fourth, in the 15. year of his Reign, unto Richard Beauchamp Bishop of Salisbury and his Successors for ever, which Charter hath been since confirmed under the Great Seal of England, by other Kings and Queens, and particularly by King Charles the First, of ever blessed memory; hereupon the Bishop being called in, and commanded to produce his proofs to make good that his pretension, accordingly the Bishop humbly offered an authentique Copy of the original Charter, of the said King Edward the Fourth, renewed and confirmed by the said King Charles the First, in the fourth year of his Reign; The which being read and duly considered, together with the Objections to the contrary, particularly that the possession and execution of the said Office of Chancellor, had been for above an hundred years, commited unto Laymen, notwithstanding which, the Soveraign and Companions, being fully satis|fied with the justness of the Claim of the said Bishop, grounded upon the aforesaid Charters, and likewise considering, that the returning of the said Office to the first Institution, would be for the honor and dignity of the said most Noble Order, the So|veraign thereupon, with the unanimous consent of the most Noble Companions then present, did Declare and Ordain; That the Bishop of Sarum, and his Successors for ever, shall have and execute the Office of Chancellor of the said most Noble Order, and receive and enjoy all Rights, Priviledges, and Advantages thereunto belonging, immediately upon the first vacancy of the said Office.
Proceed we next to the Oath the Chancellor takes at his admission,Oath. which we find to be the Lib. N. p. 313. same with the Prelate's, and in the like humble posture, that is, upon the Knee, and usually administred by the Lib. C. p. 107.112.  Lib. R. p. 114. Sc Pal|mers large Iournal. p. 57.  Lib. Carolin. p. 24. Register of the Order. When Sir Iames Palmer was to be admitted Chancellor (Palmers large Iournal p. 56. 17. Ian. an. 20. Car. 1.) the Regi|ster moved the Ibid. 57. Soveraign. That in regard his Majesty had made choice of him for that Office in place of Sir Thomas Rowe deceased; and though he had long executed the same, in his absence, and taken the Oath as Deputy Chan|cellor, yet being now elected Chancellor, ought to take the Oath in the quality he was in: The Soveraign and Knights-Companions present thought it fit to be done, and thereupon the Register gave him the Oath; after which being saluted by the Knights-Companions, and joy given him of his new Office, he went on with the business of the Chapter.
It is clear from the Precedent of the Soveraign's Livery of the Garter, Robe that the Chancellor's Robe, was at first the same with the Prelates, both for Cloth and Co|lour, but his proportion of Cloth far less, having allowed him but Ex Vetust. MS pergam. in Officio mag. Garrob. p. 2. 5 yards when the Prelate had 24. nor but 3 Timber of Miniver gross, where the Prelate had 19. beside a large quantity of other Furs. Nor was the Colour setled to one kind, until the Constitutions of his Office, appointed it to be Cap. 2. the same with the

Prelates, [Crimson] for no doubt, it was before annually changed (as was the Prelates) to the Colour of the Knights-Companions Surcoats. Howbeit by the Plate of the ancient Habits of the Officers, it is visible to have wanted the Royal Badges, wherewith the Prelate's Robe was then embroidered. When the Colour of the Prelate's Robe was changed to Murrey, then was the Chancellors so also, and made alike in all other particulars. The proportion allowed to Sir Thomas Smith for his Livery, an. 14. Eliz. was Ex Lib. tertio particular. Warrant. temp. Eliz. Reg. p. 203. 18 yards of Murrey Velvet, 12 yards of Sarcenet for the Lining, one Garter wrought with Pearls of Damask Gold, for the shoulder one Lace (or Cordon) with Buttons and Tassels of Blue Silk and Venice Gold. And the same materials and proportions were afterwards given out of the Soveraign's great Wardrobe, to the succeeding Chancellors.
But an. 13. Car. 1. the Prelate and Chancellor endeavoured a Reformation of their Robes, and upon meeting of some of the Knights-Commissioners at Whitehall the first of February in the foresaid year, who heard and debated several things relating to the Order, it was determined, Rowes Iour|nal. f. 36. That the said Knights should move the Soveraign for a new Robe for the Chancellor (notice having been given to the Knights-Companions about a week before, to provide for themselves new Mantles of Celestial Blue) and the Colour being in question, upon the Refor|mation of the Knights Robes, it being alledged (but without ground) that the Prelate and Chancellor for their upper Robe had from the Foundation, the same Stuff and Colour that was worn by the Knights, it was referr'd to the Soveraign. But herein nothing was done till an. 13. Car. 2. when the Colour both of the Pre|late and this Officers Robe, was changed to Purple.
Badge.Besides this Robe, the Chancellor of the Order hath an honorable Badge assigned him to wear, first granted to Sir William Peters, and his Successors, the 9. of Octo|ber, an. 1.  2. hil.  Mar. viz. Lib. C. p. 16. a Rose Gold, enclosed within a Garter, which he and the succeeding Chancellors of the Order have ever since worn daily about their necks; at first in a Gold Chain, but since in a Purple Ribband. The Fi|gure of which with those Badges worn by Garter and Black-Rod are to be seen at the beginning of this Chapter.
It seems something to this purpose had been in design a little before, so soon as the Chancellorship became vested in a Lay-man; for King Edward the Sixth's Sta|tutes did Ordain, Cap. 9. That the Chancellor should wear about his neck a Cross of the Order, with a Red Rose in a White, of Gold, all compassed within a Garland of Red and White Roses.
And because it was suggested to the late Soveraign King Charles the First, That there were differences and uncertainties in some Books remaining with the Chan|cellor touching the wearing his Badge; He thereupon gave out the following Warrant, under His Royal Hand and Signet of the Order to ascertain the form therein described, and manner of wearing it.

Charles R.
CHarles by the Grace of God King of Great Britain,Ex Original penes praef. Iac. Palmer. France, and Ireland, De|fender of the Faith, and Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, c. To all and singular to whom these presents shall come Greeting. Whereas there are differences and uncertainties in Books of our most Noble Order of the Garter, re|maining in the custody of the Chancellor of our said Order, about his wearing of his Badge or Token about his Neck. And because our pleasure is, that the same might be certain and constant: We do therefore of our Soveraign Power and Authority, to whom in any ambiguities arising, the Interpretation, decision, correction, solution, and dispensa|tion of all Statutes only belongs, and with the knowledge and consent of our Compani|ons of our said Order, at this time remaining with us, Decree and Ordain that our trusty and well beloved Servant Sir James Palmer Knight and Baronet, Chancellor of our said Order (and his Successors) shall wear about his neck at all times in honor of his said place (that thereby he may be known to be of that Office and Dignity, as hath been accustomed) a Medal or Iewel of Gold, enamelled with a Red Rose (within a Garter of Blue enamel with this sentence inscribed Hony soit qui mal y pense) or

such a one as We or the rest of the Knights-Companions of the said most Noble Or|der of the Garter, do or shall from time to time hereafter wear in our Collars of the said Order, in particular reference unto us and them: And in the reverse thereof he shall bear the Scutcheon of St. George enamelled within a Garter also, in reference to the Order it self, which he only shall wear hanging by a light Purple Ribband, or in a Gold Chain, as hath been accustomed. Given at our Court at Oxenford un|der the Signet of our Order, the 16. day of December, in the twentieth and one year of our Reign 1645.

Among the Officers of the Order the Chancellor hath place next beneath the Pre|late,Priviledges and in all Proceedings and Sessions, goeth and sitteth on his left hand. And as it was provided by the Constitutions of the Officers, That if the Chancellor hapned to be a Lay-man, he should be also a Knight, and have other personal en|dowments, before set down. So did the late Soveraign King Charles the First con|ceive it requisite to confer some further note of honor and estimation upon this Officer, in relation to place and precedence without the Order, to which effect there past the following Decree.
Lib. R. p. 49. vide etiam Lib. l. 25. in Offic. Armor. f. 62. At a Chapter of the most Noble Order of the Garter held by the Soveraign at Whitehall the 23. of April 1629. present the Right honorable the Earls of

Mullgrave.
Montgomery.
Rutland.
Carlisle.
Holland.
Suffolk.
Pembroke.
Arundel and Surrey.
Salisbury.
Dorset.
Barkshire.
Northampton.


Charles R.
THE Chancellor of the Order, being by the Institution a place of honour, and so disposed of, that the same hath ever been possessed by persons of great worth and virtue, yet because it appears not, that any declaration hath been made of the Rank and right of Place belonging to that Office, His Majesty hath therefore by the advice of all the Knights present at the Chapter, held upon the day and Feast of St. George, Ordered and Decreed that Sir Francis Crane the present Chancellor, and all others that shall succeed him in that place hereafter, shall in right of that place, in all assemblies, and upon all occasions, be ranked and placed immediately after Knights, Privy Councellors, and before the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the persons hold|ing both places being in pari gradu, and consequently before all others, whom the said Chancellor is to precede. And to the end publick notice may be taken hereof, and the respects known that is due to that place, His Majesty hath commanded an Entry thereof to be made in the Register of the Order. And is pleased, that the Earl Mar|shal of England shall likewise cause the same to be entred in the Office of Arms.

And to the end the place belonging to the Chancellor of the Exchequer may be certainly known, we have thought fit to transcribe hither so much of the Decree and Establishment of King Iames, made the 20. of May in the 10. year of his Reign, as will evidence the same.
Pat. 10. Iac. pars 10. m. 8. And his Majesty doth likewise by these presents, for Himself, his Heirs, and Successors, Ordain, That the Knights of the most Noble Order of the Garter, the the Privy Councellors of his Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, the Master of the Courts of Wards and Liveries, the Chancellor and Under-Treasurer of the Exchequer, Chancellor of the Dutchy, the Chief Justice of the Court com|monly called the Kings Bench, the Master of the Rolls, the Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, the Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and all other the Judges and Barons of the Degree of the Coife of the said Courts, now and for

the time being shall by reason of such their honorable Order, and employ|ment of State and Iustice, have place and precedency in all places, and upon all occasions before the Younger Sons of Viscounts and Barons, and before all Baronets, c.
The foresaid Constitutions appoint the Chancellor of the Order an Cap. 2. Habitation within the Castle of Windesor, like as hath the Prelate, and that is the South-west Tower, in the Lower-Ward of the Castle hence called the Chancellors-Tower. It appears the possession thereof had been for some time, in the hands of others, and therefore in a Chapter held at Whitehall the 5. of November, an. 5. Car. 1. It was decreed to be Lib. R. p. 55. restored unto Sir Francis Crane then Chancellor of the Order, and after his decease, to descend to his Successors in right of this Office. These Con|stitutions also Ordained, Loco citato. That this Officer should have the like Diet and Liveries in the Soveraign's Court, as were allowed to the Prelate.
Pension.At the erection of this Office, the Chancellor had no Pension allowed him, to|wards defraying his charge in the Execution thereof: nor until the Constitutions relating to the Officers were established: but thereby is setled on him a Ibid. Pension of 100 l. per annum, in consideration of his Employment, or else an allowance proportionable in Fees, Offices, or other Promotions, over and beside his Lodg|ings in the Castle, and Liveries at Court.
But as to Fees or Perquisites, there are none due to this Officer; and for that rea|son he hath not only the foresaid Pension, but all his disbursements touching the Affairs of the Order allowed him, even to Paper, Wax, and Wafers: and in|deed those persons who formerly enjoyed this Office, have thought it much below them, to accept either of Fee or Gratuity for any thing done within the Order: and so that truly noble person Sir Thomas Rowe (sometime the worthy Chancellor of this Order) out of an extraordinary sence of Honor, affirmed in a 24. Nov. 1637. Letter to Doctor Christopher Wren, Register, upon the tender (but his refusal) of some Gra|tuity; That his Office was an Office of Honor, and not of Fees, and that he had al|wys excepted against Fees for the disbursements of the Soveraign's Money. Though he acknowledged some had given his Clerk a small Gratuity for the bare Ingros|sing of an Alms-Knights Patent, but nothing further.
Seals of the Order.And because the Custody of the Seals of the Order, belong to this Officer, be|fore we leave this Section, it will be here the fittest place to say something con|cerning them.
It appears by the Statutes of Institution, to have been then agreed, E. 3. Stat. Art. 26. That there should belong to this most Noble Order a Common Seal. This is confirmed by the Statutes of King Art. 26. Henry the Fifth, and since called the Pat 15. E. 4. p. 4. m. 18. Great Seal of the Order.
The use of this Seal is declared to be to E. 3. Stat. Art. 27. seal not only the Original Statutes, ap|pointed to remain perpetually within the Treasury of Windesor Colledge, as also those E. 3. Stat. Art. 27. Copies of which each Knight-Companion is obliged to have one in his keep|ing, but likewise all Ibid. Art. 30. H. 5. Stat. Art. 31. Letters of Licence to any of the Knights-Companions desirous to purchase Honor abroad, and all Ibid. Art. 30. H. 5. Stat. Art. 31. Mandates and Certificates relating to the Order.
After what manner this first Seal was designed, or what was engraven thereon, we yet could never find: Polidore Virgile tells us, Angl. Hist l. 19. p. 379. That when the Founder of the Order had made choice of St. George for its Patron, he represented him armed, mounted on a Horse, bearing a Silver Shield, and thereon a Red Cross. But whether St. George thus designed was engraved on the first Seal, or only a Scut|cheon of his Arms, as in after times, is not certain: But this Author notes, that the Founder clothed his Soldiers in White Iackets or Coats, and on their Breasts and Backs sowed Red Crosses, parallel to the Arms anciently assigned to St. George, as also to the Kingdom of England, placed under his Patronage, which Arms the Soveraigns of this Order have ever since advanced in their Standards, both by Land and Sea.
But besides this Common Seal King Henry the Fifth, in the Lib. N. p. 67. 9. year of his Reig. Instituted a H 5. Stat. Art. 31. vide Lib. N. p. 67.  68. Privy Signet, in case weighty Affairs should occasion the So|veraign to go out of this Kingdom: The use whereof was to set to all Acts made by the Soveraign beyond Sea, to difference them from those of his Deputies here in England.



King Henry the Eighth's Statutes ordain the making both of a Common-Seal and Signet; and direct, that the Arms of the Order should be engraved upon each of them. The Common-Seal used in his Reign we have seen and represented in the inserted Plate under the Number [I] the Signet being designed after the same man|ner, but less. The use of this Seal was continued (as appears from several Com|missions of Lieutenancy, that have come to our hands) until the Reign of King Iames, and then altered to that Draught placed under number [II].
There was a like Seal made at the beginning of the Reign of King Charles the First, which being Rowes Iournal, p. 11. vide Lib. R. p. 121. judged too little for the honor of the Soveraign's Commissions, it was afterwards Decreed in Chapter held the 18. of April, an. 13. Car. 1. Rowes Iournal, p. 11. vide Lib. R. p. 121. That a new one should be made of a larger size, with the accustomed Arms and Motto, and the care thereof left to Sir Thomas Rowe the then Chancellor, and it appears he exe|cuted this Command with all due consideration, by the nobleness of the design exhibited under the Number [III]. In the same Decree direction was given for making a new Signet, the former being thought too big for Letters; this also was ef|fected by the said Chancellor, and represented under the number [IV].
It was at the same Chapter further Decreed, Lib. R. p. 119. That all Legations to deliver the Order to Forreign Princes, all other Acts bearing the stile of Commissions, all Patents of Offices and Fees, all Grants or Licenses to go out of the Kingdom, should be sealed with this Seal, which should be thence forward called the Great Seal of the Order. So also the Ibid. Book of Statutes sent to Elect Knights or Forreign Princes, being fixed to a Label of Blue Silk and Gold, according to ancient Custom. And Ibid p. 12 that all Letters con|cerning the Order, whether of signification of Election, or Lieutenancy, or Summons upon Prorogation, or other directions from the Soveraign, should only be sealed with the Signet.


These two Seals were by the said Decree appointed to be thenceforth Lib. R. p. 120. born be|fore the Soveraign in all publick Assemblies, during the celebration of St. George's Feast, or in other its Solemnities, by the Chancellor of the Order, in a Purse of Blue Velvet. And Rowes Iour|nal. loco cit. command given to Sir Thomas Rowe to provide one accordingly. On the Vide Com|pot. Th. Rowe nuper Cancellar. pe|nes praef. Iac. Palmer. foreside of which Purse, was richly embroidered (by Edmund Harison the Soveraign's Embroiderer) with fine Venice Gold and Silver, Gold and Silver Purls and Plates, and variety of coloured Naples Silks, the Arms of St. George impaled with the Soveraign's, surrounded with  Garter, and Crowned, having a very fair running work or compartiment round about, the charge of which came to Vide Com|pot. Th. Rowe nuper Cancellar. pe|nes praef. Iac. Palmer. 13 l. 6 s. 10 d.
By the Statutes of Institution it was Ordained, Art. 31. vide . 5. Stat. Art. 31. That in case the Knight-Compa|nion, to whose trust the Soveraign did commit the Seal of the Order, should upon any lawful occasion happen to be absent from the Court, he should in the mean time leave it behind him, with some other of the Knights-Companions present with the Soveraign, to the intent it might be always neer him, so long as he re|mained within the Kingdom: but if the Soveraign went beyond Sea, then his Deputy was to have the same disposal of it, as himself had: and the Signet of the Order should suffice him to Seal all such Acts and Writings as should be made there.
The distance from Court, is by the Cap. 2. Constitutions for the Officers of the Order, limited to 10 Miles, and by the Art. 29. Statutes of King Henry the Eighth to 20.
Upon consideration whereof we find See his Iour|nal. p. 21. Sir Thomas Rowe Chancellor having some occasions Anno 13. Car. 1. to be absent from the Court above 20 Miles, ac|quainted the Soveraign therewith, and tendring him the Seals of the Order, He was pleased to dispence with the Statutes, and give him leave to keep them, never|theless in his own Custody.


SECT. III. The Register's Institution, Oath, Mantle, Badge, Priviledges, and Pension.
THis Officer was one of the three constituted at the Institution of the Order, His institu|tion. under the Title of E. 3. Stat. Art. 34. Registrator and Ord Stat. in Bibl. Hatton. Art. 36. Registrarius, and so is called in the Art. 18.  36. Sta|tutes of King Henry the Fifth. Yet in the Black Book he is frequently stiled Scriba, and in the Registrum Chartaceum, and Blue Book, Actuarius.
What was the first Register's Name, or who were his Successors, unto the Reign of King Henry the Fifth, we cannot discover, but it may be presumed they were Canons of Windesor, because this Office was at first appointed to E. 3. Stat. Art. 34. one of the Colledge, namely a Ord. Stat. in Bibl. Hatton. Art. 36. Canon Resident there: besides, those Registers we meet with, mentioned in the Black Book from the Reign of King Henry the Fifth, to the beginning of King Henry the Eighth, were also Canons of this Colledge, among whom (and the first we observe so called) was Iohn Coringham, as (among other Testimonies) the fragments of a Glass Inscription in the Chancel of Clure Church, neer Windesor, were he was Rector, witnesseth.
The first Dean of Windesor, constituted Register of the Order, was Regist. Char|tac. f. 53. b. Iohn Vescy, an 8. H. 8. the next Lib. C. p. 7. Owen Oglethorp, an. 1. Mar. many of whose Successors in this Deanry (though not all) have since been admitted to this Office, nevertheless as they were Non quate|nus Decanised quatenus Ca|nonici ejus|dem muneris capacces sactisunt. Tho. Frith in suo Decan.  Canonie. Catalog. Canons not Deans of Windesor. And 'tis not unlike, but the Deans were made choice of for this Employment, as being enabled to support the re|putation of the Registership with the Revenue of this Deanry, better than any of the Canons though with addition of the Pension appointed thereto. But at a Chapter held at Whitehall the 22. of April, an. 11. Car. 1. it pleased the then soveraign to declare Lib. R. p. 107. how sutable and convenient it seemed to him, that the Office of the Dean and Register should meet in one and the same person, as for some time past it

had been enjoyed, and therefore commanded this his judgment and purpose to be entred among the Annals of the Order, that so it might pass to future times, from Example into Rule.
If we look into the Constitutions of this Office, we shall find that a Cap. 3. Secular per|son is made capable of this Employment no less than an Ecclestick, howbeit to be a Cap. 3. man of singular integrity, eminent quality, a Knight, and wll proved of for Experience and Learning. But if an Ecclesiastick, then is it appointe hat he be Iid. Learned, a professor either of Divinity or Law, that it either Canon or Civil Law, in which respect he is supposed to have dignity in some Cathedral Church, or else pro|moted by the Soveraign to a Canonship at Windesor. Nevertheless, whether he be a Lay-man or Ecclesiastick, there is here put upon him Qualifications sutable to what the Statutes of Institution do Ordain, to wit, Art. 24. vide cuam H. 5. Sat. At. 6. That he be a very knowing per|son, able to perform the office, and Ord. Stat. in ib. N. Art. 33. most fit both for Learning and Virtue.
The particulars of the ancient Oath, Oath taken by the Register, are set down in the Statutes of Institution, the substance being At. 2. H. 5. Stat. Art. 3. To enter upon the Registry with all fide|lity, the Scrutenies, Elections, Penalties, Rconciliations, and all other Acts relating to the Order. To which in one of the Exemplars this general Clause is added, Ord Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 33. That he shall faithfully discharge his Duty in all things. But in King Henry the Eighth's Reign, the Lib. N p. 313. same Oath was enjoined him, as the Prelate and Chancellor took.
At this Officer's admittance, he takes the Oath, kneeling at the Soveraign's feet, while the Prelate heretofore prononced the words, for so did he when Lib. C. p. 7. Owen Oglethorp took it an. 1. Mar. so likewise upon Ibid p. 23. Iohn Boxolls admittce an. 5.  6. Phil.  Mar. But being absent an. 3. Eliz when George Carew was sworn, the Oath was administred by the Ib. p. 32. vide etiam p. 194. Chancellor. An. 4. Car. 1. the Prelate, Chancel|lor, and Register took their Oaths at one time, and then the Ceremony was order|ed in this manner, Lib. R. p. 39. First Doctor Matthew Wren Register took it kneeling between the Soveraign's knees, the Black Rod holding the Evangelists, whereon he laid his hand, and Garter read the words out of the Black Book: this done the Regi|ster read the words of the Prelate's Oath when he was sworn, and in the last place did the like to the Chancellor. Thus also did Garter read the words to Doctor Christopher Wren, admitted Register, Ibid. p. 107 an. 11. Car. 1. as also Lib Carolin. p. 22. an. 12. Car. 2. to Do|ctor Brune Ryves.
What Habit was assigned this Office at the Institution of the Order we do not find;Mntle. but it afterwards appears by the Precedent for the Livery of the Garter, that his allowance was the same with the Chancellors, that being 5 yards of Woollen Cloth, and three Timber of Miniver gross, and as much as those Knights-Com|panions had, who were under the Degree of an Earl.
The Habit wherein he is represented in a Lib. N. p. 196. Proceeding of King Henry the Eighth's Reign, appears to be Ecclesiastick, viz. a Black Gown, a Surplice over that, reaching to his Ancles, and thereon a Mantlet of Furs; but the Cap. 3. Constitu|tions of his Office appoint him not any, wherein there seems some defect, seeing the Habits thereby assigned both to Garter and Black Rod refer to the Registers, to be the same with his. Notwithstanding from the Plate of the Officers ancient Habits, exhibited above, it may be plainly seen to be a Mantle, somewhat of a Russet Colour, faced with a pane of Blue, whereon is embroidered a Flower de Lis, crowned Gold, then another pane of Red, thereon a Lion crowned Gold, and so are they alternately placed to the bottom. To this Mantle belong Cordans of Silk, Blue and Yellow.
Since that time, not only the Register's, but also Garter's, and Black-Rod's Robes have received some alterations; for by a Decree in Chapter held at St. Iames's House, the first of Iune an. 4.  5. Ph.  Mar. these Officers were assigned Man|tles of Crimson Sattin, lined with Taffety, and a Scutcheon of St. George's Arms embroidered on the left shoulder, but not encompassed with a Garter, having like Buttons and Tassels, as were appointed to the Prelate and Chancellor. The Pro|portion of Sattin assigned to each Mantle was Ex Lib. prf. particular. Warr. in mag. Gardrob. p 131 14. yards, and as many yards of White Taffety.
And though the Register's Mantle was an. 27. Eliz. made of the preceding

materials and had like trimming, yet did it differ in proportions, here being allowed Lib. particu|lar. Warr. temp. Eliz. R. p. 201. 18 yards of Crimson Sattin, and but 12 of Taffety. From hence these Mantles continued unalterable in every thing until after the present Soveraign's return into England, when (20. Feb. an. 13. Car. 2.) there issued a Appendix Numb. X. Warrant to the Master of the Great Wardrobe, to prepare for this Officer, as also for Garter, and Black Rod, for their Liveries Mantles of Scarlet Sattin, each containing 18 yards, and 10 yards of White Taffety for lining, but agreable in all other things with the former: yet why the Colour became altered, the Warrant doth not express.
Though this Officer hath not any Badge assigned, Badge. for daily wearing, yet in the Plate at the beginning of this Chapter, he seems (at the publick Solemnities of the Order) to have heretofore carried a Scrowle in his hand, and by the Pro|ceeding in Queen Elizabeth's Reign (Cap. 21. Sec. 3. hereafter inserted) a Book, both proper Symbols of his Office.
In Doctor Christopher Wren's Registership, the Soveraign gave him com|mand to cover the Red Book of the Order with Crimson Velvet, and assign|ed for the Device two Pens in Saltire within the Garter, above which these two Letters C. R. crowned; all being wrought in rich embroidery (so also the Bor|der) with Venice Gold and Silver, Purls and Plates of Gold and Silver, and various Colours of Naples Silk by Edmund Harison the then Soveraign's Embroi|derrer, after the manner here exprest, cost Vide Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Palmer. 12 l. 17 s. 6 d. This Book he was com|manded to bear before his Breast, on all solemn occasions, when he wore his Man|tle; and thereupon, for his better ease and convenience, he made a Belt and Ouch to hang it at.


So great a regard had the Soveraigns of this Order, Priviledges. not only to this Officer, but likewise to Garter and Black-Rod, that they took them into a particu|lar protection, and by the Constitutions of their Offices, Granted, Cap. . That they, their Goods and Servants should securely remain under the perpetual protection and safeguard of the Soveraign. And if any injury or violence should I chance to be offered them, either by subjects or Forreiners, whensoever they should exhibit their complaints to the Soveraign, either Himself, with the Knights-Companions, should afford them Iustice, or cause it to be administred according to right and equity; but if the adverse party should refuse to submit his cause to the Soveraign, then the So|veraign and Knights-Companions should shew themselves so far inclinable towards these Officers, as to be ready to allow them all due favour, countenance, and protection, as much as should be consistent with justice and equity.
Upon the strength and security of this ancient Priviledge, and to avoid the charge and tediousness of a Sute at Law, Doctor Christopher Wren, Register, pe|titioned the Soveraign in Chapter held at Whitehall the Lib. R. p. 12. 19 of April an. 13. Car. 1. against one Thornhill, who under pretence of digging for Salt-Petre, had so un|dermined his Pigeon-house, built on the Rectory of Knoil-magna in Wiltshire, that it fell down: Upon reading of the Petition it was resolved by the Soveraign and Knight-Companions, Rowes Iournal. pag. 15. That they would consider the extent and purport of e Grant in the Constitutions, and until it were farther declared, the Rowes Iournal. pag. 15. Chancellor of the Order should have power upon Information from any of the said Officers, of any rigour upon controversie begun in any other Court, to write Letters under the Signet of the Order, That all vexation against them should be superseded, until informa|tion of the Cause were given to, and determination therein resumed by the Soveraign, or leave of him obtained to proceed.
After this it seems Thornhill was summoned before the Lords-Commissioners of the Navy, and his Ibid. negative Answer given them, represented to the Soveraign in another Chapter, held the 4. of October ensuing, whereupon it was Ordered, Ibid. That the Chancellor should write a Letter to the same Lords-Commissioners, and another to the Earls of Pembroke, Arundel, and Dorset, three of the Knights-Companions of the Order, to be enjoined to them, that they, or any three of them should convent the said Thornhill before them, and write their Letter to any Gentlemen or others neer dwelling unto Knoil-magna, to view and testifie the truth, to hear any further proof on the behalf of either party, and to give sentence according to Iustice, that so a tedious suit in Law might be prevented, and the dignity of this most Noble Order protected. These Commands the Chancellor performed the Ibid. p. 30. 10. of November fol|lowing, and Certificates being returned from the Country, the Knights-Com|panions (in a Chapter held the Palmers Iournal pro anno 163. p. 21. 23. of May an. 14. Car. 1) were moved to peruse them, which they promised to do; but Palmers Iournal pro anno 163. p. 21. before they could meet, Thornhill, be|ing Indicted conveying Salt-Petre to Dunkirk, fled: and so the prosecution of this business fell.
Upon the same ground was it, that the Register obtained from the late Sove|raign his gracious protection for Himself, Servants, and Estate, in the late War, in the form following.

Charles R.
WHereas by the ancient constitutions and Laws of our most Noble Order of the Garter, Palmer large Iournal. p. 68.the Register of our said Order is to have his person and estate se|cured from violence and injury, to the end he or his Ministers may securely live under our perpetual protection and safeguard, and as often as he shall be molested for him|self, or for any thing that belongs unto him, he is to receive our protection, and the assistance of the Companions of our said Order according to equity and right.
These are therefore to will and command all men of what condition soever they be, not to trouble or molest Doctor Christopher Wren Dean of Windesor, and Register of our most Noble Order of the Garter; or any of his Ministers whomsoever, or any thing that belongs to him whatsoever, but to suffer his Person, servants, and Estate to

be in quiet, security, and peace, without any injury or violence to be offered by any unto him or his, as they and every of them will answer the contrary at their peril. Given at our Court at Oxford, under the Signet of our Order, the 12. day of De|cember in the 19. year of our Reign.

This Officer by the Constitutions of his Office,Pension. hath a Pension of Cap. 3. 50 l. per an|num allowed him; or proportionable in Fees, Offices, or other Profits. And an. 1.  2. Phil. Mar. the like Pension was granted to Lib. C. p. 18. Owen Oglethorp, Dean of Winde|sor, out of the Exchequer, until some Ecclesiastical Preferment of like value should be conferr'd on him by the Soveraign. The same was confirmed to Ibid. p. 192. Do|ctor Maxey, by Decree in Chapter 23. April an. Iac. Reg. 16. and afterwards to Lib. R. p. 4. Doctor Beaumont by Letters Patent under the Great Seal of England in the 20. of the said King: for which there is a Gratiae ita amplissimae  perennes pro maximo isto favore Regiae celsicudini sint semper debi|tae  exolutae. Ibid. most grateful acknowledgment entred among the Annals.
But there needed to assignment of Lodgings at Windesor to this Officer, as there was to the rest, considering both the Canons and Dean were provided of Houses belonging to their Ecclesiastical Dignities within the Colledge, at the In|stitution of the Order.


SECT. IV. Garter's Institution, Oath, Mantle, Ensign, Badge, Priviledges, and Pension.
His Institution.KIng Henry the Fifth Soveraign of this most Noble Order, Appendix Numb. V.seriously contem|plating its honor upon good and mature deliberation, and with advice and consent of all the Knights-Companions, Appendix Numb. V. Ordained and Instituted this Officer, and for the Dignity of the Order, was pleased he should be the Appendix Numb. V. Principal Officer within the Office of Arms, and chief of all the Servants of Arms.
The services enjoined him relating to the Order, were in time preceding per|formed by Collect. W. le N. Cl. Windesor Herald at Arms, an Officer created with that Title, by King Edward the Third, much about the time of his Instituting the Order; and an annual Pension of Pat. 41. E. 3. pars 1. m. 13. 20 Marks granted him out of the Exchequer, by Letters Patent for life, which received confirmation from King Pat. 3. R. 2. p. 1. m. 10. Richard the Second.
But as to the nature of his employment, comprehended under this later part of his Title, and thus annext to the Office of Garter, we have here no direct oc|casion to discourse off; nothing therein properly relating to the service he is to performed within this Order. Nevertheless, where any are desirous to be informed of it, some part of his Priviledges, Employments, and Duty, are to be found in the Cap. 4. Constitutions of his Office, others in the In Archiv. Offic. Arm. Constitutions made by the Duke of Norfolk Earl Marshal of England, an. 10. Eliz. and lastly by the In Archiv. Offic. Arm. Lords Comissio|ners constituted for the Office of Earl Marshal, dated the 22. of November an. 20. Car. 2.
Sir William Brugges was the person first created Garter, and called in the Institution of his Office Iartier Roy d' Armes des Anglois, but else where his Title is found to run thus, Pat. 7. H. 6. m. 8. Willelmus Brugges alias dictus Gartier Rex Armorum. This Sir William became a great Benefactor to St. George's Church at Stamford, and in the Windows of the Chancel caused to be represented King Edward the Third, with his 25 first Knights-Companions kneeling, habited in their Mantles, and Sur|coats of Arms: which upon my journey thither, an. 1664. I found so broken and defaced, that no tolerable Draught of them could be taken, fit to exhibit to the Readers satisfaction.
Iohn Smert, the immediate Successor to Sir Will. Brugges, had this Office given

him by Letters Patent under this Title Pat. 28. H. 6. m. 25. Iohannes Smert Rex Armorum de Garteria, and Iohn Wrythe was stiled Pat. 18. E. 4. p. 2. m. 28. Principalis Heraldus  Officiarius inliti Ordinis Garterii Armorum Rex Anglicorum. But Pat. 4. E. 6. p. 2. Sir Gilbert Dethick, leaving out He|raldus, joined Principalis with Rex, and so it hath continued since Principalis Rex Armorum Anglicorum, Principal King of English Arms.
In the Constitutions of his Office, he is called Cap. 4. Garterus Rex Armorum Angliae, whom the Soveraign and Knights-Companions thereby Ordained, to be a Gen|tleman of Blood and Arms, of untainted reputation, and born within the King|dom of England. Besides, as King Henry the Fifth did before, so doth King Henry the Eighth here declare, Ibid. That he should be chief of all the Officers of Arms, attending upon the Crown of England.
The substance of his Oath administred by the Register at his admission, Oath. whilst he humbly kneeleth at the Soveraign's feet, in the Chapter-house, is

1. Appendix Num. VII. To yield obedience to the Soveraign and Knights-Companions.
2. To keep silence, and not disclose the secrets of the Order.
3. To make signification of the death of each Knight-Companion.
4. To execute all things faithfully, committed to his care.
5. To enquire diligently after all the Noble Acts of the Knights-Compani|ons, and certifie them to the Register.
6. To be faithful in the exercise of his Office.

And we find it observed, that an MS. 4. penes W. le N. Cl. Oath, consisting of these particulars, was ad|ministred to Garter, at a Chapter held at Greenwich, an. 28. H. 8. which is to be understood of Sir Christopher Barker, admitted Garter that very year.
We find no allowance given to this Officer for his Habit in the Precedent of the Garter for Liveries,Mantle. nor among the Books in the Soveraign's Great Wardrobe, whence it may be presumed, he had no particular Habit assign'd him at first, but was distinguished from the rest of the Officers of the Order, by his Coat only, embroidered with the Soveraign's Arms, like as the Provincial Kings then wore.
But after the Constitutions of the Officers were established, there was appointed him a Cap. 4. Habit, in all things like to the Registers (saving that the Ground whereon the Lions and Flowers de Lis were embroidered, was wholly Red) and this to be worn only at the Publick Solemnities of the Order; the fashion and embroidery of which appears in the Plate exhibited at the beginning of this Chapter. Queen Mary caus'd it to be made of Lib. C. p. 24. Crimson Sattin, and so it continued till shortly af|ter the present Soveraign's return, when the Colour was altered to Scarlet.
This Officer is appointed to bear a Constitut. ad Officiales Or|din attinentes, Cap. 4. White Rod or Scepter at every Feast of St. George the Soveraign being present, Ensign gilded at both ends, and at the top a Scutcheon of the Arms of the Order, impaled with the Soveraign's Arms. In the fore-mentioned Plate, the Figure of this Scepter hath these Arms crowned, but no directions for it given in the Constitutions, nor for the Crown on his head, wherewith he is there represented, which at these Solemnities of the Order, neither is, nor hath been used that we can discover.
There was assigned him by Queen Elizabeth a Lib. C. p. 53. Badge of Gold,Badge. to be worn daily by him and his Successors, before the Breast, in a Gold Chain or Ribband, and hereon enamelled the Soveraign's Arms, crowned with an Imperial Crown, and both surrounded with the Princely Garter; but Sir Edward Walker when made Garter, obtained the Soveraign's License to impale therein St. George's Arms, with those of the Soveraign's of the Order, of which Badge, the foreside and backside are both alike.
There is a House appointed for his habitation within Windesor Castle,Priviledges. and is the middle West Tower in the lower Ward, which thereupon hath gain'd the name of Garter's Tower. It was by a Decree in Chapter Lib. R. p. 55. annexed for ever to the Office of Garter, and restored to Sir William Segar's possession the 2. of May 1630. By the Constitutions of his Office he is to be allowed Cap. 4. Baron Service in the Soveraign's Court, and his Table served next after the Dean of the Chappel, with such Cap. 4. Liveries as of old were accustomed.
It appears that King Henry the Fifth,Pension. after his instituting this Office, died, Appendix Num. V. before he had setled any Pension upon Sir William Brugges, for supportation of his little Estate, which the Knights-Companions taking into consideration, and desiring that for the honor of the Order he should receive a reasonable subsistence among themselves, by which he might more honorably comport himself to the service of the Order, till the Infant King should come to age, and be more large|ly provided for: Appendix Num. V. They being present in Chapter, with the consent of the Prelate, did assign and ordain the said Sir William to receive of each of them annually at the Feast of St. George the Pensions following, viz.


Of the Appendix Num. V. Bishop of Winchester Prelate
5
Marks.


Of every Duke
5
Marks.


Of every Earl
6
Nobles.


Of every Baron or Baneret
4
Nobles.


Of every Knight Batchelor
2
Nobles.


The first payment was agreed on to be made in hand, and so to continue year|ly without failings; with request to the absent Knights, that for the honor of the Order, and causes in the Instrument express, they would consent to and approve of their Ordinance and Agreement, which pass'd under the Seal of the Order, and bears date in the Chapter-house at Windesor in the Feast of St. George, an. 1422. but there is a mistake in the date, for at that time King Henry the Fifth was alive, and died not till the 31. of August following St. George's day in that year.
Afterwards King Henry the Sixth, in consideration of the good services performed by Sir William Brugges to his Father and Himself, with consent of his Council Pat. 7. H. 6. m. 8. granted him by Letters Patent an annual Pension of 20 l. out of the Fee Farm of the City of Winchester during pleasure, which Pension upon surrender of this Patent, He Pat. 24. H. 6. p. 1. m. 11. granted a new to him and Agnes his Wife for their lives, and the longer liver of them. And when this Office (upon Sir William Brugges death) was given to Iohn Smert Guyenne Herald (3. April an. 28. H. 6.) he had the Pat. 28. H. 6. p. 2. m. 25. yearly Pension of 20 l. granted him therewith for life, out of the Exchequer. But his Successor Iohn Wrythe Norroy, obtained an increase of Pension to Pat. 18. E. 4. p. 2. m. 28. 40 l. per annum made payable out of the small Customs of the City of London. This annual sum was after confirmed to Garter by the Cap. 4. Constitutions of his Office and an Cap. 4. augmentation from the then Knights-Companions also made to the Pensions granted by their Predecessors upon the death of King Henry the Fifth, viz.


Of A Duke
4
Pounds.


Of A Marquess
5
Marks.


Of An Earl
4
Marks.


Of A Baron
6
Nobles.


Of A Knight-Batchellor
4
Nobles.


In succeeding times the Soveraign thought fit to increase his Pension to 50 l. per ann. (now paid out of the Revenue setled upon the Order) and the Knights-Compa|nions yet to augment their Annuities, which they did by the following Decree.
AT a Chapter holden at Windesor,Ex ipso Au|togr. the Feast of St. George being there solemni|zed the xiii, xiv. and xv. days of September, Anno Domini 1617. It was Ordained and Decreed by the mutual consent of the Knights and Companions of the most Noble Order of the Garter then present (the Soveraign thereto assenting) That their officer Sir William Segar Garter Knight, King of Arms of that Order, should then, and from thenceforth have renewed and paid unto him certain Annual Fees and Pensions, anciently due to his Place and Predecessors, with an increase of ten pounds per annum, which his Majesty forth of his Royal Bounty hath given unto his said Servant for his better maintenance and support; As also of Prince Charles Prince of Wales the sum of eight pounds, and of every Duke of the blood six pounds; all other Estates, viz. a Duke not of the Blood, four pounds, a Marquess five Marks,

an Earl four Marks, a Viscount seven Nobles, a Baron forty shillings, and a Knight Batchelor that shall be of the Order, twenty six shillings and eight pence. All which said sums of money, according to the several degrees of their Estates, are to be paid unto the said Garter or his Assigns yearly at St. George's Feast, or immediately after, as well by the Knights then present, as by those that shall be absent, or hereafter are to succeed in the said Order. And after the decease of the said Garter to his Successors for ever.

Prince Charles, Prince of Wales
viii l.
The Earl of Nottingham
liii s. iv. d.
The Earl of Northumberland
lviii s. iv. d.
The Earl of Worcester
liii s. iv. d.
The Lord Sheffeild
xl s.
The Earl of Suffolk
liii s. iv d.
The Earl of Sussex
liii s. iv d.
The Earl of Derby
liii s. iv d.
The Earl of Exceter
liii. s. iv d.
The Duke of Lenox
iv l.
The Earl of Southampton
liii s. iv d.
The Earl of Marr
liii s. iv d.
The Earl of Penbroke
liii s. iv d.
The Earl of Montgomery
liii s. iv d.
The Earl of Arundel
liii s. iv d.
The Earl of Somerset
liii s. iv d.
The Earl of Kelly
liii s. iv d.
The Viscount Wallingford
xlvi s. viii d.
The Earl of Rutland
liii s. iv d.
The Marquess of Buckingham
iii l. vi s. viii d.
The Earl of Leicester
liii s. iv. d.


Charles P.
Nottingham.
E. Worcester.
T. Suffolk.
Will. Derby.
Lenox.
Penbroke.
T. Arundell.
Fenton.
J. Rutland.
Northumberland.
E. Sheffeild.
Ro. Sussex.
Exceter.
H. Southampton.
Montgomery.
R. Somerset.
W. Walingford.
G. Buckingham.

Last of all at Ex Colle. E. W. G. St. Georges Feast held at Windesor the 22.23. and 24. of April, an. 15. Car. 2. Sir Edward Walker now Garter represented to the Soveraign and Knights-Companions by Petition, That the annual Pensions of the Installed Knights then in ar|rear for one year amounted to 94 l. 13 s. 04 d. according to the proportions last above decreed, whereof the Soveraign's part (he being to pay for all Stranger-Knights) was at that time 32 l. 13 s. 4 d. And therefore humbly prayed, that his Majesty would please to grant him and his Successors, to receive in lieu, not only of the said Pensions from Himself and Knights-Companions both Strangers and Sub|jects, but for quitting his right and just pretence to his annual Pension of 50 l. to his allowances for preparing Scutcheons, and removal of Atchievements, 100 l. per an|num, out of the yearly Revenue setled and assigned to the use of the Order.
This Petition the Soveraign was pleased to refer to a Ibid. Committee of the Knights-Companions, namely the Duke of Albemarle, the Earls of Lindsey, Manchester, Sand|wich, and Strafford, who being attended by Garter, and Ibid. consideration had upon the Proposals contained in the Petition, they humbly offered their opinions to the Soveraign, to grant him the said 100 l. per annum, in lieu of what he offered to quit; and thereby he should not only gratifie him, by preserving the interest of his Office in a more certain way than it was, but be freed from those small pay|ments for Strangers, and other yearly Charges the Petitioner pretended unto, as also exempt the Knights Subjects from the payment of their annual Pensions.
Shortly after, the Ibid. Chancellor, Register, and Garter attended the Soveraign with the Report, which he approving of, ordered the Chancellor to pay unto Garter and his Successors the said annual sum of 100 l. which he accordingly performed, and for testimony thereof signed the ensuing Declaration.

Ex Collect. praed.I Henry de Vic Knight Chancellor of the most Noble Order of the Garter do cer|tifie and declare, That upon certain Proposals made by Sir Edward Walker Knight, Garter Principal King of Arms, to the Lords Commissioners for the Affairs of the said Order, It was certified by a Writing under their said Lordships hands, dated the 26. May 1663. That in lieu of all Fees and Salaries in the said Proposals con|tained, the said Sir Edward and his Successors Garters and Principal Kings of Arms shall be paid by me and my Successors, in the said Office of Chancellor of the Garter, the sum of one hundred pounds by he year, out of the Revenue of the Order; with which Writing having attended the Soveraign, his Majesty was pleased to conform unto it, and to direct in his Commission unto me, under the Seal of the Order, to pay and issue the said one hundred pounds accordingly to the said Sir Edward Walker Garter. In witness whereof I have set my Hand and Seal to this present Certificate, this 5. August 1664.
De Vic. Canc.

Touching the Duty of this Officer in general, it is to Constitut ad Officiales Or|din. attinentes Cap. 4. perform or cause to be done, what business soever, relating to this Order, the Soveraign, or Prelate, or Chancellor shall enjoyn him to do: but his duty in particular is dispersedly set down in the following Discourse, under such heads to which it properly relates.


SECT. V. Institution of the Black Rod's Office, his Oath, Habit, Ensign, Badge, Priviledges, and Pension.
His Institu|tion.THis Officer was instituted by the Founder of this most Noble Order, but whether so soon as the Institution of the Order doth not yet appear. Howbeit within a few years after, viz. the 13. of April in the 35. year of his Reign, he grant|ed to Videsis Pat. 50. E. 2. p. 1. m. 25.  p. 4. m. 5. William Whitehorse Esq for life, Officium Hostiarii Capellae Regis infra Castrum de Windesore, with a Fee of twelve pence a day out of his Exchequer.
An. 3.H. 4. This Office is called Pat. 3. H. 4. p. 4 m. 21. Officium Virgarii comitiv de la Garter infra Castrum Regis de Windesore: and under that title was then granted to Thomas Sye with the Fees and Profits thereunto belonging. In the Patent granted to his Successor Iohn Athilbrigg, an. 1. H. 5. we observe it called Pat. 1. H. 5. p. 2. m. 18. Officium Virgarii sive Ostiarii, c. Afterwards it hath this Title, Term Mich. an. 1. E. 4. rot. 46. Officium Virgae-baiuli coram Rege ad Festum Sancti Georgii infra Castrum Regis de Windesore. And ever since it hath past in Patents by the name of Virgae-baiulus, Virgarius, or Nigri-virgifer. But in the Constitutions of his Office he hath given to him the title of Cap. 5. Hostiarius; and these qualifications put upon him, Cap. 5. That he be a Gentleman of Blood and Arms, born within the Soveraign's Dominions; and if he be not a Knight at his entrance upon the Office, he ought then to be Knighted.
As Garter was declared the Principal Officer of Arms, so was the Black Rod (for the honor of the Order) appointed the Chief Vsher in the Kingdom: And as he is so, and frequently called Gentleman Vsher of the Black Rod; so we shall wave (as we did in the account of Garter's Office) all things appertaining to his Imploy|ments, other than what directly relate to this most Noble Order.
In a Chapter held at Whitehall the 13. of February, an. 6. Car. 1. it was Decreed, Lib. R. p. 71 That the Office of Black Rod should from thenceforth successively, as soon as the

same should become void (Iames Maxwell Esquire then enjoying the Office) be annext to some one of the Gentlemen Ushers daily-waiters, whom the Soveraign should appoint. This was obtained upon the Petition of the Gentlemen Vshers daily-waiters, seconded by the Lord Chamberlain, the Earl Marshal, and divers others of the Knights-Companions, as appears from another Petition of theirs pre|sented to the Soveraign in Chapter held at Oxford, the Palmer's large Iournal. p. 63. 17. of Ian. an. 20. Car. 1.
But it seems some years after this Decree past, viz. an. 1642. the Lord Lene|rick Secretary for Scotland, had (on Mr. Maxwell's behalf) obtained the Sove|raign's hand to a Warrant for passing Ibid. Letters Patent, under the Great Seal of England, for two lives (his own, and Mr. Alexander Thayne's) and the longest liver of them, whereby the Soveraign's intention (signified in the foresaid De|cree) to the Gentlemen-Vshers was frustrate; of which they complaining in this last mentioned Chapter, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions then present (in regard this later Grant was not only repugnant to the preceding Decree, and the Great Seal surreptitiously gained, but ought to have pass'd the Seals of the Order, to be made authentical, according to a Decree made, an. 20. Car. 1.) Ordered, Ibid. That Peter Newton Esquire, should be presently sworn into this Office: Which was then done in the presence of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions.
Nevertheless shortly after the present Soveraign's happy return, viz. Lib. Caroli. p. 23. 14. Ian. 1660. (the said Peter Newton being deceased) the Gentlemen-Vsher daily-waiters petitioned the Soveraign in Chapter for the void place, which being read, the So|veraign and Knights-Companions Ordered, That the Petition should be shewed to Mr. Thaine, and he to be heard in the next Chapter, what cause he could alledge, why it should not be granted.
To this, Mr. Thaine drew up his Answer; which being taken into consideration by the Soveraign, in a Chapter held at Whitehall, the 20. of February an. 13. Car. 2. as also the Decree in Chapter before specified, which fixed the Office to one of the Gentlemen-Vshers daily-waiters, The Soveraign and Knights-Companions ad|judged and declared the said Thaine's Answer not satisfactory, as to the right by him pretended to the said Office, and thereupon confirmed the foresaid Decree: and further Ordered, Ibid. That Iohn Ayton Esquire one of the Petitioners should be forthwith sworn Gentleman-Vsher of the Black Rod, to execute the place upon all occasions hereafter, which was done by the Register of the Order in the presence of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, the Chapter sitting.
The Oath, Oath as we find it given to this Officer in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, was, Appendix Numb. VIII. Truly and faithfully to observe and keep all the points of the Statutes of the Order, as to him belonged and appertained.
He hath the like Habit,Habit. with the Register and Garter, before described.
But his Ensign and Badge are somewhat different from Garter's; Ensign. for first it was Ordained, Pat. 50. E. 3. p. 1. m. 25. vide Constitut. ad Offic. Ordin. at|tinentes. cap. 5. That he or his Deputy should carry a Black Rod (whence he hath his ordinary Title) before the Soveraign or his Deputy at the Feast of St. George within the Castle of Windesor, and at other Solemnities and Chapters of the Order. On the top of which there ought to be set a Lion of England. This Rod serves instead of a Mace, and hath the same authority to apprehend such persons as shall be found Delinquents, and have offended against the Statutes and Ordinances of this most Noble Order. And Ibid. if at the command of the Soveraign and Knights-Com|panions he should apprehend any one of the Order as guilty of some Crime, for which he is to be expell'd from the Order, it is to be done by touching them with this Black Rod, in consideration whereof, his Fee is 5 l.
There is also assigned him a Gold Badge,Badge to be openly worn in a Gold Chain or Ribband before his Breast, composed of one of the Knots in the Collar of the Gar|ter, which tye the Roses together, and encompassed with the ennobled Garter, being alike on both sides; which honor is conferr'd on him and his Successors by Lib. C. p. 52 Decree in Chapter held the 24. of April an. 8. Eliz.
'Tis as ancient as King Henry the Fifth's Reign, Priviledges. that we find a Pat. 1. H. 5. p. 3. m. 18. House in Winde|sor Castle granted to this Officer by Letters Patent (together with his Office) du|ring life, and the like provision is made for him by the Cap. . Constitutions of his Office. It is scituate on the South side of the Castle in the middle Ward. The said Con|stitutions

give him Ibid. Baron-service at Court, and Livery thereto appertaining; and besides these, the Ibid. keeping of the said Castle, and the two Parks adjacent.
Lib. R. p. 54. King Charles the Firs, having taken into his hands the Little Park of Winde|sor (by the resignation of Sir William Hewyd, who had it by Grant under the Great Seal of England) and bestowed it upon the foresaid Iames Maxwell then Vsher of the Order. He also thought fit, with the advice and consent of the Knights-Companions, at a Chapter held in the With-drawing Chamber at White|hall, 5. November 1629. to Order and Decree, That as the Custody of the said Little Park was conferr'd on Mr. Maxwell in right of his Office (pursuant to the institution) so the same should for ever after be annexed thereto, and not be di|sposed of, but under the Great Seal of the Order, and that only to the Vsher of the Order for the time being.
Pension.Lastly, this Officer had anciently a Pat. 50. E. 3. p. 1. m. 25. Fee of 12 d. per diem allowed him, which we find continued down in the Letters Patent whereby this Office was granted; beside which, the Constitutions of his Office allow him an Cap. 5. annual Pension of 30 l. heretofore paid him out of the Soveraign's Exchequer: but by King Charles the First, assigned him out of the 1200 l. per annum, setled upon the Order, touching which we shall Discourse in the next Section.


SECT. VI The payment of the Officers Pensions upon the new Establishment.
KIng Iames, sometimes Soveraign of this most Noble Order, well considering its Institution, Nature, and Constitution; and that it was in the nature of a distint Soveraignty, govern'd by Laws, Statutes, and Assemblies of its own; and Himself as Soveraign, in matters and things immediately relating thereto, had sole and absolute power of altering, changing, adding, or explaining. And finding that the annual Pensions paid to the Officers of the Order (as those to the Alms-Knights) and some other its Expences, had been anciently made payable out of his Receipt of the Exchequer, either upon and by virtue of the Great Seals of England, or otherwise by Privy Seals; and conceiving it incongruous, that the Officers should longer receive or challenge their Pensions by virtue of any other Seal than that of the Order; and in some kind derogatory to the Dignity of the Order it self, to permit other Seals longer to work within or upon the same. He thereupon, with twelve Knights-Companions, in a Chapter held at Whitehall the 2. of May in the 20. year of his Reign, Ordered, Ex ipso Au|tgr. vide etiam Lib. R. p. 12. That all things concerning the Order should thereafter be passed under the Seal of the Order only, and in parti|culr, That the Ex ipso Au|tgr. vide etiam Lib. R. p. 12. Grants of Poor-Knights Places, after their being signed by the So|veraign, should be passed under the Seal of the Order only, and none other.
And whereas at the Feast of St. George the following year, the Ex ipso Au|togr. vide prro. Lib. R. p. 15. Chancellor had received from the Dean of Windesor a Note in writing of the Pensions given to the Poor-Knights, and by whom, and in what manner the same had been given; it was also Ordered, Ex ipso Au|togr. vide prro Lib. R. p. 15. That he should take advice of the Soveraign's Attorney Ge|neral, how by virtue of the Seal of the Order, the said Pensions might be paid and received, His Majesties further pleasure being, Ex ipso Au|togr. vide prro Lib. R. p. 15. That all Grants and Payments con|cerning the Order, should afterwards pass under the Seal of the Order only, and by virtue threof.
As to the Alms-Knights Patents, this Decree took effect, but in the other gene|rals referring to the Order, how far it was pursued we know not; for in some of them we find it not observed. But in a Chapter held at Windesor, on the 22. of April in the 10. year of the Reign of his late Majesty of ever blessed memory, debate was had about setting a part from the profits of his Revenue, to the pecu|liar use of the Order, the annual sum of Lib. . p. 94. 1000 l. to be assigned out of the

Receipt of his Exchequer, and employed particularly in discharge of Expences towards the Feasts of the Order, Legations to Foreign Princes, payment of the Officers Pensions, and all other Titles, by which any thing, should at any time be disbursed for the necessity or reputation of the said most Noble Order.
Afterwards at a Chapter held the 18. of April an. 13. Car. 1. the Soveraign Ibid. p. 121. ta|tified his Royal Assignation, and increased his gracious bounty to the sum of 1200 l. per annum, setling it (for the uses aforesaid) in a Perpetuity for ever, and making it payable out of the Customs in the Port of London; but to be re|ceived by the Chancellor of the Order for the time being, as Treasurer of this Mo|ney Ibid. p. 134. of which he should be obliged to render an acount, to the Soveraign and Knights-Companions yearly at St. George's Feast. And in pursuance of this Rati|fication, was pleased to give his Rowes Iour|nal p. 27. Attorney General directions to draw up a Book for his Royal Signature, to warrant its passing under the Great Seal of England. The further care of which Affair being committed to Sir Thomas Rowe then Chancellor, he readily undertook it, and on the Ibid. p. 36. first of February following, at a meeting of the Knights-Commissioners (impowered to consider of matters touching the honor of the Order) gave them an account that the same was di|spatch. The Letters Patent bearing Teste at Westminster the Appendix Numb. XI. 23. day of Ianuary preceding.
He then also presented their Lordships with a List of the ordinary Fees and Charges of the Order, upon consideration of which, it was thought fit, Ibid. That there should issue out a standing Commission to the Chancellor, under the Great Seal of the Order, to warrant the yearly Payments, and he to be discharged, according as the said Patent had provided.
Hereupon a Commission was drawn up, which past the said Great Seal the 3. of May, an. 14. Car. 1. Appendix Num. XII. whereby the Soveraign declared his will and pleasure, and impowered the Chancellor to pay out of the said annual Revenue of 1200 l. all and every the yearly and ordinary Fees, Pensions, Sallaries and other Payments usually paid to any the Officers of the Order, Alms-Knights, or others, who do their yearly duty and service, any way unto the Order appertaining, either by Charter, Grant, or Assignation, under the Seal or Signet of the Order, or by any other lawful way whatsoever, and in particular



l.
s.
d.



To Himself as Chancellor.
100
0
0
per annum.


To Register of the Order.
50
0
0
per annum.


To Garter Principal King of Arms.
50
0
0
per annum.


To Vsher of the Black-Rod.
30
0
0
per annum.


To Thirteen Alms-Knights.
237
5
0
per annum.


Total
467
5
0



Appendix Num. XII. All which yearly Pensions are thereby appointed to be quarterly paid, that is to say, at the four usual Feasts in the year. As also any other annual and usual charge, to any other inferiour Officer or Servant, for their service or attendance. And all these upon account thereof to be made and given, and Acquittances to be produced for the receipt, to be presented to the Soveraign, or so many of the Knights-Companions as he should depute in Chapter, to take liquid, and allow the disbursments under their hands in writing, for the Chancellor's discharge.
By virtue of the foresaid Letters Patent Sir Thomas Rowe, and in his absence beyond Sea, Sir Iames Palmer Deputy Chancellor, received out of the Soveraign's Receipts of Subsidies, Customs, and Imposts, the 1200 l. per annum, out of which they paid the annual Pensions above mentioned, under the notion of cer|tain and ordinary charges, as also such as came within the compass of uncertain and extraordinary Expences; some of which as we can collect from the Penes praf. Ic. Palmer. Accounts of the said Chancellor and Deputy Chancellor, (they falling within the disburs|ments of their time) were such as these; 

Mantles, when the Soveraign pleased to bestow them on the Knights-Companions.
Plate for the Altar in St. George's Chappel at Windesor.
Embroidery of the Purse for holding the Seals.
Removal of Atchievements and Plates against Installations.
Scutcheons set up at St. George's Feast.
Privy Seals and Fees disburst for receiving the 1200 l. per annum.
Fees for Installation of Forreign Princes, and Stranger-Knights.
Parchment used in Dispensations and Prorogations.
Blue Wax for the Seals of the Order.

By all which may be guest, what other particulars ought to be accounted Ex|traordinary Charges; towards the discharge whereof this annual sum was to be employed as far as it would go, to ease the Expences of the Great Wardrobe, for|merly charged with Provisions of the Order, both for Forreign Embassies, and Expences at home.
And when Sir Thomas Rowe was sent Ambassador to Ferdinand the Third, Emperor of Germany, he paid over to the said Sir Iames Palmer, upon the Ex ipso Au|tograph. Soveraign's Warrant dated the 4. of May an. 14. Car. 1. the sum of 600 l. then resting in his hands of the said annual Receipts; which he adding to the growing Income, disbursed in ordinary and extraordinary Expences.
In reference to the manner of the Chancellor's passing his Account, as is directed by the said Commission we find it thus done by Sir Iames Palmer: he humbly moved the Soveraign in a See his Iour|nal pro anno 1639. p. 57. Chapter held the 10. of October an. 15. Car. 1. That it would please him and the Knights-Companions to view the disbursments made for the Expences of the Order, which thereupon being examined by the Knights in the Soveraign's presence the same were found agreeable to the directions of the Commission, and the Payments justified by the Acquittance of every Officer, to whom any Fee was due (no payment having been made, but the Soveraign's hand was first had to authorize the same) All which being seen and allowed, the Ac|count (wherein his disbursments exceeded his Receipts 37 l. 13. s. 10 d.) was esteemed just, and allowed by the subscription of the present Soveraign then Prince, the Earls of Penbroke and Montgomery, Salisbury, Holland, Berkshire, Duke Hamilton, and the Earl of Northumberland.


SECT. VII. The Execution of these Offices by Deputies.
THough all the Officers of the Order are strictly obliged personally to at|tend the duties of their several Places; yet in case of sickness, absence out of the Kingdom, or other lawful or emergent cause, the Soveraign hath pleased to dispence with their attendance, and appointed other to officiate in their stead; who on such occasions wear the Robe of that Officer for whom they serve: So also in case of Vacancy.
The absence of the Prelate from the Grand Feast celebrated at Windesor, an. 31. H. 6. is noted in the Black Book to have been upon just cause, and the Lib. N. p. 109. Bi|shop of Bangor was appointed to celebrate Divine Service in his stead; who the next morning celebrated Mass pro defunctis. The following year his place in these Religious Duties was supplied by the Ibid. p. 112. Bishop of Salisbury: as also an. Pag. 118. 36.  Pag. 119. 37. H. 6. And at all times of the Prelates absence since, the Soveraign hath ap|pointed which of the Bishops should officiate for him.
The Office of Chancellor hath been executed by Deputy also; to this may first be referred a passage in the Pag. 237. Black Book, where Doctor Taylor hath the Title of Vice-Chancellor. Of later times when Sir Thomas Rowe was employed upon the fore-mentioned Embassy into Germany, Sir Iames Palmer Knight (one of the Gen|tlemen-Ushers of the Privy Chamber) was deputed by the Soveraign to the exe|cution of the Chancellorship during his absence, having the Lib. R. p. 138. Purse with the Seals delivered unto him by the Soveraign the 4. of May 14. Car. 1. He first entred upon this Employment at the Installation of the present Soveraign, being sworn by the Register of the Order (the See his large Iournal p. 15. 22. of the said Moneth) durante deputatione  bene|placito Regis: which Lib. Caro|lin. p. 22. Clause was likewise added in the Deputy Chancellors Oath an. 12. Car. 2.
After Sir Thomas Rowe's return into England, being sick, and not able to officiate at the Feast of St. George held at Whitehall the first of March, an. 16. Car. 1. Palmer's large Iournal. p. 29. Sir Iames Palmer was again deputed Chancellor, to supply his place in that particular Ceremony: As also a third time, when the Feast was kept at Ib. p. 35. York, the 18. of April an. 18. Car. 1. and thence-forward he continued Deputy-Chancellor unto the death of Sir Thomas Rowe; of which the Soveraign having notice given him at Oxford, in Ib. p. 46. November an. 1644. was graciously pleased to reserve the gift of this Office, till Sir Iames Palmer's return to Court out of Wales (where he was employ|ed in his Service) and then Ib. p. 47. gave him permission to wear the Badge and Ribband about his neck, till a Chapter of the Order should be called to compleat his admit|tance: in token of his due acknowledgment for so high a favour, he humbly up|on his knees gave the Soveraign thanks, and received the honor of kissing his hand.
In the vacancy of the Registership, an. 2. H. 8. Lib. N. p. 199. Thomas Ruthall Bishop of Dur|ham supplied it, and an. Lib. C. p. 73. 18.  MS. penes G. O. Y p. 113. 19. Eliz. Doctor Day Dean of Windesor executed the Office, and attended at the Feasts of St. George as Deputy Register, Doctor George Carew then Register having license by his Patent to exercise it by himself or Pat. 3. Eliz. par. 10. Deputy, with allowance of the Queen or Soveraign of the Order, in case of sickness or other impediment.  After his death Dean Lib. C. p. 94. Quatnvis Scribae five Actuarii no|bilissimi Ordi|nis Officium supplevit, non tamen Jurats nec admissus est.Tho. Fiith. in suo Custodum Catalog. Day was commanded still to execute the Office during its vacancy (being 14 years) which he did, until advanced to the Bishoprick of Winchester, an. 38. Eliz. upon which Doctor Lib. C. p. 130. Ro|bert Bennet (who succeeded him in his Deanry) was the same year admitted Re|gister. Afterwards towards the later end of Doctor Beaumont's time (he being much broken with age and sickness) Doctor Lib. R. p. 35. Iohn King the junior Canon sup|plied the place.
The Office of Garter hath likewise been supplied by Deputy, for in those Em|bassies with the Ensigns or whole Habit of the Order to Forreign Princes, where special occasions detained Garter at home, some of the Kings or Heralds of Arms have been sent upon those Employments, nevertheless upon Garter's recommen|dation of them to the Soveraign, of which several instances shall be hereafter in|serted. So also in case of vacancy, for we find that Clarenceux King of Arms exe|cuted this Office after Sir Gilbert Dethick's death, in Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. Ianuary an. 27. Eliz. being then sent in the Embassy with the Earl of Derby, to carry the Habit of the Order to the French King Henry the Third. As also in reference to the MS. 4. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 8. preparations, made for his Installation, the 15. of April following, and service performed there|at, and at the Ibid. f. 10. Feast of St. George ensuing.
And lastly the Constitutions of the Office of Black Rod admit of a Cap. . Deputy to bear the Rod before the Soveraign, which is to be understood where a lawful oc|casion hinders his personal service. And Lib. R. p. 1. Sir Peter Young (chief Gentleman Usher) executed this Office at the Feast of St. George, held at Windesor, an. 6. Car. 1. Iames Maxwell Esq Black Rod being then in France upon the Soveraign's service. He being also sent by the King into Palmer's Iournal pro anno 163. p. 18. Scotland, Peter Newton Esquire was appointed to wait in his place, at the Feast held at Windesor the 8.9. and 10. of October, anno 15. Car. 1.




CHAP. IX. THE Election of a Knight INTO THE Order.

SECT. I. Of Summons to the Election.
THE Statutes of Institution Ordained, Ed. 3. Stat. Art. 18. That whensoever any of the Knights-Companions happened to depart this life, the Soveraign (or his Deputy) after certain notice had thereof, should forthwith by his Letters Summon all the Knights-Companions, then within the Realm (who were able to come) to meet him within six weeks after such no|tice, in what convenient place soever be pleased to assign, for the Electing a new Com|panion into the Society. Thus did the Law of this most Noble Order, in case of Death, and to avoid long Vacancies, at first provide, wherewith we observe the practice of elder times did punctually concur: and among other Testimonies, they are not the least which may be collected from the ancient Letters of Sum|mons issued out upon this occasion.
For assoon as Garter (in discharge of his Lib er N. p. 314. Oath, and pursuance of the Ibid. p. 237. duty of his place) had made Ibid. p. 237. Certificate to the Soveraign of a Knight-Companion's de|cease, or otherwise to the Register of the Order; care was taken thereupon to fill up the vacant Stall, within the time limited by this Article of the Statutes, or shortly after; in order whereunto Letters of Summons were sent to the Knights-Companions to appear at the Election, which hath induced us to exhibit two of these ancient Letters in the Num. XIII.  XIV. Appendix: The first contains several particulars no less pursuant to the Statutes, than worthy observation; and especially these.
1. First, the day whereon the defunct Knights-Companion died is therein set down, and is a note useful in Story.
2. Direction is given for celebrating Masses, according to the tenor of the Statutes, of which more shall be spoken in its due place.
3. Intimation that a Stall is become void by the Knights decease.
4. The Law of the Order vouched, which appoints an Election of another Knight, within six weeks after Certificate made of the death of the former, to avoid (as much as might be) an interval in succession, by a speedy filling up the number of Knight-Companions.
5. The Soveraign's power asserted, where he sees cause to prorogue the Election.
6. An Injunction to attend personally at the Election, under a penalty exprest in the Statutes, of which more hereafter.
7. The Day, Place, and Hour for appearance, is with certainty appointed and set down, to the end the Knights-Companions might so accommodate themselves, as to be present at the time prefixed.
8. The end of coming is mentioned, with full disposition and preparation, to perform what the Statutes in this case required.
9. Lastly, direction is there given to the Knight summoned, that in case any accident obstructed his Journey, or hinder'd him from coming to the Chapter, he should certifie the reason of his default, against the day and time of his appea|rance; of the sufficiency whereof, the Soveraign was to be sole Judge. And generally of these heads, and to this purpose were the Letters of Summons in suc|ceeding times framed.
The before mentioned branch of the Statutes of Institution we observe (from its insertion into the H. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19. following bodies of Statutes) to have been sufficiently con|firmed, nor hath it since received alteration; howbeit some enlargement and ex|planation was given thereunto, in the Lib. R. p. 14. 21. year of King Iames, at a Chapter held the last day of the Feast, viz. the Lib. R. p. 14. 24. of April at Windesor; where in the first place (among other things then also established) it was thus Decreed: Lib. R. p. 14. That the Soveraign being advertised of the death of a Knight-Companion of the Order, the Knights-Companions remaining at the Court should move him to declare his pleasure, whether he would that Letters should be sent to all the Knights-Companions within the Realm, to attend his person for the choice of a new Knight, at a day by the said Soveraign appointed, according to the ancient Statutes of the Order; or be pleased to defer the Election until the day and Feast of St. George, at what time Elections have been most usually made, wherein the Soveraign's pleasure and direction was to be followed and observed, and according as he resolved, in what place it should be, so it ought (by Letters directed to the Knights-Companions within the Realm) to be made known unto them.
This deferring or proroguing the Election was (to say truth) no new thing, nor more than what had been anciently practised (though not indulged by the Statutes of Institution, or declared Law, before this 21. year of King Iames) as appears from the fore-cited Letters of Summons, both which take notice of the limitation of time given by the Statutes, after Certificate of death, viz. six weeks; within the compass whereof, a new Election was to be made. And where a Chapter for Election could not conveniently be held, within that limited time, it was enough if the Soveraign declared (as he did in that Summons sent after Sir Robert D'um|frevils death, and entred in the Black Book) Pag. 82. That being then involved in other bu|siness, he could not well attend this Affair, and therefore deferred the time for Ele|ction unto the Eve of St. George next following. So that it is plain, the Decree an. 21. of King Iames, was but declaratory of an old and practised Custom.
But of later times this formal way of Summons by Letter to Knights-Companions attending at the Court, hath been left off (yet continued to such as are remote) and notice given them by a verbal message only: For the Chancellor of the Order having known the Soveraign's pleasure, as to the day and place, usually ac|quaints Garter therewith, who thereupon goeth immediately to the Knights-Com|panions then at Court, and desires their attendance at the Chapter, according to the Soveraign's appointment.
And here it is to be understood, that no Knights-Elect, ought to be summon|ed to a Chapter of Election, or are capable of giving their Votes therein, until they be compleatly installed, either in Person or by Proxy: Nor indeed did any necessity fall out from the Foundation of the Order, that did require they should,

until the late rebellious times, when the Castle of Windesor being Garrisoned by the Parliaments Forces, it was not possible for his Royal Highness the Duke of York, and his Highness Prince Rupert, to take possession of their Stalls, in such manner as the Law of the Order enjoined.
Therefore the then Soveraign (to whom the power of dispensing with any of the Statutes is reserved) did on the 17. of Ian. an. 1644. (so inevitable necessity re|quiring) Palmer's large Iournal. p. 66.  69. vide Appendix Num. XV. dispence with their Installation in the Chappel of St. George at Windesor, for the present, and invested them with all the Priviledges of the Order; among which, the power of giving their Votes in Chapter was one: Provided, these Princes should first take the Oath given at Installations, and afterwards perform the accustomed Ceremonies at Windesor, so soon as it should be thought fit, after the Castle was delivered out of the power of the Rebels, and returned into the pos|session of the Soveraign of this most Noble Order.
In compliance with this Proviso they both then took the Palmer's large Iournal. p. 65.  66. Oath: And on the Eve of the first Feast of St. George, celebrated after the present Soveraign's happy Re|stauration, the Duke was Installed by the Earls of Northumberland and Berkshire: and on the Eve of the second Feast, being the 22. of April, an. 15. Car. 2. the Prince likewise, received his Installation by the hands of the Duke of Albemarle and Earl of Lindsey.


SECT. II. The Place of Assembly.
BUT at what time soever this Ceremoney of Election is appointed, the same ought to be celebrated in Chapter (for so is the assembly of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions called, wheresoever or whensoever held on this occasion) whether at the Solemnity of St. George's Feast, which hath been the ordinary and most usual time, or on other certain days, set apart for this affair, by more special appointment of the Soveraign. And therefore when the Soveraign thinks fitting (in the interval of Feasts) to Elect any Forreign Prince, or other person, either Stranger or Subject, He many times doth it in peculiar Chapters, called to that end and purpose; and then he appoints his own both day and place, having the prerogative to declare them at pleasure.
This we find hath been practiced both heretofore and of late times; and by those few of many Chapters, holden at sundry places, most convenient to the So|veraign's present occasions (drawn out and here exhibited) will be sufficiently ma|nifest, whereunto we shall add the Names of those Persons of eminence, who at such times and places have been Elected.


Place.
Day and Year.
Knights Elected.


1. Sign of the Lion in Brain|ford.
11. Iuly 24. H. 6.
Albro de Vasques Dalmadea Earl of Averentia


1. Sign of the Lion in Brain|ford.
11. Iuly 24. H. 6.
Lord Beauchamp.


1. Sign of the Lion in Brain|ford.
11. Iuly 24. H. 6.
Lord Hoo.


2. Soveraign's Bedchamber at Westminster.
27. Nov. 25 H. 6.
Sir Francis Surreyne.


3. London with|in the Bishop's Palace.
8. Febr. 39. H. 6.
Richard Earl of Warwick.


3. London with|in the Bishop's Palace.
8. Febr. 39. H. 6.
Lord Bonvile.


3. London with|in the Bishop's Palace.
8. Febr. 39. H. 6.
Sir Thomas Kyriell.


3. London with|in the Bishop's Palace.
8. Febr. 39. H. 6.
Sir Iohn Wenlock.


4. Tower of London.
8. Aug. 14. E. 4.
Guido Vbaldus Duke of Vrbin.


4. Tower of London.
8. Aug. 14. E. 4.
Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland.


5. Starchamber.
15. May 15. E. 4.
Edward Prince of Wales.



15. May 15. E. 4.
Richard Duke of York.



15. May 15. E. 4.
Thomas Grey Marquess Dorset.


6. Soveraign's Bedchamber in the Wardrobe London.
10. Febr. 19. E. 4.
Ferdinand King of Spain.


6. Soveraign's Bedchamber in the Wardrobe London.
10. Febr. 19. E. 4.
Hercules Duke of Ferrara.


7. Greenwich.
14. July 15. H. 8.
Lord Ferrers.


8. Caelais.
27. Oct. 24. H. 8.
Anne Montmorency Earl of Beaumont.


8. Caelais.
27. Oct. 24. H. 8.
Philip Chabot Earl of Newblanke.


9. Hampton-Court.
9. Jan. 32. H. 8.
Edward Seymour Earl of Hertford.


10. Windesor.
6. Aug. 1.  2. Ph.  M.
Emanuel Duke of Savoy.


11. Whitehall.
8. Febr. 20. Eliz.
Iohn Casimire Count Palatine of the Rhyne.


12. York.
12. Sept. 16. Car. 1.
Thomas Earl of Strafford.


But for the most part, since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, White|hall (the Soveraign's usual Court of Residence) hath been the place, whereunto the Knights-Companions have been specially summoned, and peculiar Chapters held for Election of Knights, in the interval between the vacancy and St. George's Feast: Howbeit of late, while the present Soveraign was abroad beyond the Seas, and wanted the full number of Knights-Companions to constitute a compleat Chap|ter, He hath been necessitated to make use of his supream power, not only in Ex Collect. Edw. Wal|ker Eq. Ar. Garter. dispencing with the Ceremony of Election in Chapter, but also in Ex Collect. Edw. Wal|ker Eq. Ar. Garter. supplying th defect of a Scrutiny, by making his own choice; nevertheless, since his most happy return to the Throne of his Ancestors, Whitehall hath also recovered her accustomed Honors, and beheld again a most worthy advancement of Knights into this most Noble Order, at a Chapter specially called and held in the Bed|chamber there, the first day of April, an. 13. Car. 2. in the Election of the Duke of Richmond, the Earls of Lindsey, Manchester, and Strafford.


SECT. III. The Number of Knights that constitute a Chapter.
IN the next place we are to consider, what number of Knights-Companions ought to assemble for constituting a compleat Chapter of Election.
By the Statutes it is appointed, there should be E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18 H. 8. Stat. Art. 19. ix at the least, besides the Soveraign or his Deputy; the due observation of which hath been so strictly stood upon heretofore, that Elections were ordinarily deferr'd, where the Chapters con|sisted not of so many. For proof of which we find that the Duke of Gloucester, anno 9. H. 6. then Deputy to the Soveraign (at that time in France) for celebrating the Feast of St. George at Windesor, Lib. N. p.  forbore to proceed to Election, because the Number of Knights-Companions there assembled, was less than the Statutes required to constitute a Chapter. We likewise take notice, that anno 10. H. 5. no Election was made (the Feast being also celebrated at Windesor) though one Stall was void, by the death of the Ib. p. 69. Lord Clifford; and probably the reason (though not exprest) might be for want of that full number of Knights-Companions, the Sta|tutes required: For the Duke of Bedford (then the Soveraign's Deputy) had but Ib. p. 6. three Knights present with him.
But in this case we need not fly to conjectures, there are direct and cleer in|stances enough; wherein, if we abound, we hope the satisfaction they will give the concern'd Reader, beside the antiquity of the Precedent may obtain our pardon.
In the Ib. p. 95. 22. year of King Henry the Sixth, or rather 23. (for so the Fol. 23.b. Registrum

Chartaceum hath it in the hand of that very Age) Humfry Duke of Buckingham, being deputed to celebrate the Feast of St. George at Windesor, although there were at that time four Stalls vacant, yet did no Nomination pass, one reason be|ing Fol. 23.b. because there was not present a sufficient Number to make Election. So when the same King celebrated the Grand Feast Lib. N. p. 108. personally at Windesor, in the 31. year of his Reign, having but three Knights-Companions attending him thereat, and two Stalls void; the Election was prorogued Lib. N. p. 108. for the very same reason. In like manner the want of a sufficient Number of Knights-Companions, hapning at the Feasts held the 32.33. and 34. of Henry the Sixth hindred the Election at those times: for at the first of them there were but Ib. p. 111. two Knights-Companions, beside the Soveraign's Deputy, and at the two last but Ib. p. 112.114. four besides the Soveraign, though the Registrum Chartaceum anno 33. names five, by adding the Duke of Somerset.
At the Feast of St. George, celebrated at Windesor, anno Ex MS. in Offic. Armor. [M. 15.] fol. 12.b. 1471. which answers to the 11. year of King Edward the Fourth (although from what is spoken, con|current with the following circumstances, both out of the Dominus Iohannes Ascheley literis suis per Garterum missis sufficientem excusa|tionem obtendit. At  fine celebritatis, quia minor erat illic numerus quam ut Ele|ctioni suscipiendi sufficeret, eundem Rex accercebt, ut supplerer. Lib. N. p. 132. Black Book of the Order, and the Et puis envoyes per le Roy pour Mes|sieur Ashley Iohn desre a l' elexion con|demayn apres St. George, fol. 42. Registrum Chartaceum, we suppose it should more rightly be transferr'd to the twelfth of this King's Reign; and therefore this passage throughout may fitly be corrected by those Authorities) the Soveraign intending to make an Election, and having but five Knights-Companions present with him, Calys Pursivant at Arms, was sent to London for Sir Iohn Astley, to come and furnish the Chapter; in which, saith this Fragment, there were chosen seven Knights, name|ly the Prince, the King of Portugal, the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Wiltshire, the Lord Ferrers, the Lord Montjoy, and the Lord Howard.
But here are some other mistakes, for the Prince was not elected until anno Lib. N. p. 138. vide Regist. Chartac. f. 44.b. 15. E. 4. and the King of Portugal not until the Lib. N. p. 149. Regist. Char|tac. f. 49.b. 22. year of the same King. As for the rest we not finding the true time of their Election elsewhere, shall let them stand; having been loth to make use of so imperfect an authority, but that the circumstance of sending for Sir Iohn Astley, to make up a Chapter, rather than vio|late the Laws of the Order, may be faithfully enough related, and well worth ob|serving through the other false lights cast in, from the inadvertency of the Relator.
Lastly, the 31. of Ianuary, anno 21. Car. 2. being designed for the Election of Christopher Duke of Albemarle, and there appearing but five Knights at the Chap|ter, the Election was put off till the 3. of February following, at which time a statutable number of Knights being present, his Election past.


SECT. IV. Dispensation for want of a full Number.
AND whereas some may suppose that the Soveraigns of this Order in later times, have appeared less careful in the due observation of its Statutes and Laws than were their Predecessors, by making use of Dispensations, where the number of six Knights-Companions have been wanting, they are to consider the License herein, is no other than an advantage to be laid hold on, in cases of necessity only (for necessity can bring a sufficient plea, where the infringement of a Decree is objected, in the Law of this Order) and withal to shew that the power and prerogative of Dispensation is reserved to the Soveraigns of this most Noble Order, in all cases of exigency: albeit not to be made use of, where there is a possibility to perform the Rules and Injunctions of the Statutes.
The Soveraigns therefore in succeeding times, for sundry reasons, and upon important and urgent occasions have been induced to dispence with this branch

of the Statute, as to a full Number of Knights-Companions; in case so many were not in readiness as the Law appointed to make a compleat Chapter. And the first liberty we observe to have been taken herein, was by King Henry the Eighth, in the Lib. N. p. 266. 26. year of his Reign; who after he had received intelligence of the death of the Lord Montjoy, immediately called a Chapter at Whitehall, where no more than Ibidem. five Knights-Companions being present, the absence of the rest were ex|cused by his special favour, and the Idem  Ibidem. Injunction of the Statute (as the Annals fur|ther add) concerning the due Number of Nominators, were by the same clemency remitted, because of the exigency of the time and place; and forthwith upon a Scruteny then taken, Iames the Fifth King of Scotland was elected into the fellow|ship of this most illustrious Order.
From this time to the late Rebellion, we meet not with the like case; but then the wickedness of those days created new necessities, which occasioned or ra|ther inforced the then Soveraign (one of the exactest observers of the Laws and Ceremonies of this Order) most unwillingly to awaken this dormant prerogative, which he first put in execution at a Chapter specially called for the Election of that deserving and renowned Knight, Thomas Earl of Strafford, held at the City of York, upon the Palmer's large Iour|nal. p. 25. 12. day of September, anno. 16. Car. 1. where at that time and place, by his Supream Authority, he dispensed with the defect of Number of Palmer's large Iour|nal. p. 25. six Knights-Companions (having then with him Palmer's large Iour|nal. p. 25. four only, some of the rest being employed in his Service against the Scots) and gave Sir Thomas Rowe then Chancellor of the Order, directions to prepare a Dispensation accordingly; which (in regard that Soveraign did therewithal command should be Palmer's large Iour|nal. p. 25. entred among the Annals of the Order) we have thought fit to insert in the Numb. XVI Appendix.
Afterward, when several of the Knights-Companions so much adhered to the Long-Parliament, that no summons could draw thence their attendance upon the Soveraign, though but to celebrate the grand Festival of their Patron (much less to the compleating Chapters of Election) to which the Oath taken at their Instal|lation had equally obliged them; the Soveraign was constrained to make further use of his Supream Authority, in this very particular; and thereupon at the Feast of St. George celebrated at Palmer's large Iournal. p. 35. York, upon the 18.19. and 20. days of April, in the 18. year of his Reign, in a Chapter held on the Eve of the said Feast, by Himself and but Ibid. p. 36. four other Knights-Companions, viz. Prince Charles, the Prince Elector, the Earl of Lindsey, and Duke of Richmond and Lenox, it was Ordered, Ibid. p. 36. That Letters of Dispensation should be drawn up by Sir James Palmer (then Deputy Chancellor) for the insufficient Number (as wanting of six Knights) to hold a Chapter of Election; and for authorizing the Knights then present, to deliver in their Votes, according to custom in other Scrutenies, that so the Soveraign might proceed to the Election designed. By virtue of which Dispensation, the Ibid. p. 42. Duke of York, and Prince Rupert, were Elected Fellows and Companions of this most Noble Society.
The like Dispensation was made for the defect of Six Knights, to hold a Chap|ter of Election at Oxford, upon the second day of March, ann. 20. Car. 1. there being then but Ex Autgr. penes praef. Iacob Palmer. five Knights-Companions present with the Soveraign, namely the Duke of York, Prince Rupert, the Earls of Dorset and Berkshire, and the Duke of Richmond and Lenox; at which Chapter, William Prince of Orange, Son-in-Law to the Soveraign, and Bernard de Foix Duke of Espernon were Elected.
Last of all, in reference to the holding 29. Mar. 1. Apr. 10. Apr. three several Chapters, preparatory to the Feast of St. George, and Grand Installation celebrated at Windesor the 15.16. and 17. days of April, in the 13. of his Majesty the now Soveraign's most happy Reign (one of which Chapters was called for the Election of four Knights, and to deliberate with the surviving Knights-Companions) the Soveraign was pleas|ed (the 29. day of March immediately foregoing) to pass the like Lib. Carol. p. 24  2. Dispensation, under the Signet of the Order, and his own Sign manual for this defect; and Appendix Num. XVII. there|by made those three Chapters as legal and of as much force and validity, as if the Number of Knights-Companions, required by the Statutes, had been full and compleat.



SECT. V. Of opening the Chapter.
WE are now arrived at opening the Chapter, whereinto neither the Sove|raign of the Order, nor any of the Knights-Companions are to enter, without wearing both their Mantles and Garters, for so the E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 3. Statutes of the Order ordain, and so hath the Law been understood, in case where a Chapter hath been held elsewhere than at Windesor; as for instance at a Chapter held at Whitehall, for the Election of Iohn Count Palatine of the Rhine, an. 20. Eliz. the MS. quart. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 23. b. Earl of Hun|tingdon, and the Lord Grey of Wilton, not having their Mantles then at Court, not permitted to enter into that Chapter, to give their Votes for his Election.
The late Soveraign King Charles of ever blessed memory Palmer's large Iour|nal p. 25. determining to call a Chapter for Electing the foresaid Thomas Earl of Strafford at York, where nei|ther He, nor any of the Knights-Companions then attending his person, had their Robes of the Order with them, and taking notice of the Injunction of the Statutes now mentioned, did by his supream authority, as Soveraign of the Order, Appendix. Num. XVI. dis|pence with the Knights-Companions then present, for coming into the Chapter without their Mantles.
Afterward, upon great necessity, occasioned by the late Rebellion, the same Soveraign was inforced to make further use of his Prerogative, relating to this particular, in some Palmer's large Iourn. p 48.  55. vide Autogr. penes eurdem Iac. Palmer. following Chapters held at Oxford.
In like manner shortly after the present Soveraign returned to his Throne, a like Dispensation pas'd under the Signet of the Order (the Great Seal being then under the hand of the Graver, but not finished) dated the 10. of Ianua|ry in the 12. year of his Reign, He being then necessitated to make use of his Supream authority for holding a Chapter the 14. of Ianuary following, in regard the Knights-Companions, then in being, were not as yet provided of new Robes.
Presuming then, that a full Number of Knights-Companions (in obedience to their Summons) are attending the Soveraign, habited in their Mantles and Garters, and entred into the Chapter-house at Windesor, or other place appointed for this their Assembly, the Soveraign having taken his Seat, at the upper end of the Ta|ble, and given leave to the Knights-Companions to sit; the occasion of their be|ing called together, is first declared, either by the Soveraign himself, or by the Chancellor of the Order, upon his command.
The next thing in course, is to give the Soveraign information of all the Stalls then void, the notice of which vacancies, if (as sometimes formerly) the Sove|raign happens to be in foreign parts, ought to be before sent him, by his Lib. N. p. 65. Deputy or Lieutenant; but if in England, and present in Chapter, then to be presented by the Chancellor, or in his absence, by the Register or other Officer of the Order.
This done, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions enter into consideration how the room of the defunct Knight, or Knights, shall be Lib. C. p. 109 supplied; and sometimes (where two or more Stalls are found void) whether they shall be all fill'd up at that time, or if not, Lib. C. p. 109. how many Knights then Elected.
But where the Scruteny is intended to be taken in the Choire of St. George's Chappel at Windesor, these or the like particulars (referring to Election) are com|monly consider'd of on the Feast day, in the Chapter held immediately before Vespers; wherein it is most usually Ordered, That the Scruteny shall be taken in the said Chappel that following Afternoon, and so was it Decreed on St. George's day anno 5. E. 6. viz. Lib. N. p. 304. That the Elections of Knights should be taken that Even|song, and in the Chappel.
After this, the Chancellor begins to collect the Knights-Companions Votes, and this is frequently termed, the taking of a Scruteny: To the full understanding the nature of this Action and Ceremony, we shall proceed to certain considera|tions preparatory thereunto; beginning with what concerns the Nomination of the Persons to be proposed to Election.



SECT. VI. That Knights only present in Chapter ought to Nominate.
THE Nomination of those persons proposed to the Soveraign's Election, be|longs only to such of the Knights-Companions as are present in Chapter when the Scruteny is taken; for therein not only all the Bodies of the Statutes are positive, but Entrances to that purpose, are made in sundry places of the Annals; insomuch, that from the Institution of this most Noble Order, it hath not been otherwise used, that we can collect.
And it is observable, that anno 26. Eliz. (the Feast of St. George being cele|brated at Greenwich) the Earl of Warwick, and Lord Burley (Lord Treasurer of England) fell both ill of the Gout, upon the Feast day, which occasioned their absence at Evening Prayer, whilst the Scruteny was taken: whereupon we find their Lib. C. p. 95. indisposition of body, and absence noted in that Scruteny instead of, and in those peculiar places, where their Nominations should else have been entred, had they been present at the taking thereof. And beside this we meet with an observation made upon the same occasion, by Robert Cooke Esquire, then Cl|renceux King of Arms MS. quart. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 8. That as for those Knights-Companions, who happen to be absent, when the Scruteny is taken, although this absence be occasioned by accident of sickness, or with the Soveraign's license, nevertheless, in regard of this their ab|sence, at that very time their Votes may not be received.
Those Knights-Companions that come late to the Chapter, lose also the privi|ledge of giving their Votes for that time, which so hapned to Lib. Carolin. p. 44.  45. Prince Rupert and the Earl of Strafford at the Chapter held for the Election of Iames Duke of Monmouth in the Privy-Chamber at Whitehall the 29. of March, an. Dom. 1663.
Now though none of the absent Knights-Companions can give a Proxy to Vote, or otherwise send their suffrages into the Chapter or Chappel, there to pass in Nomi|nation; yet anciently (about the Reigns of King Henry the Fifth, and King Henry the Sixth) when divers of the Knights-Companions were frequently em|ployed in the Wars of France, and consequently so strictly obliged to their se|veral Commands, that they could not personally attend the celebration of the Feast of St. George at Windesor, it was usual for the Commander there in chief, with consent of those Knights-Companions, to make a formal Certificate or Presentment (but not to pass it by way of Nomination or Vote, for that the Law of the Order did not permit) to the Soveraign of the Order, or his Lieutenant, and Knights-Companions assembled at the Feast, of such persons famous for martial Valor and Virtue, with an account of their notable services and atchievements (attested by other persons of honor also) as were at that time, and in that Kingdom, em|ployed in the Soveraign's service, and seemed worthy the honor of Election; to the end that famous and deserving men might be preferr'd to so noble a Dignity. Which manner of Recordation we having most happily lighted upon, among the Collections made by the great industry of William Dugdale Esquire, now Norroy King of Arms; and esteeming it to carry the just reputation, both of authority, for informing us of this custom, and of antiquity, for the hand of that time, can|not without injury to its due worth omit.

My Lord the Duc of Bedford remembrith, as by the Statutes of the Diver of the Gartice, the Election of the Stalls voyde; be saith in the voyce of the Brethren, and of the Fellowship, beyng at the tyme at the Fest, in the presence of the Soverain or hys Deputy; Yt thinkyth to my said Lord, that for hys acquital to Knighthood, yt fytteth hym to give in knowledge to the Kyng, Soverain of the Ordre, and to his Fellowship of the same Ordre, the great honours of the notable Knights, that from

tyme to tyme exercyseth, and have exercysed in Knighthood, and especi|ally in the service of their Soveraign Lord; and of such notable Knyghts, as my Lord of Bedford, for the tyme remembreth hym of; he hath, by the advyce of them of the Fellowshyp of the Order, being now in France, in the Kyngs service, and givyng in charge to the said Garter, Kyng of Arms of the Order, to shew theyr ames to the Kyng, and to expound part of theyr Deeds, Acts, and of theyr worthynesse. First, to expose the honour of Sir John Radeclyff, that hath contynowed all the tyme of the victorious Kyng that last dyed, whom Chryste absolve, at the first landing of hym at Ches de Cau. Quies-de Caux, where the sayd Radeclyff receyved the order of a Knyght, and after continowed the Seige of Hareflew; And af|ter with my Lord of Excester, at the Battaile of Vallemont, and of Quies|de Caux. And also sythen the deth of the sayd victorious Kyng, Rade|clyff being Seneschall of Guyen, hath brought by hys labour in Knyght|hood, to hys Soveraign Lord's obeysance, within the Duchie of Guyen many dyverse Cities, Towns, and Fortresses. And in especial deserved great and notable merits, at the Seige of the City of Bazas. Bazates, whych Seige was accorded, appointed, and set day of Battaile, and of Re|scous, the whych day was kept and houlden, with great power on both sydes, and under Banners displayed, the Enemyes doubtyng to fyght wyth Radeclyff, required hym of apoyntment they to depart, under saufe conduit, from the said feild, the whych saufe conduit he graunted them, for the term of eight days, like as they required. The honour and the empruise, rested in the sayd Radeclyff, and to hys hygh meryte; for in|contynent followying, was delyvered to hym, the reddyssion and possession of the sayd Cytty of Bazates. And also the sayd Radeclyff was at the Battaile of Assincourt, and hath contynowed and exercysed the Armys, the space of xxviij. Wynter unreprothed. And in the tyme of his Esquier|hood, was at the Battaile of Shrewsbury, and at the Journey of Husks, wyth the Lord Grey at the discomfiture and taking of Owenson.

Syr Thomas Ramston.
Syr William Oldegall.
Syr Rauff Butler.
Syr Ro. Harlyng.
Syr Gilbert Halsall.

Item, my Lord the Duc of Bedford, beseecheth the Kyng, Soveraign of the Order, to have also for recommendyd to his good grace and highnesse, other of his Subjects and Servants, now being in hys ser|vice, in his Realme of France, whych hath doon, and yet doth take great payne by their Knyghtly labour, dayly to serve the merite of worthyness and prowess; as Sir Robert Hungerford, Sir Thomas Beamont, Sir John Popeham, Sir Nicholas Burdett, Sir Rauff Ne|vell, Sir Edward Wyver, Sir John Robesart, Sir Tyre Robesart, Sir William Bretton, Sir Thomas Kyngston, Sir Richard Hankford and dyverse other.

But lest peradventure it may seem to some, that the Knights-Companions pre|sent in Chapter can at their pleasures, Nominate or propose to Election such persons as they think fit, so they be qualified according to the Statutes of the Order; this priviledge is to be understood of Knights Subjects only; for in all cases concerning Strangers, the Soveraign doth but permit, and may direct and confine the Knights-Companions to the Nomination of such, as He at any time intends to Elect, which Prerogative we find more particularly asserted in the 31. year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and third year of King Charles the First.
In the first of these instances, the Pag. 113. Blue Book of the Order recordeth, That at a Chapter held immediately before Vespers on Saint George's day, the Earl of Hun|tingdon, then Lieutenant for the Soveraign, acquainted the Knights-Companions,

That the Soveraign did Locum-tenens certiores Lacit Com|militones superiorem permittere ipsorum voluntari, quemcun externum Principem, quen suis suffragiis comprobarent in hunc Ordinem Eligere. Ibid. permit them, or leave it to their plea|sure, to chuse into the Order whatsoever Foreign Prince they should by their Votes approve of.
Hence there may be observed two things, First, that the Knights-Companions have not the priviledge and liberty to nominate what Foreign Prince they please, but the same is derivative from the Soveraign, and only by his particular license or leave, at some times permitted to them.
Secondly, if this Paragraph be well weighed (as also that which succeeds) it is most clear from the context, that Nominare ought to be understood here by the word Eligere, and that the power delegated to the Knights-Companions from the Soveraign, was only to Nominate, not Elect. For it immediately follows,A Capitulo ibant ad Ve|speras, dum illae celebran|tur, Equites Nuncupatio|nes Votorum ineunt quas Pralarus Or|dinis excepit. ead. pag. That the Knights-Companions went from the Chapter to the second Vespers, and while the Divine Offices were celebrating, the Prelate received their Nominations, and that very Evening the Lieutenant presented them to the Soveraign, for her to con|sider of: which had been needless, if the Knights-Companions had been im|powered by her said License, to have made the choice themselves: But the con|trary is yet more evident by that which follows, for the next morning, all the Knights-Companions attending the Soveraign in Chapter, she her self made there the Election, not of any Foreign Prince, but of the Ibid. p. 114. Earl of Sussex, and Lord uckhurst.
In the other Instance anno 3. Car. 1. the Soveraign in a Lib. R. p. 33. Chapter, held before Vespers on St. George's day, signified it to be his pleasure (three Stalls being then vacant) that out of Foreign Princes (the Quorum no|minatio ad se solum spectat. Ibid. Nomination of whom (saith the Annals in that very place) belongs only to the Soveraign; that is, the Soveraign has the prerogative to direct the Knights-Companions to Name, or impose upon them the Nomination of such Foreign Princes as he pleaseth) they the Knights-Companions should Chuse, which must nevertheless be understood to Nominate, or enter down into the Scrteny (not Elect) Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, and Henry of Nassau, Prince of Orange: For there a little after, it in like manner appears (when the Scruteny was presented to the Soveraign) that Himself, not the Knights-Companions, made Election of them.
And it is further manifest by the Scruteny Lib. R. l|co citato. there inserted, that both these rin|ces were named by every of the Knights-Companions then present, according to the Soveraign's signification (which has been usually done at all other times, upon the like occasions, as may be seen by the Scrutenies entred in the Annals) But concerning the third person then to be Elected, the Soveraign (intending him to be a Knight-Subject) Lib. R. l|co citato. left it wholly to their pleasure, to Nominate whomso|ever they esteemed worthy of their Votes.
Since this time, the Nominations in like cases have been sufficiently owned, by the Knights-Companions themselves, to be a Prerogative belonging to the Sove|raign: For, to the end they might more readily and fully comply with the obser|vance of this particular; it was moved in a Ex Auto|graph pe|nes praef. Ia. Palmer. Chapter held at Oxford, the second day of March, an. 19. Car. 1. Ex Auto|graph pe|nes praef. Ia. Palmer. That it might become a custom for the Soveraign to delre before hand, whether He would Elect any Foreign Prince, and whom; that so the Knights-Companions might be sure to Name him in the Scruteny.


SECT. VII. Of the Number, Qualifications, and Degrees of the Persons to be Nominated.
ANother consideration in our progress towards the act of Election, is touch|ing the Number, Qualifications, and Dignities of the Persons Nominated,

which may be best known from another branch of the before mentioned Article of the Statutes, and is to this effect, E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. That every one of the Knights-Compani|ons present at the Election, should Nominate for himself nine very sufficient Persons, whom he should judge free from all reproach and scandal, whether Subjects to the Soveraign, or Forreigners. Provided they are known not to favour or abet any party at enmity with him: that is to say three Earls, or others of higher degree, three Barons, and three Knights.
The things chiefly observable out of this Text, we rank under five heads.

First, The Number of Persons Nominated, or to be given in by every Knight-Companion, are to be exactly Nine.
Secondly, They ought to be of unblamable Reputation.
Thirdly, Either Subjects to the Soveraign, or else Strangers.
Fourthly, Such as are known not to be engaged in any party against the Soveraign.
Lastly, to be Earls (or of greater dignity) or Barons, or Knights.

1. For the first of these, their Number; every one of the Knights-Companions assembled in Chapter are enjoined to name nine, neither more nor less. So also saith King Henry the Fifth's Art. 18. Statutes, whereunto are consonant the Art. 19. Statutes of King Henry the Eighth. And in this particular the Statutes have been hitherto observed (except in one case) as from the Entries of those many Scrutenies, in the Annals of this most Noble Order, is fully evident.
As to Numbers, we are taught that great Mysteries lie wrapt up in them, the excellency and dignity whereof, and particularly of this number Nine (which Poet. l. 1. c. 1. Scaliger calls the most perfect number) are largely celebrated among the Learn|ed, both ancient and modern, which are easie to be met with; wherefore we shall not spend further time to insist upon them.
But why our Royal Founder made choice of this Number, to be put in Nomi|nation, above all other, unless he had some reflection on the Nine Worthies (men reported famous for valour and martial exploits, and therefore not unlikely to be at first proposed as Examples to the Knights-Nominators) or otherwise consi|dered it as a trebled threefold Cord, and Symbol of perfect stability and solid amity (for so also is the number Nine accounted to signifie) can neither easily nor certainly be resolved.
2. As to the second point; the Injunction in the Statutes of Institution takes order, that the Persons designed for Election, should be free from all reproach, and of untainted reputation; and according to those of King Henry the Fifth, are to be Art. 18. the best and most sufficient Knights, and freest from reproach, that the Nomina|tors know. To the same purpose speaks the Exemplar entred in the Black Book, Art. 17. Such as are fittest, and whom they who Nominate believe to be free from ignominy and dishonour. And to this Act of Nomination belongs part of the second Article in Henry the Eighth's Statutes, Lib. N. p. 215. That no Knight-Companion should name any Per|son whom he thinks or esteems in his Conscience, to have upon him any spot of Re|proach: But on the contrary in another place of the same Statutes, it is provi|ded, that they be nominated and proposed, Art. 19. out of the number of the most worthy and select Knights.
How tender the Knights-Companions were in ancient time of infringing the Statutes in this particular, is manifest from a notable passage, which fell out Lib. N. p. 121. an. 39. H. 6. at a Scruteny taken the 8. of February, in the Bishop of London's Palace; where Iohn de Foix Earl of Lib. N. p. 121. Kendall, a Gascoigner by birth, (which makes the Example more eminent, where a Stranger became so tender of the honor of the Order) not being acquainted with the Lib. N. p. 121. quality and merit of Knights and hono|rable Persons among us, so well and sufficiently, as to name such whom he was confident were irrprehensible, and without blemish, forbore to Lib. N. p. 121. nominate any person at all. And certainly, seeing the Statutes put very considerable qualifi|cations upon the Deputies and Proxies made choice of for the Installation of Strangers (as shall be discourst of in its proper Cap. 16. Sect. 2. place) much more caution and regard ought to be used and had, both in the Nomination and Election of Knights, into this so Illustrious Society.
3. Touching the third point; the Statutes make indifferently capable of being Nominated or Elected, either Knights-Subjects, or Strangers, [Free Princes or their Subjects] and it was so even at the Institution, upon the first choice; where among the 25 Elected Knights, 23 of them were Subject (among whom we reckon Piers Capdall de la Buche) but Sir Sncio dabricrt and Sir Henry Eme were both born Strangers, and Subjects to other Princes.
And thus was it practised, not only in the remaining part of the Founder's Reign, and during the Reigns of three of his Successors, as appears in the Cata|logue of Knights elected in their times; but also ever since, as is more particu|larly and fully evident, from the Scrutenies taken and entred throughout the Annals of the Order.
Of those who were admitted into this Noble Order by Election, we shall in the last Chapter give an account in a compleat Catalogue of them: Here we think it sufficient, to insert the Names of such, as having not been Elected, are not to be forgotten, out of this very respect, that by their standing Candidates in Elections into this Order, have the fame of being mentioned in the principal Register of Honor now in the Christian world: Giving a List, not of all (for that were too numerous) but only those of eminent quality in Foreign parts, with the time when the Scrutenies were taken, that transmitted them to our hands.

A Catalogue of some Strangers, who have been Nominated yet not Elected.
Franciscus Sforza dux Mediolni
28. H. 6.
Franciscus secundus dux Britanniae
13.14.15.22. E. 4.
Henricus quartus Rex Legionis  Castillae.
14. E. 4.
Matthias Corvinus Rex Hungariae
19.22. E. 4.
Fredericus scundus Dux Austriae
22. E. 4.  1. R. 3.
Philippus quartus Dux Burgundiae
14. H. 7.
Franciscus Maria Dux Vrbini
1.2. H. 8.
Vladislaus Secundus Rex Hungariae
1.2.6.8. H. 8.
Christianus secundus Rex Dniae
6.8. H. 8.
Dux Barrye.
8. H. 8.
Comes Galaciae
8. H. 8.
Alphonsus Dux Ferrariae
13.15. H. 8.
Lodovicus secundus Rex Hungariae
13.14.15. H. 8.
Maximilianus Sforza Dux Mediolani
14.15.16. H. 8.
Marchio Piscarae
17. H. 8.
Iohannes tertius Rex Portugalliae
17.18.26.28. H. 8.
Marchio Mantuae
18. H. 8.
Carolus Burbonus Dux Vandosme
24. H. 8.
Guilielmus Dux Clivensis
32. H. 8.
Dux Bavariae
32. H. 8.
Dux Alvae
1.  2. Ph.  Mar.
Dux Medinae Coeli
1.  2. Ph.  Mar.
Comes Fereae
1.  2. Ph.  Mar.
Franciscus secundus Rex Galliae
1. Elizab.
Franciscus tertius Comes Palatinus
10.11.12.13.16.17. Eliz.
Augustus Dux Saxoniae
11. Eliz.
Alphonsus secundus Dux Ferrariae
13. Eliz.
Dux Andegavensis
13.22.23.24. Eliz.
Rambrith de Walsey
25. H. 6.
Iohannes de Voynada
25. H. 6.
Dominus Grabazenby
24. H. 8.
Dominus Humers
24. H. 8.
Dominus Iohannes Mounte
24. H. 8.
Dominus Harmibolt
24. H. 8.
Dominus Boysy
24. H. 8.

4. In the fourth place, they are not in a capacity of Nomination, who are known to have taken contrary part against the Soveraign; or as the Exemplar entred in the Black Book more largely than any of the Statutes express, Art. 17. such as are not his Adversaries, or Abettors or willing defenders of his Adversaries. But con|cerning such, we no where observe they had room in the Scrutenies, all Knights-Companions having been more wary and discreet, than by Nominating a known or publick Enemy, to put either disrespect upon the Soveraign, or offer viola|tion to the Statutes.
5. In the fifth and last place, concerning the Degree, Rank, and Dignity of the Nine Knights propounded to Election; the Statutes of Institution appoint, That they be, first three Earls, or persons of greater dignity, secondly, three Ba|rons, and thirdly, three Knights; or as it is in Henry the Fifth's Statutes, Art. 18. trois Contes, ou de greigneur estat, trois Banerets,  trois Batchelers. These De|grees are to be ranked in three Classes, and they distinguished by three Divisions, all comprehending the three Degrees aforesaid.
As touching the first of these Divisions; whereas all other Bodies and Exem|plars of the Statutes make positive mention of Earls only (taking in nevertheless the higher Degrees though not named) the Statutes of Henry the Eighth express themselves in this point somewhat more amply than the rest, by mentioning in the first Class, Art. 19. Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls, or persons superiour to these in De|gree, wherein the highest Dignities are included.
In this place we may properly observe, the different Title (viz. Baneret) that Henry the Fifth's Statutes (but now mentioned) hath given us, instead of Baron; and not only in this Article, but in all Art. 21.22. other, where there is occasion to speak of Barons; nevertheless the Record intends by it, to signifie no other than the very same Degree, namely a Baron. For albeit a Baneret, who had his name 2. part In|stitut. f. 667. a Vexillo, from the Banner, was usually taken to signifie a Degree of Honor next beneath that of Baron, both heretofore and in later times (as may be col|lected from that famous Pat. 10. Iac. pars 10. m. 8. establishment made on the behalf of the younger sons of Viscounts and Barons) yet formerly among our Records it is found to be a Sy|nonimy to Baron, and so clearly made out by our most learned Title of Ho|nor, p. 736.737 Selden, and is to be so taken here; and not as a distinct Title of a lower Degree, because also we observe the Banerets ranked in all Scrutenies before King Henry the Eighth established his Statutes (except An 14. H. 7. vide Lib. N. p. 172.  173. one) with the Knights-Batchelors not with Barons.
Besides this, something further may be said concerning the Title of the third and lowest rank in this Classis; for in the Statutes of Institution they are called Art. 18. Milites Bachalauri, in those of King Henry the Fifth Art. 18. Batchelers, and elsewhere Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 17. Bachalauri, and H. 8. Stat. Art. 19. Bachalauri Equites, which in common acceptation are all the same with Milites; though thus rendred to express and manifest their difference from Knights Banerets, who are of a higher Degree of Honor. And here we have an occasion given to note, That there is no place in a Scruteny for any un|der the degree of Knights Batchellors.
And though Ord. Stat. in Bibl. Hatton Art 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19. three of the Nine named are appointed to be Barons, and three other Earls, or of a higher Degree, yet must these six be such as have received the Order of Knighthood, else ought not their names be either given or taken in Nomination; for the Text is plain, That each of the Knights assembled at the Ele|ction shall name nine Ord. Stat. in Bibl. Hatton Art 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19. Knights.
Thus his late Majesty of blessed memory, in the sixth year of his Reign, in|tending to chuse Iames Marquess Hamilton into the Society of this Order, con|ferr'd the honor of Lib. R. p. 59. Knighthood upon him immediately before his Nomination; and the Annals in that place give this Remarque upon the Action, and the rea|son for it, Ibid. Because by the Statutes it is provided, That none should be Elected into the Order, that have not been dignified with the title of Knight.
Yet it seems the Ceremony of Knighting the person designed for Election, was not so strictly and duly observed as it ought, but that sometimes this branch of the Statute was either not taken notice of, or else confounded with the second Article, throughout the several Bodies of the Statutes, which prohibits the Choice or lection of any person into the Society (of which we shall speak by and by) as

this doth the Proposal or Nomination; and thereupon perhaps it was conceived, that although the Nomination, Election, and sometimes delivery of the Ensigns of the Order, were first dispatcht and past, yet it was well enough if the honor of Knighthood were conferr'd afterward. As it was in the case of William Earl of Derby, and Thomas Cecil Lord Burleigh, anno 43. Eliz. where the Register notes, Lib. C. p. 144. that as soon as their Election was past, and they brought into the Chapter, the Earl of Derby (who it seems had not been Knighted before) was dubbed Knight, with a drawn Sword, according to Custom, after which they had the Garter and George put on by the Soveraign her self.
In like manner Pag. 159. Vlrick Duke of Holstein, and Henry Earl of Northampton, im|mediately after their Election (being the last day of St. George's Feast, an. 3. Iac.) and before they received the Ensigns of the Order, had the dignity of Knight|hood conferr'd on them by the Soveraign. So also in the case of the Earl of Suf|folk, an. 3. Car. 1. which the Red Book of the Order taking notice of, saith, Pag. 35. that as soon as it was understood, that the Earl had not received the Order of Knight|hood before, the Soveraign immediately drawing his Sword Knighted him; which was not done till after his Pag. 35. Election, and Investiture with both the George and Garter.
Thus also did the Ceremony of Knighthood succeed the lection of his sacred Majesty the present Soveraign, the 21. of May, an. 14. Car. 1. For Palmer's large Iour|nal. p. 9. after he had been Elected, and the Ensigns of the Order placed upon him, and that the two senior Knights (the Earls of Penbroke and Montgomery, and of Arundel and Surrey) were intreated by the rest of the Knights-Companions, to present his Highness to the Soveraign in the name of all the rest, to be initiated into the Title and Dignity of a Knight-Batchelor, he was conducted by the said Earls (his Supporters) into the Presence Chamber in Windesor Castle, where before the Chair of State, he most solemnly Palmer's large Iour|nal. p. 9. received the Order of Knighthood from the Soveraign his late Ma|jesty of blessed memory.
To Lib. R. p. 143. honor which Knighthood, and the memory thereof, four of the chief No|bility then present were also Knighted, namely, the Earls of ssex, Saint Albans, and Elgin, and Viscount Grandison; the first of them being conducted from the great Chamber to the Soveraign's State, between two Batchellor Knights, Sir Frederick Hamilton, and Sir Robert Huniwood; the second by Sir Roger Pal|mer Knight of the Bath, and Sir Henry Mildmay; the third by Sir Iohn Meldram and Sir William Withrington; and the fourth by Sir Iohn Harpur and Sir Iohn Lucas.
Afterwards the Law in this point began again to be more rightly understood, and by that time his Royal Highness the Duke of York, came to be Elected (which was on the Palmer's large Iour. p. 42. 20. of April, an. 18. Car. 1. being the last day of the Feast of Saint George, then celebrated at the City of York) the Soveraign appointed and ac|cordingly conferr'd the honor of Knighthood upon him, the Palmer's large Iour. p. 42. day before, which he received upon his knees; being first conducted into the Prese Chamber, be|tween two of the Nobility, who were also Knights, namely, the Ibid. p. 39. Marquess of Hertford, and Viscount Grandison: In honor and memorial whereof, there were also four Noblemen Knighted at that time, the Ibid. p. 39. Earl of Carnarvan, supported by Sir William Killegrew and young Sir Arthur Ingram; the Lord George d' Aubigne, sapported by Sir William Howard and Sir Peter Wyche; the Lord Iohn Stewart, by Sir Peter Killegrew and Sir Capell Bedell; and the Lord Bernard Stewart by Sir Edward Savage and Sir Hery lount.
And thus Ex Colle|ct an. E. W. G. Prince Edward Count Palatine of the Rhine, and George Duke of uckingham,Ex Colle|ct an. E.W.G. being designed by the present Soveraign to be admitted into this most Noble Order, were both first Knighted at Saint Germans in France, an. Dom. 1649. and afterwards had the Ex Colle|ct an. E. W. G. Ensigns of the Order sent unto them by the hands of Sir Edward Walker Garter, who, in right of his Office, invested them therewith.
Nevertheless in the case of his Highness Prince Kupert, who had the honor to be Elected, with his Royal Highness the Duke of York, an. 18. Car. 1. His want of Knighthood became no impediment thereunto, being then a Prince in another Country, viz. Count Palatine of the Rhine and Duke of Bavaria, and might there|fore justly claim the priviledge, to come within the rule of Foreign Princes, mentioned a little lower.
But herein also the Soveraign, to come as neer to the intention and obser|vance of the Statute as he could (where there was a possibility to do it, and the honor also would be well accepted by the Prince) thought it requisite by Com|mission, under the great Seal of England, to impower Palmer's large Iour|nal. p. 45. Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey, and George Lord Goring (late Earl of Norwich) both being then in Holland, or either of them, to Palmer's large Iour|nal. p. 45. Knight the said Prince, Palmer's large Iour|nal. p. 45. before the putting on his Garter (seeing it could not possibly be done before his Election) which was intended to be sent and presented unto him, by the hands of Sir Iohn Burrough Garter; but his Pag. 48.  53. death after hapning, the Soveraign's intention herein was frus|trated. Albeit the Prince upon his coming afterwards into England, received both the Garter and George from the Soveraign himself at Pag. 33. Nottingham, never|theless without being Knighted, which to excuse it may well be alledged, that the Soveraign might not take into his thoughts this part of the Ceremony, it be|ing a time of so greas business and trouble, occasioned by the then setting up of his Standard.
However, upon the Id. p. 62. 17, day of Ianuary, an. 1644. when a Decree past in Chapter, then held at Oxford, that both the Duke of York and the Prince should enjoy all Id. p. 65. Rights and Priviledges of the Order, though they were not hitherto Installed (until Windesor was free from the Enemy, but then to perform the Ce|remonies of Installation there) the Prince, Id. p. 65. before he took his Oath, was con|ducted by the Earl of Berkshire, and Duke of Richmond and Lenox (two of the Knights-Companions) unto the Soveraign, and kneeling down received the ho|nor of Id. p. 65 Knighthood from him. There being at the same time, Id. p. 65 two of the Nobi|lity likewise Knighted in memorial of that Solemnity; namely, the Lord Henry Seymour, second Son to the Marquess of Hertford, brought up to the Soveraign between Sir Iohn Stawell Knight and Baronet, and Sir Francis Lloyd Knights; and the Lord Capell conducted between Sir Richard Willis and Sir Thomas Corbet Knights.


SECT. VIII. Of the Scruteny, and by whom it ought to be taken.
ALL this being premised, we are led directly to the Scruteny it self, in refe|rence to which we shall first consider by Whom it ought or hath been usually taken, next the time when, and then the manner and form thereof.
By the Statutes of Institution the collecting Knights-Companions Votes, and entring them in the Scruteny, properly belongs to the E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18 Prelate of the Order, and upon him is this employment conferr'd, not only by the other H. 8. Stat. Art. 19. Bodies of Sta|tutes that succeeded, but also by the Lib. N p. 232. Constitutions of his Office, and the obliga|tion of his Ib. p. 313. Oath; whose right thereunto we find afterwards duly Wintonien|sis Antistes Ordinis Praela|tus cujus illud er at Officium, summa cum reverentia and soliram Equi|tu nomen|claturam pro|cedit. c. lib. C. p. 100. asserted, up|on this Officers taking a Scruteny, anno 27. Eliz. on the Feast day of St. George.
Nevertheless the Statutes provided, that if the Prelate were at any time absent, then the E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. Dean of Windesor, or the E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. Register, or the E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. Senior Residentiary of the Colledge, or the Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 17. Secretary or Scribe of the Order, should undertake the employ|ment; and the Constitutions of the Officers say, the Lib. N. p. 232. Chancellor, Dean, or Regi|ster shall in like case do it; which when they did, it is frequently mentioned to be performed by them, Lib. N p. 77.  89. in absence of the Prelate, as implying a reservation of his right to the employment; or as in another place more expresly, In absentia Prelati cujus Ordinarium alioquin id e|rat Officium. Idem p. 84. In the absence of the Prelate, whose particular duty otherwise it had been. Now there are vari|ous Examples of all these, given us in the Annals of the Order, but among the many, take these that follow, and first of the Prelate.
The Prelate of the Order gathered and received the Suffrages from the Knights-Companions, Lib. N. p. 64. anno 9. H. 5. when Iohn Earl Marshal, and four other Knights

were Elected. The like did Henry Beaufort Lord Cardinal, Prelate of the Order, upon the Election of the King of Portugal, Id. p. 91. an. 13. H. 6. And when the Duke of Norfolk was Elected, Pag. 105. an. 28. H. 6. the Prelate then also collected the Suffrages; which he likewise did, upon the Feast days of St. George, celebrated in the Lib C. p. . 12. Idem. p. 62. 13. Pa. 64. 14. Pag. 100. 27. Pag. 103. 28. Pag. 108. 30. Pag. 113. 31. Pag. 119. 34. and Pag. 128. 35. years of Queen Elizabeth's Reign.
Sometimes the Scrutenies have been collected, both by the Dean of Windesor and the Register of the Order jointly; as at the Elections of Lib. N. p 77. Iohn Lord Talbot an. 2. H. 6. of Pag. 81.  Regist. Char|tac. f. 13. b. Sir Iohn Fastolf, an. 6. H. 6. and the Duke of Conimbero. Quinbery, an. Lib. N. p. 84. 5. H. 6. all taken at the Feasts of St. George celebrated at Windesor.
And peradventure the Dean, at those times, received the Votes from the Knights-Companions on the Soveraign's side, while the Register collected those other on the Prince's; for we observe, that in King Henry the Fifth's Reign, in employments of other natures (but of like manner as to the performance) one whereof was, to signifie the pleasure of the Soveraign to the Knights-Companions, about their giving due Reverence, first to God, and afterwards to Himself; and the other in a Ceremonial, which directs and appoints the manner and order of Regist Char|tac. f. 9. b.Censing the Knights-Companions; in both which, the Dean was sent to perform the service on the Lib. N. p. 65. right hand the Choire [the Soveraign's side] and the Register, on the Lib. N. p. 65. left.
Sometimes the Register of the Order took them himself alone, as at the Election of Ib. p. 89. Iohn Earl of Arundel, an. 10. H. 6. as also at another Election of the Pag. 92. Earl of Monteyne and Sir Iohn Grey, an. 14. H. 6. And we likewise find, that when the Office of Register was void, and Thomas Ruthall Bishop of Duresme, executed it during its vacancy, the Bishop himself Pag. 199. an. 2. H. 8. collected the Suffrages. In like manner, when William Day Dean of Windesor, officiated in the absence of George Carew Dean of the Chappel and Register of the Order, at the Feasts of Saint George held at Whitehall the Lib. C. p. 73. 18. and MS. penes . O. . p. 113. 19. years of Queen Elizabeth, he perform|ed this service.
This duty was likewise performed by the Register, from the 15. year of King Henry the Eighth, to the end of his and his Sons Reign, as appears by the Black Book of the Order, in those places, where the taking of Scrutenies is treated of, as also on the day of St. George, celebrated the first of Queen Elizabeth by Lib. C p. 29. Iohn Boxhall, and again at the Feast of St. George held, an. 1. Iac. by Pag. 150. Gle Thompson, who in the several times were Registers of this most Noble Order. Nevertheless here it must be understood, that what was in these Instances done by the Register or such as officiated for him, was on the behalf of the Prelate, and not otherwise.
But in the Pag. 7. beginning of Queen Maries Reign we find the Chancellor of the Order began to perform this service, being by Art. 19. King Henry the Eight's Sta|tutes, adjoined to those other Officers, before appointed to collect the Scrute|nies, In absence of the Prelate, and thereby made capable of the employment; which afterwards we observe somewhat tacitely noted to be performed, as if in his own right, when the Register hath done it, in the Chancellor's absence. Though in truth it was no other, then as when the Bishop of Duresme, and Do|ctor Day (immediately before remembred) took the Scruteny in the vacancy of the Office, and absence of the Register, nevertheless on the behalf of the Prelate.
For instance, an. 4. Eliz. the Register in the MS. penes W. Le. N. Cl. absence of the Chancellor (who was sick) upon the Feast day of St. George collected the Suffrages; and an. 8. liz. George Carew then Register of the Order, took the Votes of the Knights-Compa|ions, Lib. C. p.  t. in absence of Sir William Petre Chancellor of the Order. So also anno Pag. 161. Iacobi 4. where the cause of the Chancellor's absence is noted to be MS. penes Guil. Dugdale Ar. modo Norroy Reg. Armor. sickness, and an. 6. Iac. to be Lib. C. p. 166. death.
In the first of these Instances we find the Prelate expresly mentioned to be pre|sent; in the two following his presence implyed, for it is said, that the Ex cod. MS. pen. Guil Dug|dae. four Officers of the Order did attend both Feasts, whereof (the Chancellor being want|ing) the Prelate must needs be one.
Now all these passages seem to relate to the Chancellor's, rather than the Prelate's right, by this Remarque; That every of the Scrutenies were taken in

the absence of the Chancellor, which looks something like a cautionary note, that intended the preservation of the right of performing this service to the Chancellor, rather than the Prelate.
Furthermore, when a Deputy Chancellor hath been admitted to officiate in the Chancellor's absence, he and not the Prelate hath taken the Scruteny, though pre|sent; as at that made for the Election of his sacred Majesty the present Sove|raign, the Palmer's large Iour|nal. p. 18. 20 day of May, an. 14. Car. 1. and at another Scruteny taken the Palmer's large Iour|nal. p. 1. 22. of May following. As also when the Suffrages were collected, for the Ele|ction of his Highness the Ibid. p. 40. Duke of York, and Prince Rupert, at York anno 17. Car. 1.
But there is one passage more (upon taking a Scruteny, an. Iac. 22.) which seems advantageous to the Chancellor in this point, where it is said, Suffragia quum dedis|sent praenomi|nti militis,  ca supremo detulisse, Cancellarius, qui eis ex of|ficio excipien|dis incumbe|ba, Supremus c. lib. R. p. 23. That when the Knights-Companions had given their Votes (as in the Annals they are described) the Chancellor who, according to his Office, was to receive them, presented them to the Soveraign. Howbeit in truth, we find no sufficient ground for the Regi|ster to record this as done by the Chancellor, by virtue of his Office, or any one Act or Decree of Chapter that hath suspended or taken off the Prelate's right, which is reserved to the Prelate, even by the Pat. 15. E. 4. par. 3. m. 18. Patent for erecting the Office of Chancellor, particularly in those things, which touching the Order, ought by the Statutes of the Institution to belong to him. But forasmuch as at the usual time of performing this Ceremony in the Chappel, the Prelate (if present) is presumed to be officiating at the Altar, in discharge of another part of his Duty: Upon this consideration hath the service been then imposed upon the Chancellor and others.
Lastly, we have observed the Scruteny to be once taken by Palmer's large Iournal. p. 27. Garter, an. 16. Car. 1. at the Election of the renowned Thomas Earl of Strafford; but this was at a time when not only the Prelate, but all the other Officers of the Order, ex|cepting Sir Iohn Burrough Garter, were absent; and consequently this Service be|ing so performed by him, ought rather be judged (from what hath been said) to have been done in the Prelate's, than Chancellor's right.


SECT. IX. The Time when.
BUT whosoever of the Officers of the Order they were that gathered the Knights-Companions Suffrages, the time when they entred upon this duty (in the intervals of Feasts, where the occasion required a peculiar Chapter to be called for Election) was usually after the Chapter had been opened, and the mat|ter of Election proposed by the Soveraign; after which (to the execution of this accustomed employment) the Officer usually proceeded with great Reverence and all possible Respect.
Howbeit upon an extraordinary occasion (in the interval of the Grand Feasts) the Soveraign hath sometimes, caused and assembly of the Knights-Companions to be had at the Castle of Windesor, who in the Choire of St. George's Chappel (not Chapter-house) after the more solemn way, have delivered in their Nominations, and returning thence into the Chapter-house, He there hath made his Election. Thus did King Henry the Eighth, upon the Lib. N. p. 288. 7. of Iune in the 17. year of his Reign in reference to the Election of the Ibid. p. 249. Lord Henry Fitz Roy (so is he styled in the Scruteny, and there ranked among the Barons) for as yet he was not cre|ated Duke of Somerset and Richmond, nor until the Pat. de an. 17. H. 8. pars 1. 18. day of the same Month) and Ralph Nevil Earl of Westmerland; the Ceremony of whose Nominations ha|ving been performed in the Lib. N. p. 249. Choire, the Soveraign returned into the Chapter-house where the Election passed.
Again we observe, that the Lib. R. p. 139. 20. of May an. 14. Car. 1. being Trinity Sunday, the Soveraign caused a Chapter to be held that afternoon in the Chapter-house at Windesor, in reference also to the Nomination and Election of his Sacred Majesty, the present Soveraign; at the breaking up whereof, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions proceeded immediately to Saint George's Chappel, where at Palmer's large Iournal. p. 5. Evening Prayer (which was not within the compass of the Fest, for that began not until the next day) the Scruteny was taken.
And besides those Examples, which shew the Nominations have been collected (upon peculiar occasions) in the Choire at Windesor, there are also one or two In|stances, where it appears they have been also taken in the Chappel at Whithall, as on the Lib. R. p. 2. 15. of May, an. 1. Car. 1. at the Election of Edward Earl of Dorst, Henry Earl of Holland, and Thomas Viscount Andever (afterwards Earl of Berkshire) as also on the Lib. R. p. 2. 4. of Iuly the same year, whereat the Duke of Chevereux was chosen one of the Companions of this most Noble Order.
Otherwise, and that most usually, the Suffrages have been collected at the se|cond Vespers, or in the time of Evening Prayer, on St. George's day, or that day whereon the Feast of St. George hath been celebrated by Prrgation. And with this note of time do we find the taking of divers Scrutenies marked.
Howbeit, we once have met with a scruteny, made in the Chapter-house at Windesor, on the Lib. R. p. 9. Eve of the Grand Feast, at which the Person immediately Elect|ed was sent for in, and had the Id. p. 61. Ensigns of the Order placed upon him: when forthwith the Soveraign proceeded to the Chappel, and after some space the Elect Knight followed to his Id. p. 61. Installation.
And this was the case of Iames Marquess Hamilton, an. 6. Car. 1. who being necessitated to begin his Voyage the next morning towards Germany (whither he went General of 6000 Foot, in assistance of the King of Sweden) occasioned the Soveraign to dispatch these Ceremonies on the Eve of the Feast.
Formerly the time wherein the Scruteny was begun to be taken in the Chappel may be noted to have been spoken of somewhat general and indefinite, as in the Cellesian. W. le N Cl. 2. MS. fol. il|nes eund. W. le N. l. 3 MS. fol. il|nes eund. W. le N. l. 4 MS. penes c. praef. W. D. N. 5. MS. penes praef. W. D. N. 8. and MS. penes praef. W. D. N. 9. years of Queen Elizabeth, during the time of Evening Prayer. And so in like manner, an. Lib. C. p. 160. 4. Iac. and an. Lib R. p. 30. 13. Car. 1. And when the Feast of St. George was held at Whitehall upon the 18. of April, an. 13. Car. 1. the Annals say, Lib. R. p. 122. That the Soveraign recreated himself with the melody of Evensong, du|ring which, the Chancellor collected the Votes of the Knights-Companions.
But in some other places, the time of this Action, is delivered more limited to a precise time, or some particular part of Evening Prayer. As an. 26. and 27. Eliz. Lib. C. p. 94. Whilst the Choire sung the service. And the like, an. Ib. p. 18 s. 14. Iac. but an. 4. Car. 1. while the Anthem was sung, after the second Lessn,Lib. R. p. 44. but more frequently after the first Lesson, as in the 2. and 9. years of King Charles the First, lb. p. 33. while the Anthem was singing, or during the Anthem of the blessed Virgin, called the Magnificat; and which is all one with than an. 14. Car. 1. viz. Palmer's large Iournal. p. 25. assion as the first Lesson was read, or Palmer's Iournal pro an. 1638. p. 23. at the first Lesson, which is there remembred to be, the Palmer's Iournal pro an. 1638. p. 23. usual part of the ser|vice, in which the Nomination ought to begin.


SECT. X. The Manner and Order of it.
AFter what manner the Knights-Companions Votes ought to be collected, when the Scruteny is taken in the Choire, if we have recourse to the celebration of Saint George's day at Greenwich, an. 28. H. 8. entred into the Black Book of the Order, we shall be informed from the then Register, Pag. 269. That he used his diligence in going to and fro, from one side to the other, to demand and redemand the Suffrages,

from the Knights Companions, according to the variety and order of their Stalls, which like course and proceeding we find recorded, in eisdem terminis, to have been observed by the Chancellor, anno Lib. C. p. 88. 24 Eliz. And without question was ge|nerally thus performed at other times; for in other places of the Annals, it is mentioned to be done lb. p. 42. de more, after the usual manner, as an. 5. Eliz. or Pag. 94. juxta Ordinis Constitutiones, according to the Ordinances and Decrees of the Order, as anno 26. Eliz.
That the Officer who collects the Nominations, ought to begin at the youngest Knight-Companion, and so proceed upward towards the eldest, doth plainly appear from the order mentioned to be used in the Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. 2. and the MS. penes G. O. Y. p. 114. 20. years of Queen Elizabeth, as also an. Palmer's Iournal pro anno 1639. p. 23. 15. Car. 1. But to give the Reader a more particular ac|count of this Ceremony, with its circumstances, as it was performed in his late Majesties Reign of blessed memory, and doubtless long before, though it hath not been our good hap to meet therewith in scriptis, it was as followeth.
Ex rela|tion. Chr. Wren. nuper Re|gist. hujus Or|din.  Dan. Stokes nuper unius Praeb. Reg. Cap. S. Gor. Windesor. First the Officer arose, and went into the middle of the Choire, directly over against his own Seat, where he made two Reverences, first towards the high Al|tar, and next to the Soveraign: thence he proceeded up the Choire, neer the hault pace, against the Stall of the Iunior Knight-Companion, and there made like Re|verences: This done, he went up to the Stall of the said Iunior Knight, and with a single Reverence to him only, demanded whom he pleased to Nominate, which having taken (making to him a second Reverence) he descended into the Choire, and thence passed to the next senior Knight on the other side (unless by reason of the vacancy of that Stall he sate on the same side with the Iunior) and re|ceived his Nominations. Ex rela|tion. Chr. Wren. nuper Re|gist. hujus Or|din.  Dan. Stokes nuper unius Praeb. Reg. Cap. S. Gor. Windesor. From the second Knight-Companion he again crossed the Choire to the third, and in like manner he ascended, according to the senio|rity of the Knight-Companions present (always crossing the Choire where there was occasion) until he arrived at the senior Knight-Companion; and having thus received all their Nominations, he returned into the middle of the Choire, and after usual and accustomed Reverences, took his Seat.
This method and order of collecting the Votes, as to the general, and in the Choire, ought likewise to be observed, when they are taken from the Knights-Companions in Chapter, they being ranked in due order, on each side the Table, according to the seniority of their Elections, and position of Stalls in the Choire, the Officer who gathers them beginning with the Iunior, and thence orderly ascending to the Senior Knight-Companion; concerning which more need not be said, than is before delivered.
And that it may be understood in what form every Knight-Companion ranketh the Names of those Persons he proposeth, and how each Classis is distinguished and divided, the following Scruteny will fully enough declare, it being taken the 12. day of May, an. 13. H. 6. upon the vacancy of one Stall, hapning by the death of Sir Heer Tanke Clux a German by birth, and is the first Scruteny we find mar|shalled among the Annals of this most Noble Order.




Nominabant




Principes.
Barones.
Equites.


Dux Exoniae
Ducem Norfolciae
Dominum Lovell
Dominum Tho. Stanley


Dux Exoniae
Ducem Warwici
Dominum Audley
Dominum Ioh. Holland


Dux Exoniae
Comitem Oxoniae
Dominum Dudley
Dominum Ioh. Steward


Marchio Suffolciae
Ducem Norfolciae
Dominum Lovell
Dominum Iacobum Fenys


Marchio Suffolciae
Comitem Devoniae
Dominum Audley
Dominum Ric. Woodvyle.


Marchio Suffolciae
Comitem Oxoniae
Dominum Foix
Dominum Andream Ogard


Comes Salopiae
Ducem Warwici
Dominum Audley
Dominum Rogerum Fenys


Comes Salopiae
Ducem Norfolciae
Dominum Dudley
Dominum Thomans Stanley


Comes Salopiae
Comitem Oxoniae
Dominum Foix
Dominum Thomam Kiriell


Dominus Sudeley
Ducem Norfolciae
Dominum Foix
Dominum Rogerum Fenys


Dominus Sudeley
Ducem Warwici
Dominum Lovell
Dominum Iacobum Fenys


Dominus Sudeley
Comitem Devoniae
Dominum Audley
Dominum Gulielm. Bonevile


Dominus Willoughby
Ducem Warwici
Dominum Wells
Dominum Thomam Kiriell


Dominus Willoughby
Ducem Norfolciae
Dominum Lovell
Dominum Io. Montgomery


Dominus Willoughby
Comitem Oxoniae
Dominum Laware
Dominum Rob. Shotesbroke


Dominus Scales
Ducem Warwici
Dominum Foix
Dom. Edm. Hungerford.


Dominus Scales
Comitem Oxoniae
Dominum Clyfford
Dom. Guliel. Beauchamp


Dominus Scales
Comitem Devoniae
Dominum Laware
Dom. Andream Ogard


Dominus Johannes Fastolph
Ducem Norfolciae
Dominum Boucer
Dominum Ro. Hungerford


Dominus Johannes Fastolph
Ducem Warwici
Dominum Audley
Dominum Rob. Roos


Dominus Johannes Fastolph
Comitem Oxoniae
Dom. Grey Ruffyn
Dom. Andream Ogard


Dominus Johannes Beauchamp
Ducem Warwici
Dominum Foix
Dominum Rogerum Fenys


Dominus Johannes Beauchamp
Comitem Devoniae
Dominum Lovell
Dominum Iacobum Fenys


Dominus Johannes Beauchamp
Comitem Oxoniae
Dominum Audley
Dominum Robertum Roos


Here may be observed, how each Knight-Companion hath his own Name pre|fixed to those Persons for whom he gives his Vote, to the end it may be known and remembred by whom the Knights-Candidates are Nominated, and these are ranked in three several Divisions.
The first contains the Degrees of Earls, Marquesses, Dukes, Princes, Kings, and Emperors; howbeit at a Scruteny taken an. 24 H. 6. in a Chapter held at Brain|ford, Lib. N. p. 98. Albro Vasques Dalmadea (who immediately following is styled Comes Ave|rentiae) is by mistake ranked but in the second division, among the Barons, and twice among the Knights, in the Votes of the Marquess of Suffolk, and Earl of Shrewsbury: but this Error peradventure arose for want of due information ei|ther of the Law in the Statutes, or his Degree; the later of which is more proba|bly true, for being a Stranger, his Title of Earl might not be so generally known; nor is it taken notice of in the Scruteny it self, though in the Annals im|mediately after.
And which is more apparent, the Earl of Oxford, Devonshire, and Arundel (whose degrees were sufficiently known) at a Scruteny taken an. Lib. N. p. 98. 24. H. 6. are once ranked in the second division among the Barons, and an. Pag. 197.198. 1. H. 8. the Earl of Derby is three times so placed, and again an. Pag. 211. 13. H. 6. the Earl of Devonshire twice. But this hapned not through any oversight, or neglect in observation of the Statutes in this particular, but because at these Nominations, wherein they are so placed, the first division (to which they belonged) hapned to be fill'd up with those other higher degrees, appertaining to the same Classis, that is to say, Kings or Dukes; as when the before mentioned Earls of Oxford, Devonshire, and Arundel, were named in the place of Barons, the King of Portugal, the Dukes of Warwick and Norfolk, were set down in the place of Princes; and so it fell out in like manner in the other instances.
On the contrary an. 15. and 16. E. 4. the Lord Richard Grey one of the Queens Sons by her former Husband Sir Iohn Grey of Groby Knight, in respect of his alliance to the Royal Family, is ranked in the first Division among the Lib. N. p. 138 140. Princes, under this Title Dominus Richardus filius Reginae, and afterwards, an. 19. of the same King, set only among the Ib. p. 144.14 148.149. Barons, as well with the former Title, as this, Ricar|dus Dominus Grey. But in the 22. of the same King, he is thrice registred among the Princes, and as often with the Barons; whence we see, that sometimes the place among Princes may be afforded of courtesie to Persons of most eminent Re|lation, but then again as it is not their due, so such of the Knights-Companions as rank them lower, pass no diminution on their honor.
Within the second Division are placed Barons and Viscounts; for Viscounts were in all Scrutenies, after the first Erection of that Dignity, ranked with Lib. N. p. 99.104.110.244  Lib. C. p. 17 47.51.55.57 59.60.62.  Barons,

until the Lib. C. p. 157. 3. of King Iames (saving only Lib. N. p. 289 Iohn Dudley Viscount Lisle, an. 35. H. 8. who by every Knight, the Duke of Norfolk excepted, is ranked in the first Division with the Princes) and in a Scruteny then taken, Robert Cecil Viscount Cranborne is the second Viscount that we observe to have been ranked with Princes, from whence it became usual so to do, in succeeding Scrutenies, un|til an. Palmer's large Iour|nal. p. 21. 14. Car. 1. and then upon a question put in Chapter (held at Westmin|ster the Palmer's large Iour|nal. p. 21. 23. Maii anno praedicto, whether Earls Sons and Viscounts were elegible with Barons; it was resolved they were, and that by all practice (except in the two cases now mentioned) it was usually done, and it seems so again observed neer that time, for in Ex eod. Iournal. p. 5.  18. two Scrutenies taken the 19. and 21. of that instant May, the Viscounts are therein reduced to the second Division, and ranked with Barons.
Finally, in the third Division the Knights-Batchellors receive their place; so al|so did Banerets, until King Henry the Eighth in his Art. 19. Body of Statutes gave them equal rank in Scrutenies with Barons. Only in that one Scruteny taken an. Lib. N. p. 171.172.173. 14. H. 7. Sir Reignald Bray, Sir Richard Gouldford, and Sir Rice ap Thomas (all three Rot. pergam nuper pen. Sim. Archer Eq. Aut. created Banerets at the Battel of Black-heath) are registred among the Lib. N. p. 172.173. Barons, and yet two of them are oftner ranked with the Lib. N. p. 172.173. Knights-Batchellors in the very same Scruteny.
But though the word in King Henry the Eighth's Latin Statutes is Baronettus instead of Banerettus, yet is this a mistake met with anciently in some both Re|cords and Books, as well as in those places of the Annals, all written long before the Title of Baronet was conceived, or the Dignity in use with us; for the Pat. an. 9. Iac. Reg. pars 2 5. first Creation of that hapned but in this last Age. And hereof more satisfaction may be received Cooks Instut. pars 2. f. 667. Selden's Tit. of Hon. p. 736  737. Spelman's Gloss verbo Baronctus. elsewhere.
In the last place, he who demands these Suffrages, given according to the judg|ment of each Knight-Companion present, is by the Statutes of Institution appoint|ed to take them in . 3. Stat. Art. 18 writing. In pursuance of which, we find it so observed, at a Scruteny taken an. 2. H. 6. for the Election of Regist. Chartac. fol. 12.b. Iohn Lord Talbot and Furni|vall (afterwards created Earl of Shrewsbury) where the Dean of Windesor and the Register of the Order, Regist. Chartac. fol. 12.b. wrote down the Votes and Nominations of every one of the Knights present at the day of Election.
Again, at a Scruteny made an. 4. H. 6. (so also at sundry other times) to supply the Stall of Ralph Earl of Westmerland, then lately deceased (for whom mistakingly, the Black Book of the Order sets down Pag. 81. Sir Henry Fitz. Hugh, in whose room a little before in the same Pag. 78. Book an. 3. H. 6. it appears the Lord Scales was Elected, and elsewhere, that Regist. Char|tac. f. 13.b. Sir Iohn Fastolse was chosen a Compa|nion of this most Noble Order, upon the death, not of Sir Henry Fitz. Hugh, but of the said Earl of Westmerland) we find it noted, that the Lib. N. p. 81. Dean and Register wrote down in order (according to their seniority) the Votes of the Knights-Companions.
And after the Scrutenies began to be entred on the Pages of the Annals, it is evident the general practice hath gone along with the Injunction of the Statutes, only there are two Instances of an Election made, without taking a Scruteny in writing; one in the case of Prince Henry, and Christierne the Fourth, King of Denmark; where the Knights-Companions in a Chapter held at Whitehall the 14. of Iuly, an. Iacobi Regis primo, gave their Votes Lib. C. p. 150. Viva Voce, and forthwith the Soveraign Elected them both into the Fellowship of the Order. The other was the case of Iames Marquess Hamilton, Elected the 2. of February in the 20. year of the same King, with the Lib. R. p. 4. vocal consent of all the Knights-Companions present.
But it is to be considered, that this course, and the omission of taking the Scruteny in writing, is not only contrary to the Law of the Order, so enjoined for a more certain memorial of the action, and more faithful transmission of it to Posterity, but exceeding prejudicial to persons of Honor and Merit; whose Names would otherwise live with great reputation among the Candidates of this Illustrious Order: and of which honor many deserving persons will be hereaf|ter deprived, if the Injunction of the Statutes be not observed in this particular.



SECT. XI. The Presentation of it to the Soveraign.
THE Suffrages being recieved from the Knights-Companions, the Officer by whom they are collected, is to present the whole form of the Nomina|tions to the Soveraign, with all due Reverence; for so is it recorded, an. Lib. N. p. 64 9. H. 5. when the Prelate of the Order had taken the Scruteny.
If these Votes were taken in Chapter, the Paper wherein entry was made hath been usually forthwith presented to the Soveraign's hands, who upon perusal of it made Election and Choice before the Chapter broke up; of which practice we could give sundry Instances, did not the generality thereof render it needless.
But if collected in the Chappel; sometimes it was immediately delivered to the Soveraign, before he went thence, though no Election were made until the Soveraign and Knights-Companions met in Chapter the next morning. And thus in the MS. penes W. le N. Cl. 2. and Lib. C. p. 42. 5. years of Queen Elizabeth, as soon as the Nominations were all received, the Chancellor of the Order (who then took them) presented the Scruteny to the Soveraign, Ex Collect an. W. le. N. Cl. before Service ended: the like did the Register of the Or|der, an. MS. penes W. D. N. 8. Eliz.
At other times it hath not been presented until Vespers were finished, as in the MS. penes W. D. N. 4. Lib. C. p. 66. 14. and Lib. p. 103. 28. years of Queen Elizabeth, and the Lib. C. p. 166. 6. Ib. p. 172. 9. Ib. p. 184. 13. and Ib. p. 187. 14. of King Iames.
Lastly (and which hath been frequent in use of later times) the Scruteny hath not been presented to the Soveraign until the next morning, after opening the Chapter (customarily held before Morning Prayer) as in the Ib. p. 63. 13. Pag. 70. 15. Pag. 84. 22. and Pag. 108. 30. years of Queen Elizabeth, and again in the Lib. R. p. 35. 3. Ib. p 90. 9. Pag. 97. 10. Pag. 124.132. 13. Pag. 142. 14. Palmer's Iourn. pro an. 1639 p. 20. 15. and Palmer's large Iour|nal p. 42. 17. years of the Reign of his late Majesty of ever sacred memory: against which last time of presentation, it was transcribed into a little Palmer's large Iour|nal p. 42. Book, and with all due reverence offered upon the Knee, Lib. R. p. 142. before any thing else was treated of in the Chapter.
If the Soveraign be absent from the Chappel when the Votes are collected, that Officer by whom they are taken, is to present them into the hands of the E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. Sove|raign's Deputy, or Lieutenant; who thereupon is obliged to deliver them to the Soveraign, either that Evening or the next Morning.
Besides the general practice hath gone along therewith, as we see an. Lib. N. p. 77. 2. H. 6. where the Dean of Windesor, and the Register of the Order having collected the Vote of every Knight, Lib. N. p. 77. they were immediately presented to the Soveraign's Deputy. So also when Iohn Duke of Bedford was Lieutenant, an. 4. H. 6. the Votes taken for Election, Ib. p. 81. vi|de Regist. Chartaceum. f. 13.b. were delivered unto him. Again anno 20. Fliz. Sir Francis Walsing|ham then Chancellor, having taken the Suffrages, forthwith (before Evening Prayer was ended) gave them to the MS. penes G. O. Y p. 114. Earl of Sussex, then Lieutenant to the Soveraign: and the like did the Prelate to the Lib C. p. 103. Lord Howard of Effingham Lieutenant, an. 30. Eliz. as also in the Excad. lib. 33.35.36. and 37. years of the said Queens Reign.
And that the Lieutenant in discharge of his duty, did present them afterwards to the Soveraign, appears likewise from several places in the Blue Book of the Order: for after the Nominations were re|ceived, and delivered to him by the Prelate, in the said 30. year of Queen Elizabeth, Ib. p. 113. He presented them unto her: and to the like purpose is it remembred in the Vota Nominantium excepit Praelatus Or|dinis, qui ea Locum-tenenti exhibit,  is Superiori Lib. C. p. 119. 34. Vota Nominantim excepit Cancellarius, except a sine mora Locum-tenenti tradidit, eadem ille postmodum Supremae exhibe|bat. Ib. p. 131. 38. and Nomina in Scrutinio excepta, Locum-tenenti Cancellarius obtulit, hic Suprema: Ib. p. 137. 40. years of this Queen.
But it seems in the 12. year of King Iames, some excep|tions were taken, for that the Chancellor did not present the Scruteny to the MS. de Festis temp. Iac. R. pene E. W. G. f. 151.b. Prince (at that time the Soveraign's Lieu|tenant) but afterwards to the Soveraign himself: wherein he committed an Error, which some of his Predessors had fallen into before, viz. an. Lib. C. p. 32.33. 2. MS. fol. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 4. 3. and Lib. C. p. 91. 25. Eliz.



SECT. XII. His Considerations thereupon, referring to the Qualification of each Person to be Elected.
THE Scruteny being thus taken, and presented to the Soveraign, we now proceed to those particulars, which are to be weighed by him, upon view and consideration had thereof.
For, as the Knights-Companions are obliged by the Statutes to Nominate no other than such as can abide the Test of those Qualifications before remembred; so is there a standard of Honor, provided and ordained for the Soveraign, where|by to measure the Extraction, Quality, and Merit of the Person proposed to Ele|ction; lest peradventure in less circumspect times, the favour of the Soveraign might become over indulgent, to Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 2. inferiour or unworthy persons, who ought here utterly to be rejected, because this Order, Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 2. consisting of goodness and hono|rable virtue, doth not admit or uphold unworthiness and villany.
Here then falls in to be considered the substance of the second Article, through|out all the Bodies and Exemplars of the Statutes, wherein the Qualifications for Ele|ction are exhibited, as in the 18. Article are those for Nomination. In the first of which viz. those of Institution, the words E. 3. Stat. Art. 2. That none shall be Elected into the Order, c. can refer to the Act of Election only, if we consult the rest of the Sta|tutes, and compare them with this place; for thus they severally deliver them|selves, That none shall be H. . Stat. Art. 2. Elected Companion of the Order. That none shall be H. 8. Stat. Art. 2. Elected and Chosen a Companion of this Order. All pointing to the time of Ele|ction more properly and directly, than to any other Ceremony succeeding, ei|ther of Investiture with the Garter and George, Installation, or to what ever else it may nore dubiously be wrested, from the Expressions of Ord. Stat in Biblioth. Hat|ton. Art. 2. Admitting and Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 2. Re|ceiving Knights into this Order, used in the Exemplars of the Statutes of Institu|tion. And that this doth so is further cleared, from another passage in the said second Article of King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, which speaking of the last point of Reproach, saith, the guilt thereof so incapacitates any mans Election, that he ever after ought to be esteemed unworthy of Election into the Order.
The Qualifications and Endowments are chiefly noted to be two; first, that the Person in Nomination be a Gentleman of Blood; and secondly a Knight and without Reproach. As to the first of these, finding the phrases somewhat varied throughout the Statutes, we shall therefore single them out.
By the Statutes of Institution no man ought to be Elected, Art. 2. unless he be a Gen|tleman born, and so saith King Henry the Fifth's Art. 2. Statutes. The Exemplar entred in the Black Book saith, Art. 2. unless he be worthy upon the account of Birth and Arms; whereunto is added (in this Exemplar only) Art. 2. that he be one eminent for his demea|nour and good Report; hereby linking together, Blood and Virtue, which indeed make the noblest Conjunction. Finally, King Henry the Eighth's Statutes speak a little larger, and appoint him to be a Art. 2. Eum nomine  ar|mis nobilem esse, qui pro|prii Cognomi|nis, Tessaram gentilitiam gestar,  eo sanguine geni|rus est, cujus idem insigne  nomen pro|pria sint. MS de Arte Heral|dica apud Iu|risp. Heroic. p. 438. Gentleman by Name, Arms, and Blood; and lest this Character might seem in any part obscure; a Gentleman of Blood is determined to be H. 8. Engl. Stat. Art. 2. one descended of three descents of Nobles, viz. of Name and Arms, both of his Father and Mothers side.
For most certain it is, that Gentility is not made perfect or accomplished in the Person in whom it takes beginning, but rather compleated by Succession. And we find among the Romans, though the Father was free born, and of the Eque|strian Cense, yet was it further requisite, that the Ano V. C. 775. Constitu|rum est ne cui jus Annuli es|ser nisi cui in|genuo ipsi Pa|tri Avo pa|terno sexter|tia 40 census fussent. Plin. l. 32. c. 2. Grandfather should be so like|wise, for obtaining a Ring, one of the Symbols of the Equestrian Order with them. Whence have been wisely found out, those three Degrees of Gentility; Begin|ning, Encrease and full Ripeness: for Iurispruden|tia Heroica. p. 8.a. Gentility hath its beginning in the Grand|father, its encrease in the Father, and full ripeness in the Son; and therefore in the constitution of Gentility, the Father and Grandfather (bringing renown and

reputation to the Son, by same and estimation of life and actions) are at least required to make it perfect and compleat; because it cannot naturally and con|gruously grow to ripeness in the Son, unless it hath formerly encreased in the Fa|ther, and long before begun from the Grandfather.
As to this particular, there is a memorable instance in that of the Lord Willi|am Pagit, devested of the Garter, about five years after his lection; upon pre|tence of his King Ed. 6. Diary in Bibl. Colton, Sir I. Hawards life of the said King. Print. 1636 p. 344. not being a Gentleman of Blood by either Father or Mother.
But it is also observable in the Blue Book, that this severity towards him pro|ceeded not altogether from defect in point of Extraction, but most from the pre|valence and practice of Iohn Dudley Duke of Northumberland (A quo pro|curance Duce Norhumbriae suerat injustis|sime ac imme|ritissime de|turbatu. Lib. C. p. 6. by whose means he was most unjustly and undeservedly put out of the Order) haply grudging the great honor he had formerly done the said Lord, when being Earl Mar|shal of England, Ex. Collect. Pat. Arm. d Rob. Glover nuper Somer|set. Herald. f. 45. b. his good advice and character of him procured from King Ed|ward the Sixth, a new Grant of those Arms, under the Great Seal of England, which he had sometime before Ex. Collect. Pat. Arm d Rob. Glover nuper Somer|set. Herald f. 45. b. received from Garter Principal King of Arms.
But admit the defect of Blood and Arms for three descents, were the true cause of his deprivation of the Garter; yet what follows is mis-related by Hist. E. 6. loco cit. Sir Io. Howard (as also by Chronic. f. 1026. Iohn Stow) to wit, that the George and Garter were forth|with bestowed upon the Earl of Warwick eldest Son to the Duke of Northumber|land (who out of Dugdales Antiq. of War|wickeshire p. 339.a. curtesie was so called, as a commonly Dukes Sons, in the life time of their Fathers, are entituled of some Earldom, whereof their Fathers have the honor) but more truly had he said, they were bestowed upon Sir Andrew Dudley, Brother to the said Duke.
For although we find the said Earl of Warwick put in the Scruteny, entred among the Annals of the Order, of Edward the Sixth's Reign, and taken at a Chapter held on St. George's day, an. 6. Ed. 6. (the Lord Pagit being Lib. N. p. 320. vide Autogr. penes praef. Guil. Dug|dale. See also King Ed. 6. Dyary in Bibl. Cotton. degraded in a Chapter held on the Lib. N. p. 320. vide Autogr. penes praef. Guil. Dug|dale. See also King Ed. 6. Dyary in Bibl. Cotton. Eve of the said Feast) yet was not the Earl Elected at that or any other time; nor was any other person then chosen, who had the honor to be inserted into that Scruteny, except the Lib. N. p. 321. Earl of Westmerland, and the said Lib. N. p. 321. Sir Andrew Dudley.
But to return; the Ensigns of this most Noble Order were not with more dis|grace taken from, than with honor restored to the Lord Pagit, assoon as Queen Mary came to the Crown; and that by as great and absolute authority, as did deprive him of them, namely by Decree in Chapter, holden at St. Iames's the 27. of September, an. 1. Mar. so that this Honor might be said, to have been rather wrongfully suspended than justly lost.
For in confirmation of this Lords restauration, he had the Lib. C. p. 6. Garter forthwith buckled on his Leg again, by two of the Knights-Companions present, and the Lib. C. p. 6. Collar of the Order put about his shoulders, with the George depending thereat. And a command then also given Garter, to take care that his Lib. C. p. 6. Atchievements should be again publickly set up, over his Stall at Windesor: being the same he before possest, viz. the 9. on the Soveraign's side.
In this case of the Lord Pagit, we observe that the very Records of the Order, brand his degradation of injustice upon the foresaid pretence, as if it were infer|able thence, that when Honor is conferr'd upon the score of Virtue, and great En|downments, the consideration of these supplies the defect and obscurity of Extra|ction. Whence it came that the then Soveraign (whose prerogative it was H. 8. Stat. Art. 1. to de|clare and interpret the Statutes) being at that time present in Chapter, thought fit to qualifie the Law, and gave him this honorable commendation, Lib. C. p. 6. That he had highly deserved of the Nation by his Prudence and Counsel.
And though the Exemplar entred in the Black Book hath the qualification of Art. 2. Virtue and good Report inserted only into it; yet we observe the same (in effect and practice) considered in foregoing times, with great circumspection, by the Soveraigns and their Lieutenants before Election; and that the Magnanimity, For|titude, Prudence, Generosity, Fame, Reputation, and other Virtues and Merits, whe|ther innate or acquired, of the Person proposed to Election; have been by their prudent Inquisition looked into, deliberately weighed, and brought to the Rule for tryal, as to their fitness and capacity of the honor of this most Noble Order.
These and such like Qualities we see Ille Nominatos expendens, ut alii lii Fortitudine, Prudentia, reliquis Vir|tutibus ac Meritis antecellerent,  Comi|tibus Iohannem Comitem Mareschallum (ut vocant) c. aptissimos at quam dig|nissimos  ob id in Ordinem suscipiendos esse decrevit. Lib. N. p. 64. King Henry the Fifth took into his consideration, at an Election in the 9. year of his Reign, and for which he preferr'd before others (then Nominated and presented unto him) Iohn Earl Marshal, Wil|liam Earl of Suffolk, Iohn Lord Clifford, Sir Lewis Robert|sack, and Sir Heer tanke Clux. In like manner did Ibid. p. 77. Hum|frey Duke of Gloucester (Deputy to King Henry the Sixth, in the second year of his Reign) weigh and examine diligently with himself, the Fortitude and Pru|dence, with other the illustrious Actions and deserts of Iohn Lord Talbot before his Election; and thereunto gave an approbation worthy his own judgment, and not less than that noble Candidates virtue merited.
It is further remembred in the Annals of this Order, that for these and such like noble and heroick Qualifications, persons in after times were likewise pre|ferr'd in Election before others: And particularly, we observe it taken notice of, an. 28. H. 8. upon the Election of Sir Nicholas Carew, Lib. N. p. 271. That he was a very fit person, upon the eminency of his Extraction and Fame, and the many worthy and noble Actions he had performed; so as that all present did without any delay unanimously approve of his Election. Of like nature those Commendations given to Hen|ry Earl of Cumberland upon his Election, wherein also particular services are taken notice of, viz. the Ibid. p. 274. many famous and loyal Atchievements performed by him, both at several other times, and then more especially, when the tumult of Rebellion, began to break forth in those Borders, where he had his habitation.
The second Point is, That unless he be a E. 3 Stat. Art. 2. Knight, he is not qualified for Ele|ction, (or as one of the Exemplers express it In Bibl. Hat|ton. Art. 2. unless girded with the unstained Girdle of Knighthood) and the same in terms do the other H. 5. H. 8. Stat. Art. 2. Bodies of Statutes de|clare. Whence we may again mind the Reader of the singular regard and jea|lousie the Law of the Order hath of this particular Qualification, above the rest:
And lest chance or inadvertency might let slip a Person not Knighted into the Scruteny (besides the two former cautions given touching Nomination) yet is it also here (in another Article) a third time remembred and provided against, to secure such from passing through the Soveraign's Election. For this cause also were the words Lib. N. Ord. Stat. in Art. 2. ut minimum (That he be at least a Knight before he be elected) ad|ded as a special Item, to give a more than ordinary caution, when the Soveraign comes to make his Choice.
And to make it clear, that the second Article in the Statutes hath long since re|ceived this construction, we shall insert an eminent case, which fell out Lib. N. p. 246. an. 17. H. 8. where the Soveraign (keeping the Feast of St. George at Greenwich) having Elected the Lord Roos (created Earl of Rutland, the 18. of Iune following) into the Society of this most Noble Order, and being Pag. 247. advertised on the morrow after St. Georges day, while the Mass of Requiem was celebrating, that he had not be|fore received the dignity of Knighthood, according to the Statutes, which positive|ly enjoin, Ibid. That whosoever is elected into this Society, should be in degree at least a Knight, that is actually Knighted beforehand; for so the words ut minimum here in this place also of the Annals vouched, ought justly to be understood, in regard the Lord Roos, was at the time of his Election a Baron of this Realm, and consequently stated in a higher degree of honor than a Knight: The Soveraign therefore immediately after Mass, recalled the Knights-Companions to a new con|sultation, whereat he declared the Election void, for the reason before alledged, and commanded the Ensigns of the Order, [the Garter and George] so lately re|ceived to be withdrawn, which being accordingly done, He in the same place, drew his Sword, and therewith dubbed him Knight, and then proceeded, with the Knights-Companions present, to a new Election, wherein the said Lord Roos was with their unanimous consent again Elected a Companion, and so decla|red by the Soveraign's own mouth: by whose command also, the aforesaid En|signs and Ornaments were restored unto, and placed upon him by the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk.
And declaratory to this, is it since recorded in the Red Book of the Order, Pag. 143. That none of the English, Scotch, or Welch Nation, how considerable soever

otherwise, in the prerogative of Blood or Virtue, can be Elected into this most ho|norable Society, but that he ought to be first ennobled and rendred capable by this first Degree of Knightly honor.
But in reference to Foreign Princes being in their own Country, this Law hath now no force; for by a Decree made at Whitehall, in a Chapter there held, the Lib. R p. 117. 18. day of April, an. 13. Car. 1. it being the day whereon the Feast of St. George was also celebrated, these words [ut minimum] are explained to relate to Placuit Supremo, ut solos Majestati suae subditos Lex ea comprehende|ret, primi hujus gradus expertes; Non autem Principes Exteros superiori gradu ornatos, Ib. p. 119. all Subjects, of what Degree soever, within the Soveraign's Dominions (Placuit Supremo, ut solos Majestati suae subditos Lex ea comprehend|ret, primi hujus gradus expertes; Non autem Principes Exteros superiori gradu ornatos, Ib. p. 119. not Foreign Princes) who before their Election at least (if not Nomination) ought to be Knighted, as the Basis and first Degree of Chivalry.
And as they ought to be Knights,The three points of Re|proach. so as well Knights free from Infamy or Re|proach; for so the Art. 2. Statutes of Institution enjoin. In Henry the Fifth's Statutes it is thus rendred, Art. 2. Chivalier sans reproche, which is the same with H. 8. Stat. Art. 2. Eques irre|prehensus. And we find it one of the Arguments used by Iohn Duke of Bedford, on the behalf of Sir Iohn Radcliff, to promote his Election; Ex autogr. penes W. D. N. That he had con|tinued and exercised the Armies, the space of eight and twenty Winters unreproached.
But for as much as the points of Reproach may be accounted many and diverse, and through their incertainty and number, rather become Traps to enshare, than Rules for caution and direction, Stat Art. 2. King Henry the Eighth determined and li|mited them to Three only.
The first species or point of Reproach is, 1. Conviction of Heresie. where a Knight hath been convicted of Heresie, against the Catholique faith, or suffered any publique punishment for such offence. Here we may see, Heresie is reckoned among those defects that deprive men of Honor, in as much as bending its force against the Catholique Church, it not only renders a man in the ballance of Honor of no weight, but more than all other sins makes him infamous. And therefore when either by Tongue, Pen, or Actions, a man endeavours to trample under foot the sacred Law, scanda|lizeth Government, seduceth others, or in like execrable wickednesses disco|vers himself, he is judged void of Conscience and quity, and a most notorious destroyer of that divine part of man, the Soul and consequently deserving, not of external infamy alone (which the guilt of this Offence justly cotracts) but other punishments extending to life.
The second Point of Reproach is,2. Attainture of Treason. where any Knight hath been arraigned, convict|ed, and attainted of Treason. Nevertheless Queen Elizabeth qualifies this point by a Decree in Chapter held at the Tower the Lib. C. p. 26. 12. of Ianuary, in the first year of her Reign (which we conceive was made upon occasion of restoring in Blood Wil|liam Marquess of Northampton, and the Lord Robert Dudley, after created Earl of Leicester, who with others had been attainted of high Trea|son in the first of Queen Mary, and the attainder confirmed by Parliament the same year) viz. Decretum est, si quis ex familia no|bili, aut generosa procrearus, cujus utet parens avus  proavus generosi sucrint. Laese Majestatis vel ante hac condemnatus est, vel post hac condemnabitur, si el post eam condemnationem a Principe, ig|noscatur, ita ut ad familie sue beneficium, Insignia  dignitatem restituatur; rabbus ortus majoribus quales antea notati sunt, sit hujusmodi qualem ejus Ordinis Leges  Institut describunt, ut is deinceps Or|dinis nobilissimi capax sit,  in ejus Co|militonum adlegi  coaptari rite poss. Ib. p. 29. That in case any Person (so convicted) were pardoned by the Soveraign, and restored in Blood, every such Gentleman in Name, Arms, and Blood, and descended as aforesaid, being otherwise qualified ac|cording to the ancient Statutes of the Order, should be thenceforth accounted Eligible and might be chosen a Companion. And we find that the very next St. George's Feast, held the Ibid. p. 29. 22.23. and 24. of April following, the said Mar|quess of Northampton, and the Lord Robert Dudley (who during the remaining part of Queen Maries Reign, lay un|der the burden of a heavy fate) had now recovered the Priviledges of Honor, and were preferr'd in Nomination, and on the last day of the said Feast Pag. 30. Elected into this most Illustrious Society.
And here may further notice be taken of the said Marquess of Northampton's case, who having been restored in Blood, and his restauration to the honor of this most Noble Order also designed (for he had been formerly, an. 35. H. 8. Lib. N. p. 289. Elect|ed and Ib. p. 290. Installed) it was thought necessary to descend to a new Nomination

and Election, which as may be collected from the aforesaid Decree ought now to be done, and was in him accordingly performed, the Lib. C. p. 31. 3. of Iune, anno pri|mo Eliz.
3. Flying from Battel.The third and last Point of Reproach, is where a Knight-Companion hath fled from Battel, in which the Soveraign, or his Lieutenant, or other Captain (having the Kings authority) were present, when Banners were displayed, and both sides pro|ceeded to fight. Now for a man to carry himself cowardly in the Field, abandon his Colours, leave his Prince, Friends, and Companions in hazard of life; are un|doubtedly things highly reproachful, and draw dishonor upon the Order, the So|veraign, and Knights-Companions; and a sufficient testimony, that he valueth more his life than his honor, and prefers an infamous safety before an honora|ble death.
If we look back into ancient History, we shall meet with a great Example of Honor and Courage in Maccab. l. 1. c. 9. ver. 4.5.6. Iudas Maccabeus, who though he had but 800 of 3000 men left him (the rest being fled out of fear to encounter Bacchides Army, con|sisting of 20000 Foot, and 2000 Horse) and those 800 too forward to follow after; yet rather than cowardly forsake the Field (whereby in all likehood, he might have saved his life which was there loss) he encouraged his Soldiers to receive the onset of his Enemies, with these words, Verse 10. God forbid that I should do this thing, and flee away from them; if our time be come, let us die manfully for our Brethren, and let us not stain our Honor. And to say truth, the resolution of a right Martialist ought to be either to return with Honor, or die upon the Bed of Honor.
By the Laws of King Edward the Confessor, where a Soldier in any expedition either by Land or Sea, runneth from his Colours, his Lamberts Arch. f. 147. de Heretochiis E|dit. Cant abr. 1644. life and Estate was made liable to answer the Offence. And sad experience, having from time to time made appear the inconvenience, danger, and loss occasioned by such cowardly and dishonourable departure out of the Field; at length our Parliaments, taking the same into serious consideration, made it Stat. 18. H. . c. 19.3. H. 8. c. 5.2. E. 6. c. 2.4.  5. Ph.  Mar. c. 3. Fellony without benefit of Clergy, forasmuch as this Offence tended to the hurt and jeopardy of the Stat. 7. H. 7. c. 1. King, the Nobi|lity, and all the Common-wealth. And to secure our Naval Forces, as well as Land Armies, Queen Elizabeth extended the Statute of 18. H. 6. cap. 19. no less to Mariners and Gunners, to all intents and purposes, than to other Soldiers.
But much greater may the danger be, and far more dishonorable to them than private Soldiers, where a Commander in chief, or other Officers (having the con|duct of an Army, or any part of it) shall herein offend; of which there is a nota|ble example in Thomas Earl of Lancaster, who an. 12. E. 2. was Walsingh. sub. an. 1319. proclaimed Traitor for leaving the Army at the Seige of Berwick, the consequence where|of proved the loss of the whole design. And therefore, whoever is culpable of any of these three points of Reproach, is altogether Lib. N. p. 216. uncapable of Election into this most Noble Order.
Ere we pass further, let us take notice of an Error, which Polydore Virgil hath linked with one justly observed and refuted by the learned Pen of Histor. of St. George, part. 3. ch. 3. sect. 6. Doctor Hey|lin, and which Eq. Aut. An|glo Wirtemb. p. 24. Erhardus Celius hath transcribed from the said Polydore; namely, that the Knights-Companions have certain Laws belonging to their Order, where|by they are obliged, Hist. Angl. l. 19. p. 378. To defend and help one another, and in time of Battel ne|ver to betake themselves to shameful flight.
But the first of these Clauses, is not in truth, any part of the Statute-Law of the Order; nor is the latter otherwise to be taken, than as one of those points of Reproach laid down in the second Article of King Henry the Eight's Statutes; which renders the person nominated uncapable of Election, if known guilty thereof.
Now that which gives some umbrage to the Knights mutual assistance and defence, is an Article of the Statutes, which prohibits the arming themselves one against another. For to avoid begetting of Feuds among them, whereby brotherly love might be extinguished (a thing in all Societies specially to be preserved) it was not the Founder's least care to provide against so great a mischief. And therefore he Ordained (which since the ensuing Bodies

of Statutes have confirmed) E. 3. Stat. Art. 29. H. 5. Stat. Art. 30. H. 8. Stat. Art. 33. That none of the Knights-Companions should Arm themselves against any of their Fellows, unless either in the cause of his Soveraign, or his own just quarrel.
Upon this Clause some of them took hold, when in the great and fatal con|troversie between the Houses of York and Lancaster, they divided themselves to either side, and both pretended to take part with the King: some sticking close to Henry the Sixth, whom they accounted Soveraign of the Order, both de facto, and de jure; others taking part with Edward the Fourth, as esteeming him Soveraign de jure, though not de facto.
But to make the obligation and tye of this most Noble Fraternity more strong, and to preserve a perpetual unity among the Companions thereof, left they should unhappily engage in factions one against another, specially to the effusion of blood: it was further Ordained, Ibid. That if a Knight-Companion should happen to be retained in the service of a Foreign Prince, to take up Arms in his quarrel, and after his Adversary desired to entertain another Knight-Companion on his side also; he that was last invited, was bound to wave the proffer, and in no wise to give his consent. And therefore in all Reteynors of War, the Knight-Companion was obliged to make a special precaution, that his engagement should become void, if any of his Fellows were before retained on the other side. And if at the time of his reteynor, he knew not that another of his Fellows had been engaged with the Adversary, so soon as it came to his knowledge, he was ob|liged to relinquish the service he before undertook.
Besides these three points of Reproach, in a Manuscript of the Statutes in En|glish, which hath before it the whole preamble to Henry the Eight's Statutes, and did belong to Henry Grey third Marquess Dorset, Duke of Suffolk, as appears by his Coat of Arms, painted in the beginning of it within a Garter, and his Name subscribed with his own hand, under the Coat; we find a fourth point of Re|proach, added to these other Three, in these words.
The fourth point of Reproach is, That if any Knight of the Order from henceforth, by prodigality or ryot, wilfully and negligently mis|spend, sell, aliene, or do away his Patrimony or Livelihood, by reason whereof, be shall not be able honourably to maintain himself and his Estate, in such honorable manner, as may conserve the honor of the said Order, and of himself; In this case he shall be summoned by the Usher of Arms of the Order, called the Black Rod, by Command|ment of the Soveraign, his Lieutenant, or Deputy to appear before his Majesty, or his Commissioners, and the Knights of the Order, at the next Chapter ensuing, there to be examined before the Soveraign, or his said Commissioners, and the Knights and Companions of the said Order, and if he be found in such great default of Prodigality, insolent Riot, or wilful negligence; That then the Soveraign, with the advice of the Company of the said Order, may deprive and degrade him of the said Order, at the said Chapter, if it be their pleasure.
But this point of Reproach is not inserted into King Henry the Eighth's Statutes; nevertheless the substance thereof appears to have been approved of before: for we find among some Orders prepared in the Chapters held at Windesor, by the Marquess of Exiter, and other Knights-Companions then present, the 25. and 26. days of May, an. 8. H. 8. one of them was something to Deinde quatenus Equites hoe Insigni Subligaculo decorati, si praeclari slatus obliti, minus honest viverent, exclude|rentur ab hac honoranda Societate; nis commoniti propere resipuerint. Lib. N. p. 204. this purpose.



SECT. XIII. Of other Inducements for Election.
AMong the number of these Candidates, the Soveraign is to regard those who have E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19. most voices, or whom he conceives likely to contribute most to the E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19. honor of the Order, and prove most E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19. serviceable to himself, or most E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19. useful to his Crown and Kingdom.
Touching the first of these Inducements,1. The having most voices. the greater number of Voices; we find the Law hath not been always observed, as from the many Scrutenies, entred in the Annals will appear, if need were to refer thereunto. Nevertheless it is sometimes noted to have taken place, as at the Election of the Duke of Conimbero: Quin|bere, an. 5. H. 6. where after a due and sufficient examination had of the Scru|teny then taken, the said Duke Lib. N. p. 84. by the consent of most voices, was then Elected into the Stall of Thomas Duke of Exiter. This plurality of Voices is again taken notice of (among other Inducements) for the Election of Sir Nicholas Carew, the Lib. N. p. 271. 24. of April an. 28. H. 8.
It is remarkable that one time when the number of Voices, on the behalf of two Knights, were upon Examination found equal (which hapned in the case be|tween Sir Iohn Fastolf, and Sir Iohn Radcliff, an. Ib. p. 81. vi|de Regist. Chartac. f. 13. b. 4. H. 6.) Sir Iohn Fastolf, be|ing by the Soveraign's Lieutenant esteemed the more Ib. p. 81. vi|de Regist. Chartac. f. 13. b. worthy of the two, ob|tained the Election.
The second Inducement relates to such,2. Being most honorable for the Order. as in probability may bring most repu|tation to this Order, or advance the good and prosperity thereof; and these have been chiefly Foreign Princes, esteemed so in respect of that high pitch of Honor they attained, and whose eminent Valour and Worthiness proclaimed them de|serving, both of Nomination and Election.
And therefore the late Soveraign of blessed memory, See the Com|mission of Le|gation. upon consideration had of the Glorious Atchievements and high Renown of Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, judg'd it a part of his respect, not only to render him all offices of kind|ness and friendship, as to a Prince neerly allyed, and his most special friend; but al|so to impart to him, as far as in him lay, the greatest and highest honors that might be, and especially such wherewith the Military Virtue of a great Captain was wont to be adorned.
But the general consideration, for which the Soveraigns thought fit to Elect Foreign Princes into this most Noble Society, and to impart to them these Testi|monies of Honor, hath been exprest in the Commissions of Legation to be in respect of their Glorious Merits, ennobled by the lustre and grace of their Heroick Vir|tues, their eminent Nobleness, Grandeur, Prowess, and Magnificence, the re|nown of which, Fame had divulg'd and spread abroad through the World.
3. Serviceable to the Sove|raign.Thirdly, where the advantage of the Soveraign's service was cast into the Ballance, it frequently out-weighed other pretentions; insomuch, that (an. 2. H. 6.) the consideration of the Lib. N. p. 77. Eminent services of Iohn Lord Talbot, for his King and Country; appears to be the strongest motive for his Election. And Ex Collect. E. W. G. the great zeal and affection which Iohn Gaspar Ferdinand de Marchin had, to engage himself in the present Soveraign's service and Cause, for the recovery of his just rights (besides his eminent and famous actions, performed in several military Commands, wherein he had been for many years employed) was the strongest inducement that swayed with the Soveraign, to chuse him a Knight-Companion of this most Noble Order, an. 10. Car. 2.
4. And useful to the King|domBut the last of these Inducements is of greatest latitude, for thereby the So|veraign has power to reject whosoever he pleases, though exceed in number of Voices or other Qualifications, and to Elect a Person, but once named, which appears full enough in the case of Casimire the Fourth King of Poland, an. 28. H. 6.

who having but the Lib. N. p. 104. single Vote of the Lord Scales, yet upon consideration had by the Soveraign, how advantageous he might become to his, and his Kingdoms, Interest, pass'd in Election.
And of later times (as appears in some of the Preambles to the See the Ap|pendix. Commissions for carrying the Ensigns, c. to Foreign Princes) the advantages which the Sove|raign has conceived to possess himself of, in the improving, confirming, and establishing of a most strict and inviolable Bond of Friendship and fair correspon|dency, between him and Foreign Princes, their Realms and Subjects; hath been a main Inducement to Elect such into the Order.


SECT. XIV. That the Soveraign only doth Elect.
UPon the vacancy of any of the Knights-Companions Stalls, the Election of new Knights E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19. appertains to the Soveraign, and in some case to his Lieute|nant; in declaration of which, it is recorded in the Black Book of the Order, Pag. 65. That if any Stalls fall vacant, it should belong to the Soveraign to Elect new Knights, wheresoever he were resident; provided he have with him the compleat number of Ib. p. 65.66. six Knights-Companions; but if he be beyond Seas, wanting that Num|ber, and the Feast of St. George held by his Lieutenant at Windesor, Ib. p. 65.66. in such case the Election belongs to the Lieutenant, who is first to be certified of the Sove|raign's pleasure, as also who they are that in His esteem appear fit persons to be chosen, to the end such Information may guide his Election.
This power of Election is fully acknowledged by the Knights-Companions them|selves to be in the Soveraign, as appears out of their Letter sent to King Henry the Fifth then in France, and dated at Windesor, on the morrow after Saint George's day, where it is said, Et quia metuendissim domine plane noverimus, quod vestra regalis sublimitas ubicun suerit locorum potest prout de|cet  convenit vacantibus Stallis Commi|litonum vestri Collegii militaris; adhi|bito numero corundem pro Electione ce|lebranda, requisito tales corum lo sub|rogare  praficere, quo vestrae coronae regiae tanta celsitudo versimiliter magis sencerit profituros ac morum probitate  nobilitate sanguinis noverit praepollere, Ex vetusto Codice MS. penes Sylam Taylor Gen. f. 158. b. That the Soveraign in what place soever residing, may, as is most fit|ting, elect into a vacant Stall (there being a sufficient number of Knights called to the Election) such as he shall judge ser|viceable to his Crown, or do exceed others in deserts, and nobleness of descent. Observable herewith is this, that at the publishing the Election of Emanuel Duke of Savoy, King Philip and Queen Mary, being at that time, joint Soveraigns of the Order, it is called, the Election of the MS. p. 14. King and Queen.
This grand Prerogative of the Soveraign, being not duly considered by Poly|dore Virgil, occasioned his committing a great mistake (and De jure  Privileg. Mili|tum l. 1. c. 15. Claudius Coteraeus from him) for speaking of this Order, and the succession of new Knights into the rooms of those deceased, he hath this passage, Angl Histor. l. 19. p. 378. One Knight is received into the room of another deceast, by the Choice and Election of all the rst. But Erhard Celly being as much ignorant of the Soveraign's Prerogative, and rather more mistaken, sticks not to affirm, Anglo-Wir|temb. p. 103. That no person may be received into this Order. not so much as by the Soveraign, unless with the common consent or suffrage of all the Knights-Companions.
But these passages are altogether erroneous; the Knights-Companions part be|ing only to Nominate the Persons (nevertheless qualified as aforesaid) but the right of Election remains wholly in the Soveraign of the Order. For whosoever He designs, appoints, and chuseth, is forthwith admitted: His only pronouncing the Name of the Person in Chapter being sufficient.
For after the Scruteny hath been taken, and presented to the Soveraign, in the manner and order before laid down, He peruseth it himself, or otherwise the Chancellor, or other Officer of the Order that took it, Lib. R. p. 13. reads it over to him;

which done, the Soveraign (with reference to the considerations before expressed) forthwith resolves upon some one, or more of the Knights, named in the Scruteny, and thereupon openly and publickly Supremus pro Electis tres il|lustrissimos Principes (Du|cem Bruns|wick, Comi|tes Salisbur.  Carliolen|sem) pronun|ciabat. lib. R. p. 23. Supre|mus Comitem Northamptoniae Electum pro|nunciat. Ib. p. 4. Supremus accepta  per|pensa Nomen|claturae Sche|dula, Electos pronunciat Comites Dan|biae  Morito|niae. Ib. p. 90. declareth the Name of him, or them, whom he doth Elect: by which bare act of Pronunciation, and without any fur|ther Ceremony, the Person or Persons so named, stand and become Elect Knights: And this is the manner used at the conferring an Election; except now and then the Soveraign is pleased to give his reasons why the Knight is Elected by him.
But though this act of Election be setled by the Law of the Order upon the Sove|raign, yet is the consent of the Knights-Companions thereunto, frequently entred down among the Annals, and sometimes mentioned in the Commissions of Lega|tion to Foreign Princes: Not that the single act of Election is in truth the act of the whole Chapter, or is invalid or incompleat, without the joint consent of the Knights-Companions present at the Election; but their consent so expressed is to be understood, as an honorary respect given them by the Register, and signifying rather than applauding or praising the Soveraign's Choice, as being in their judg|ments, according to the merits of the Person Elected, than a necessary circum|stance, contributing to the ratification or strengthning the Election made by the Soveraign, as if defective without it.


SECT. XV. The Scruteny ought to be entred among the Annals.
AMong other the duties laid upon the Register and set down in the E. 3. Stat. Art. 34. vide H. 5. Stat. Art. 36. Statutes of the Order, and Constitutions of the Officers this is one; of which men|tion is made to this effect, Lib. N. p. 235. That the Registers part is to set down and record for a memorial, the Elections (or Scrutenies) and Names of the Knights Elected. But in succeeding times a scruple arose, whether this need be done, when the Scruteny should be taken, yet no Election made?
To cleer which doubt, in a Chapter held on Saint George's day, an. 5. Eliz. we find it the Soveraign's will and pleasure, that thence forward it should be en|acted, and accordingly it was established for a Law within this Order, Lib. C. p. 42. That if any Nominations were taken from the Knights-Companions, the same should be entred in the Annals, though there were no Election made of any Person into the Order at that time. Which we suppose was so decreed, out of great respect to those Princes and Noble Personages, who in future times should by the glory of their actions appear but worthy the honor of Nomination into so Illustrious an Order. And in pursuance of this Decree, there is frequent mention made of the delivery of the Scruteny into the hands of the Register, to make entry thereof accordingly.
For instance, an. 22. Eliz. the Blue Book saith, pag. 82. That the Chancellor himself deli|vered the Knights-Companions Votes to the Register, to be committed to writing, for a perpetual memorial; and accordingly the Register, as his duty obliged him, having transcribed them, put them into their proper place, with all care and fide|lity. In like manner, an. 26. Eliz. After the Chancellor had presented the Scruteny to the Soveraign, he delivered it to the Register, Ibid. p. 94.  100. to insert among the Annals of the Order, who immediately committed it to posterity, after the accustomed form. Again, an. 34. of the same Queen, Ibid. p. 120.  131. The Votes were delivered to the Regi|ster, who took care to Record them, according to the usual order. Nevertheless since the aforesaid Law pass'd, the Entry of Scrutenies hath been sometimes omitted, either through the Registers not calling to memory the duty enjoined by the before mentioned Decree, or else by some accidental miscarriages, or other neglects.
As for Example, in some places of the Annals, instead of Scrutenies we find

Excuses entred, as an. 28. Eliz. where it is said; That the Lib. C. p. 103. Prelate immediately after Vespers, presented the Scruteny to the Soveraign, but because there was Lib. C. p. 103. no Election made of any new Knights, in regard of the croud of weighty and press|ing affairs, which seemed very much to concern the Soveraign and State, it was laid aside Ibid. and through neglect lost; at least it came not to the Ibid. Registers hands, to be inserted in its proper place. So an. 18. Eliz. although the Dean of Winde|sor took the Scruteny at Vespers, on St. George's day, nevertheless it is said, Ib. p. 73. That no Election was made, nor any thing else done. The like Excuse is made, an. 5. Car. 1. but the fault is here laid on the Chancellor; for though the Scruteny had been taken by him during the Vespers of the Feast day, Lib. R. p. 50. yet would be not suffer it to be entred.
In the next place we read, That the Votes being presented to the Soveraign, an. 31. Eliz. Lib. C. p. 113. they were left with her. And an. 11. Car. 1. the Lib. R. p. 108. Scruteny of Alger|non Earl of Northumberland, never came to the Registers hands, and lastly an. 33. Eliz. we only find, Lib. C. p. 118. that the Chancellor delivered the Votes to the Lieute|nant, but no mention is there made, what became of them afterwards.
But the Law yet remains in force, that all Nominations and Votes of the Knights-Companions ought to be entred among the Annals; whether Election be made or not, unless it shall please the Soveraign, for any extraordinary reason, upon particular occasions, to forbid it. One Example (and but one) of such a Prohibition we have met with, an. 40. Eliz. where Lib. C. p. 137. by the Queens special com|mand, the Scruteny then taken was not recorded among the acts of this most No|ble Order; nor is any thing thereof to be found in the Blue Book. But it is there also said, that the Register took care to set down all the passages as they hapned, Ibid. the Names only excepted.
And that it may not seem strange, why the Scruteny is not inserted in the Re|gistry, an. 44. Eliz. this account is given, Ibid. p. 146. That upon assembling the Knights-Companions, it seemed good to the Soveraign for several urgent Reasons, best known to her self, to give commandment; Ibid. That for that time they should wholly forbear all Scruteny of Votes and Nomination of Persons; except which, there was nothing wanting to the height of Solemnity at that meeting. But this we find noted in the Annals, to be Ib. praeter morm, contrary to the usual Custom.


SECT. XVI. The Scruteny ought not to be viewed until it be entred.
HEnce we are led to take notice of the following passage: It seems the Ex Collect. Rob. Cooke Ar. nuper Clar. R. Armor. fol. 10. Earls of Derby and Rutland, two of the Knights-Companions (on the morrow af|ter St. George's day, an. 27. Eliz.) were desirous to have seen the Scruteny, which was delivered into the Dean of Windesor's Custody to be Registred, in pursu|ance of the before mentioned Decree, an. 5. Eliz. But he gave them a modest de|nial, and said Ex Collect. Rob. Cooke Ar. nuper Clar. R. Armor. fol. 10. it ought not to be seen before it was Registred.
Whereupon the Earls, not satisfied with this answer, requested the opinions of the rest of the Knights-Companions (present at that Feast) in this case; who upon consideration thereof adjudged the point Ex Collect. Rob. Cooke Ar. nuper Clar. R. Armor. fol. 10. against them. And since this occasion, we have observed it elsewhere noted. Ex Autogr. pen. praef. Iac. Palmer. That no Knight-Companion ought to see whom the other hath named.



SECT. XVII. Of Scrutenies taken, yet no Election made.
IT hath often hapned, that though the Nominations for Election, have been formally taken, presented, and perused, yet hath not the Soveraign thought fit at present to make any Election, being moved thereunto from several consi|derations; principally where an intent was to keep open a Stall: But this must be understood of such Scrutenies as are taken of course, at the Vespers on the Feast day.
The most notable Example in this kind, is that of Sigismond the Emperor, who died in the Lib. N. p. 94. MS. in Offic. Arm. [F. 9.] f. 19. b. 16. year of King Henry the Sixth, and whose Stall was not di|sposed of till 21. years after, viz. the Lib. N. p. 119. 37. year of the said King; and then deter|mined to be reserved for Lib. N. p. 119. Prince Edward, the Soveraign's only Son, he being at that time about six years of age.
This is that Emperor, whose Election (being about the Ibid. p. 57. 7. of May, an. 4. H. 5.) is the first Election we find Registred in the Annals, where he is styled Ibid. p. 57. Sigis|mundus Imperator Almanicus. He was then lately come into England, and so was the Duke of Holland, Ibid. p. 57. cum praeclaro Duce de Brig, una ex comitatu Impe|ratoris (as he is there styled) who hitherto had the ill fortune not to be remem|bred in any of the Catalogues of Knights-Companions, that we have yet met with; nevertheless at the Feast of St. George celebrated at Windesor, the day abovesaid, was Ibid. p. 57. Elected Knight of this most Noble Order.
And the reserving a Stall was sometimes given by the Soveraign, as a reason for deferring his Election; as upon the 4. of October, being the morrow after the Feast of Saint George, held by prorogation at Windesor, an. 13. Car. 1. (when the Scruteny, taken the day before, was read over in the Chapter-house) where the Soveraign declared, Lib. R. p. 132. That he would receive no man into the Order, before his Son Charles: whereupon, all the Knights-Companions gave their sence, Lib. R. p. 132. That this resolution, was rather an effect of Iustice than fatherly indulgence; since they all ac|knowledged him to be more a Prince by merit and towardliness of his youth, than by the fortune of his Birth, at which the Soveraign exprest his satisfaction, no otherwise than by silence.
For such like cause, an. Palmer's Iournal pro an. 1639. p. 34. 15. Car. 1. when the Scruteny was presented to the Soveraign, by the Chancellor of the Order, the 10. of October (being the last day of the Feast, celebrated at Windesor by prorogation) the Soveraign declared, Palmer's Iournal pro an. 1639. p. 34. That he had a purpose to have chosen Prince Rupert his Nephew, a Knight of the Order, but being then a Prisoner with the Emperor, he would not Elect any at that time: Whereupon the vacancy of a Stall was reserved.
At other times, we note the pleasure of the Soveraign in deferring Elections, to be frequently entred down only in the general, and without expressing the cause, as an. 13. Eliz. on the morrow after St. George's day, upon perusal of the Scruteny by the Soveraign in Chapter, held in the Privy Chamber, where the Blue Book tells us; Pag. 63. That the said Soveraign made no Election, though there were two Stalls vacant. Nay although there were found to be three Stalls void, on the Feast days in the Lib. C. p. 87.  93. 23.24. and 25. years of the said Queens Reign; nevertheless upon receipt of the Scruteny no Election was made by the Soveraign, until the follow|ing year, viz. an. 26. Eliz. Thus was it in the 2.8.11. and 12. of King Iames, where no other mention is made than this, C. p. 156. None were admitted into the Order this year. And in such case, the Soveraign only Palmer's large Iournal. p. 20. views the Scruteny, Palm. Iourn. p an. 1639. f. 34. approves of every Knight-Companion's Nomination, and gives them thanks.
Sometimes we meet with this Prorogation of Elections recorded, as done at the pleasure of the Soveraign only; and at other times, by the Soveraign, with the approbation of the Knights-Companions.
To the first of these pertains a memorial entred, an. 22. Eliz. on the 24. of April, at a Chapter held before Morning Prayers; where the Knights-Companions received notice, Lib. C. p. 84. that it was the pleasure of the Soveraign to prorogue the Election for that time. And an. 38. Eliz. though there was an Pag. 132. earnest expectation on the morrow after Saint George's day, of the Election of a new Knight, yet Pag. 132. it seemed good to the Soveraign, to prorogue the Election to the following year.
Again, an. 10. Car. 1. on the morrow after the Feast day, then celebrated at Windesor, when the Scedule of Nominations taken the Evening before, was pre|sented to the Soveraign in Chapter by the Chancellor, and one place void; Lib. R. p 97. The So|veraign did not think fit to make any Election at all.
As touching the second, we meet with this instance, an. 27. Eliz. Lib. C. p. 101. That with the concurrent approbation and assent, of the Knights-Companions then assisting, the Soveraign thought fit to put off the Election to another time. But as to the reason of this seeming difference in the Soveraign's absolute power, yet taking in the Knights-Companions approbation, it may be said, as is already spoken, in the act of Election; That though it be the unquestionable prerogative of the Soveraign, to prorogue Elections at pleasure, yet ought of respect and honor to the Knights-Companions, their approbation hath been sometimes exprest.


SECT. XVIII. The Penalties inflicted on Knights-Companions who appear not at an Election.
LAstly, to close up this Chapter; where any Knight-Companion hath received Summons to appear at a Chapter of Election, and doth E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19. refuse to come, or wilfully withdraw himself, unless he be hindred for some just cause; and the reason of that impediment E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19. signified to the Soveraign, under his Seal of Arms beforehand (which if found to be just and reasonable is forthwith E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19. allowed and accepted, if otherwise, rejected and disallowed) his disobedience was Ordain|ed to be punished with the payment of E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19. one Mark (which King Henry the Eighth's Statutes inlarged to twenty shillings) to the Dean and Colledge of Windesor, and heretofore disposed towards praying for the Souls of the desunct Knight. At his next coming to Chapter, he is to tarry E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19. kneeling upon the ground in the midst of the Chapter, before the Soveraign (or his Deputy) and the whole company there present, which penalty he must still undergo, until such time, as finding fa|vour with them he be restored.
And for greater caution this Clause was herefore inserted in the Letters of Summons, as appears (among others) in that which issued out after the death of Sir Robert D'umfrevile, where after the time and place for Election was certified, and command given to observe both; the Letter closeth thus, Regist. Chart. f. 12. b. Et se estre ny pouer nous signifies soubz, c. And if it cannot be accomplished, that is, if the Knight-Companion could not meet at the appointed time, to perform his part in what the Statutes oblige, he should then signifie to the Soveraign under his Seal the cause of his impediment; that so he might perceive by his excuse, whether it were worthy acceptance, or he in fault or not.




CHAP. X. THE Investiture OF A KNIGHT SUBJECT WITH THE Garter and George,

SECT. I. The Notice given to a Knight Subject of his Election.
IN reference to this Ceremony, we are first to premise something, con|cerning the notice to be given the Knight-Elect of his Election into this most Noble Order; whether he be at such time personally at Windesor, or other place where the Chapter is then held, or employed in some more remote parts within the Kingdom, or elsewhere beyond the Seas, upon the Soveraign's Affairs.
To the newly Elect-Knight, who upon this acquisition of Honor happens to be at Windesor, or wheresoever else the Chapter is held, Constitut. ad Official Ordin. attinen|te. c. 4. Garter (immedi|ately after the Soveraign hath signified his pleasure, in Election of the person) is sent out of the Chapter to give him notice of it; for we find this employment recorded as part of the Constitut. ad Official Ordin. attinen|te. c. 4. duty of his Office, and asserted to be so by the general practice; and (among other Precedents in the Annals) upon the Election of the Ibid. Lord Howard, and Sir Henry Marney, an. 2. H. 8. (both then present at Court) it appears that Garter was forthwith sent out of the Chapter, to give them notice thereof, and to conduct them to the Soveraign's presence; where both were invest|ed, with the two principal Ensigns of the Order, the Garter and George. And upon the like service was he employed, at the Election of Sir Ib. p. 271. Nicholas Carew an. 28. H. 8. and of the Lib. C. p. 66. Lord Burghley, and Lord Grey of Wilton, an. 14. Eliz.
And as Garter hath been accustomed to carry the verbal notice of Knights Election; so also the Soveraign's Letter, signifying Election, to a Knight then likewise at Court, where the Soveraign is pleased (for the greater honor of the

Person) to wave a verbal notice, and send Letters of signification in its stead. And in such case these Letters are drawn up by the Chancellor of the Order, and pass under both the Soveraign's Sign manual, and Signet of the Order. Such a particular Honor was afforded the present soveraign; to whom Palmer's large Iour|nal p. 7. immediately after his Election, in a Chapter held at Windesor, the Soveraign directed the fol|lowing Letter, presented to him by Palmer's large Iour|nal p. 7. Sir Iohn Burrough Garter, who found him walking in St. Palmer's large Iour|nal p. 7. George's Hall.

Charles R.
OVR most dear and entirely beloved Son, Rowes Iourn. p. 42. having to our great comfort seen, and considered the ripeness of your youth, and conceived joyful and pregnant hopes of your manly virtues, in which we are assured, you will en|crease to your own honor, both in prowess, wisdom, justice, and all princely en|dowments: and that the emulation of Chevalry will in your tender years pro|voke and encourage you, to pursue the glory of heroick action, besitting your roy|al birth, and our care and education. We with the Companions of our most Noble Order of the Garter, assembled in Chapter, holden this present day at our Castle of Windesor, have elected and chosen you one of the Companions of our Order. In signification whereof, we have sent unto you by our trusty and well beloved servants Sir John Burrough Knight Garter, and our Principal King of Arms, these our Royal Letters, requiring you to make your speedy repair unto us, to receive the Ensigns of our most honorable Order, and to be ready for your Installation, upon the 21. day of this present Month.
Given under the Signet of our Order, at our Castle of Windesor,the 20. of May, in the 14. year of our Reign 1638.
To our dearly beloved son Prince Charles.

This is the only Instance we have met with, where a Letter was sent to an Elect-Knight, and he at the same time present at Court. But when an Election passeth, and the Knight Elected is remote from Court, then the general form of the Letter is both to signifie his Election, and summon him to his Investiture with the Garter and George: of which see a Precedent in the Num. XVIII. Appendix.
But where the Soveraign is pleased to descend to mention particular services, or other inducements for a Knights Election, there the Preamble of the Letter is worded accordingly: and that this hath sometimes, though but rarely been used, appears thus in that Letter which certified Election to Sir Iohn Fastolfe, Appendix Num. XXI. We considering the virtuous fidelity you have shown, and the honorable exploits you have done, in the service of our thrice renowned Father, and that in our service al|so, you (as many others) have given proofs of that honor and those deserts where|with God hath endowed you, always suffering, as is the part of a good and faithful subject, the pains and toyls of War, for the vindicating and maintaining of our just right, claims, and title; have chosen you one of our Companions of our Order, c.
Where the Letter barely signifies Election; that is when the Soveraign doth not design a present Investiture with the Garter and George, but defers that Ce|remony till the Elect-Knight comes to Windesor, to take possession of his Stall; in such case notice of the day of his Installation is also inserted towards the end of the Letter, and upon his appearance at Windesor, so soon as he is called into the Chapter-house, the Garter is first buckled about his left leg, next follows his Inve|stiture with the rest of the Ornaments of the Order, and lastly his Installation. And thus (in the case of Henry Earl of Cumberland, an. 29. H. 8.) was the Investiture with the Garter deferr'd, till his appearance at Windesor, where that Ceremony, as also his Investiture with the Habit and Collar, and lastly his Installation, were dispatcht at one time.



SECT. II. His Reception into the Chapter-house.
IF the Elect Knight be neer where the Chapter is held, and that Garter hath been sent forth to give him notice of the Honor, and to usher him into the Chapter-house to receive the Garter and George, before the Chapter break up; in|timation being given of his approach, the Soveraign sends forth two of the Knights-Companions to meet him, who after a mutual salute, conduct him be|tween them to the presence of the Soveraign, Garter going before them.
For instances herein, first of Strangers, we shall remember Lib. C. p. 159. Vlrick Duke of Holstien, an. 3. Iac. R. who being sent for by Garter, was introduced into the Chapter between Prince Henry and the Earl of Dorset, and by them presented to the Soveraign: So Lib. R. p. 23. Christian Duke of Brunswick, an. 22. Iac. R. proceeded with much state and honor, in the midst between William Earl of Penbroke and Phi|lip Earl of Montgomery, to receive the Garter and George.
The Collect. E. W. G. 6. of November, an. 14. Car. 2. Christian Prince of Denmark being Elect|ed in a Chapter, held in the Withdrawing Room at Whitehall, and then absent, Garter was sent next day by the Soveraign, to give him notice thereof, with desire to be present the following day, at the foresaid place, to receive his Investiture; where the Soveraign and several of the Knights-Companions being assembled, Collect. E. W. G. Garter was sent out for the Prince (then at the Earl of Bath's Lodgings in the matted Gallery) and thence usher'd him into the Lobby between the said Galle|ry and the Withdrawing Room; where he was received by the Earls of Lindsey and Manchester, and conducted between them into the Chapter, Garter preced|ing them, and after three obeysances they brought him up to the Soveraign.
Among Knights-Subjects, we find the Lib. C. p. 66. Lord Burghley and Lord Grey were con|ducted (an. 14. Eliz.) to the Soveraign by the Lord Clynton and Earl of Bedford; and Ib. p. 109. Robert Earl of Essex, Thomas Earl of Ormond, and Sir Christopher Hatton (present at Greenwich, an. 30. Eliz. when their Election passed) Ibid. were severally led into the Chapter; the first of them between the Earls of Worcester and Pen|broke; the second between the Lord Hunsdon and Lord Grey of Wilton; and the third between the Earl of Leicester and Lord Burghley; and as soon as they were brought up before the Soveraign, with all Reverence and Humility they fell upon their knees.
In like manner, an. 4. Iac. R. Ex lib. C. p. 163. Robert Earl of Salisbury proceeded up to the So|veraign's Throne, between the Earls of Nottingham and Dorset; and Viscount Bindon, between the Earls of Suffolk and Northampton. And an. 22. Iac. R. the Earl of Arundel and Surrey, and Earl of Kelly, took Lib. R. p. 23. William Earl of Salisbury be|tween them, and presented him to the Soveraign: So also in the Reign of his late Majesty of blessed memory, it is remembred, that the Ibid. p. 45. Earl of Northampton was conducted to his receipt of the Garter, in the Chapter-house at Windesor, between the Earls of Penbroke and Montgomery, an. 4. Car. 1. and the Earls of Danby and Moreton, being Elected also at the same place, an. 9. Car. 1. the Ib. p. 90. former of them was conducted to the Soveraign by the Earls of Penbroke, and Arundel and Sur|rey, and the Ib. p. 90. latter by the Earls of Salisbury and Carlisle. And when the pre|sent Soveraign appeared upon his Letter of Summons, at the Chapter held in the Withdrawing Chamber in Windesor Castle, to receive his Investiture, two of the senior Knights, viz. Philip Lib. R. p. 142. Earl of Penbroke and Montgomery, and Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surry, were sent forth to conduct him in, who (ushered by the Palmer's large Iour|nal p. 8. Black Rod) brought him between them up to the Soveraign.
The Ex Collect. E. W. G. Duke of Monmouth being Elected at a Chapter held in the Withdrawing Room at Whitehal, the 28. of March an. 15. Car. 2. Garter was immediately sent to him in the Soveraign's Bedchamber, who being met at the door the Earls

of Lindsey and Manchester, Garter (the Black Rod joining himself to him in the Room) pass'd to the lower end of the Room before the Duke and the two Knights-Companions, whence they proceeded up to the Soveraign with three Reverences.
Lastly, at the Election of Ibidem. Iames Duke of Cambridge, in the same Room at Whitehall (3. Dec. an. 18. Car. 2) Garter was also sent fort into the Bedcham|ber, to acquaint him that the Earl of Manchester and Duke of Monmouth wre apointed by the Soveraign and Chapter to bring him in thither. That done, the said Knights-Companions arose and went to the Duke, whom meeting at the Bed|chamber door, they took their compass about the rest of the Knights-Companions (then standing) and brought him between them (Garter and Black Rod preced|ing) from the lower end of the Room close before the Soveraign.


SECT. III. The Ceremonies of Investiture with the Garter and George.
THE Knight-Elect being thus introduced, and brought to the Soveraign, having first with all reverence bowed himself before him, it was usual heretofore to make a short gratulatory speech, in acknowledgment of so great an evidence of the Soveraign's royal bounty, and the Knights-Companions re|spects: The substance of such an address, we find coucht in that speech made by Sir Nicholas Carew, after he had been conducted into the Chapter-house at Windesor, to receive his Investiture, an. 28. H. 8. who first Lib. N. p. 271. giving infinite thanks, both to the Soveraign and the whole Society, for that they had vouch|safed to receive him into the honor of this most illustrious Order, being a per|son in his own esteem most unworthy thereof; in the next place profest, That whereas he was preferred in this choice before many others much more de|serving than himself, it was not to be attributed to his merits, or any thing by him performed, but meerly to the Soveraign's bounty, and the favour of the Knights-Companions present towards him.
The bestowing of so singular an honor, being thus thankfully acknowledged the Ceremony of Investiture with the two principal Ensigns of the Order begins, first with the Garter, as the most ancient and chiefest Ensign, and next with the George: but the further Investiture with the Habit, and other the Ornaments of this Order, are to be compleated at the time of the Elect-Knights Installation at Windesor.
Now the manner and order in the aforesaid Investiture, was anciently as fol|loweth; first the Elect-Knight set his left foot upon a Stool, and then one of the Knights-Companions, by the Soveraign's appointment, as his Substitute, buckled the Enobled Garter about his left leg; and this is to be seen in Picture in the margent of an old Draught of the Combats of Sir Iohn Astley, set forth in the Pag. 73. Antiquities of Warwickshire, where the said Sir Iohn's Investiture with the Gar|ter, is represented after the aforesaid manner. But of late times, the Elect-Knight Ex Collect. A. V. W. kneeled on his right Knee, whilst this Ceremony was performed; during which, the Lib. N. p. 201 words of Admonition or Signification at this part of the Investiture are to be read.
The Forms of Admonition anciently used at the Investiture of Knights-Subjects are inserted in the Numb. XXXVI. Appendix; but that particularly relative to the putting on the Garter, is entred in King Henry the Eighth's Book of Art. 27. English Statutes, and is as followeth.
Sir, the loving Company of the Order of the Garter hath received you their Brother and Fellow, and in token of this, they give and present you this

present Garter, which God grant that you receive and wear from henceforth to his praise and glory, and to the exaltation and honor of the said Noble Or|der, and your self.
Afterward it was decreed in a Chapter held at Windesor the 5. of August, an. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar. to this effect, Lib. C. p. 12. That not only the same Advertisements and Admonitions which were wont to be given to Strangers at their Investitures, should be likewise given to Knights-Subjects, that in time to come should be Elected and Installed; but also, that among the Knights-Companions there should not be any Investiture differing either in Ceremony or Habit.
Hereupon the foresaid words of Admonition at putting on the Garter were left off, and Lib. N. p. 310. those used at the Investiture of Strangers given and continued to Knights-Subjects; the English Version of which may be seen at the end of the said English Statutes, which thence we have transcribed hither: being pro|nounced by the Chancellor, if the Soveraign or his Lieutenant be present, other|wise by the Register.
To the land and honor of Almighty God, his imaculate Mother, and Saint George the holy Martyr, tye or gird your Leg with this. Noble Garter, wear|ing it to the encrease of your honor, and in token and remembrance of this most Noble Order; remembring, that thereby you being admonished and en|couraged, in all just Battels and Wars, which only you shall take in hand, both strongly to fight, valiantly to stand, and honorable to have the Victory.
But against the Investiture of the present Soveraign, the words of Significa|tion, being better weighed and considered, were put into this form.
Palmer's large Iourn. p. 8. To the honor of God omnipotent, and in memorial of the blessed Martyr St. George, tye about thy Leg for thy renown this Noble Garter; wear it as the Symbol of the most illustrious Order, never to be forgotten or laid aside: That thereby thou mayst be admonished to be courageous, and having under|taken a just War, into which only thou shalt be engaged, thou mayest stand firm, valiantly fight, and successfully conquer.
The Princely Garter being in manner aforesaid buckled on, and the words of Signification pronounced, the Elect-Knight is brought before the Soveraign, who puts about his Neck the George, pendant at a Skie coloured Ribband; at which part of the Ceremony, the Admonition used at the adorning of an Installed Knight with the Collar of the Order (changing only the word Collar for Rib|band) is pronounced; but were thus framed for the before mentioned occasion, of the present Soveraign's Investiture with the George and Ribband.
Ibid. Wea this Ribband about thy Neck, adorned with the Image of the blessed Martyr and Soldier of Christ St. George; by whose imitation provoked, thou mayest so overpass both prosperous and adverse encounters, that having stoutly vanquished thy Enemies, both of Body and Soul, thou mayest not only receive the praise of this transient Combat, but be crowned with the Palm of eter|nal Victory.
In further progress upon this Ceremony, we shall note, that so great a re|spect hath been given to Foreign Princes who receive the honor here, that the Soveraign most usually performs the Investiture himself: For so when Philip King of Castile received a personal Investiture, in the Chapter-house at Windesor, it was from the Lib. N. p. 184. Soveraign's own hands, for he took the Gar|ter from the King of Arms, put it about the Kings Leg, and Prince Henry fast|ned the Buckle.
Queen Lib. C. p. 79. Elizabeth her self buckled the Garter about the Leg of Iohn Casimire, Count Palatine of the Rhyne; and hung about his Neck a Gold Chain with

the George at it. The like honor did Ib. p. 15. King Iames to the Duke of Holtein in the third year of his Reign.
And now and then (though seldom) out of special grace and favour hath the Soveraign done this honor to a Knight-Subject: though when Queen Eliz. was pleased to adorn the Lord Burghley with the Garter, the Annals note it to be done as it were Ib. 65. by the by; and Henry Earl of Susse. an. 31. Eliz. received these Ensigns of the Order from the Ib. p. 113. Soveraign her self. The like favour did she to the Ib. p. 1. Earl of Shrewsbury in the 34. year of her Reign. So also did Ib. p. 159. King Iames invest Henry Earl of Northampton, with the principal Ensigns of the Order; as a person worthy so great an honor: and lastly, his R. p. 142.  143. vide porro Palmer's large Iourn. p. 8. late Mjesty of blessed memo|ry, placed both the Garter and George upon the present Soveraign, the 21. of May 1638. with his own hands.
Sometimes the Soveraign hath performed but part of the Investiture, and commanded the senior Knight to do the rest. Thus when the Earl of Devonshire an. 13. H. 8. received these Ensigns, it was on this manner; first the Soveraign reached out the Garter to the Marquess Dorset, and commanded him buckle it about his left Leg, which as he was doing, the Duke of Norsolk gave him his assistance; then the Lib. N. p. 11. Soveraign put on the Gold Chain, with the Image of Saint George at it. At the Investiture of Christian Duke of Brunswick, an. 22. Iac. R. the Lib. R p. 23. Soveraign put about his neck the Blue Ribband, whereat hung the Effigies of St. George; and the Earls (who introduced him to the Soveraign's prese) buckled on the Garter. The like did the Ibid. p. 45. late Soveraign to William Earl of Nor|thampton, an. 4. Car. 1. at which time the Earl of Penbroke fastned the Garter about his left Leg; and an. 9. Car. 1. the Earls of Danby and Moreton were both of them invested with the George by the I. p. 9. Soveraign himself, while the Earl of Penbroke invested the former, and the Earl of Carlisle the latter with the Garter.
So also (since the Soveraign's happy return) in the cases of the Prince of Den|mark, the Dukes of Monmouth, Cambridge, and Albemarle, was the Investiture begun with the George.
And thus we see, that an. 22. Iac. Reg. the order of Investiture began to be in|verted, the George and Ribband being then first put on, and the Garter last: Nevertheless, the Garter as it was the first, so the principal and most worthy Ensign of the Order, and therefore in the practice of all former times, thought fit to have the precedence of Investiture given it; and was so observed at the In|vestiture of the present Soveraign.
Lastly, the Investiture with these two Ensigns, hath for the most part been heretofore performed by the two senior Knights, and at the command of the Soveraign, but always in his presence, the Chapter sitting; but if absent, then by his Lieutenant: and so it hapned an. 31. Eliz. for the Lord Buckhurst being Elected at Whitehall, upon the 24. of April that year, and coming to Court (having no knowledge of his Election) after the Soveraign was risen (yet leaving the Chapter sitting) her Lib. C. p. 113. Lieutenant invested him both with the Garter and George.
The Solemnity of Investiture being compleated, the Elect-Knight recollecting himself with all befitting humility, Lib. N. p. 211. renders thanks to the Soveraign for these Tokens and Ensigns of Honor, and after, with due respects, salutes the Knights-Companions, Palmer's large Iour|nal p. 9. who thereupon re-salute the Elect-Knight, and joyfully receive him into their Fellowship Society.
In case two or more Elect-Knights receive the honor of this Investiture at one time, then so soon as the senior hath been Invested, and his humble thanks pre|sented, he Ex Collect. A. V. W. passeth down towards the Chapter-house door, and there stands, while the next junior is in like manner invested; which Ceremony being end|ed, he also goes down, and stands with the other Elect-Knight; and so do the rest in order (if there be more present, that attend their Investiture) until the Chapter break up.



SECT. IV. Of sending the Garter and George to an Elect-Knight Subject.
WHere a Knight-Subject at the time of his Election is remote from Court, or beyond Sea, and the Soveraign determines to send him the two principal Ensigns of the Order, the charge of this employment doth of right belong to Constitut. ad Official. Ordin. Altinentes c. 4. Garter; and herein there are divers Precedents. Sir Thomas Wriothesley Gar|ter, was sent to the Ex vet. MS. penes Io. Vin|cent gen. p. 159. Earls of Arundel and Westmerland, with the Garter and George, an. 17. H. 8. So also was Sir Gilbert Dethick Garter, sent upon the like employ|ment, to the Earl of Ex Col|lect. W. le N. Cl. Westmerland an. 6. Ed. 6. to the Earl of Ex Col|lect. W. le N. Cl. Sussex, an. 1  2. Ph.  M. to the Lord Ex Col|lect. W. le N. Cl. Grey of Wilton, an. 3.  4. Ph.  M. to the Ex Col|lect. W. le N. Cl. Earl of Shrewsbury, an. 3. Eliz. to the Earl of Ex Col|lect. W. le N. Cl. Bedford, an. 6. Eliz. to the Earl of Lib. C. p. 44. Warwick an. 5. Eliz. (being then at Newhaven in France) to William Ex Collect. E. W. G. Earl of Worcester an. 12. Eliz. to Ex Collect. E. W. G. William Lord Cobham an. 26. Eliz. and to the Lord Scroop the same year who then was at Carlisle in Cumberland.
This Investiture of the Lord Scroop, was the Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. last action in this kind, which Sir Gilbert Dethick performed; who had served four Soveraigns of this Order, an Officer of Arms, the space of Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. 65. years, whereof he had been Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. Garter 38. years, and having most worthily and faithfully accomplished his service, upon his return to London from Carlisle aforesaid, he languished by the space of ten weeks or thereabouts, and dyed the Ex Collect W. le N. Cl 3. day of October, an. Dom. 1584. in the 81. year of his age.
The Letters heretofore sent from the Soveraign along with these Ensigns of the Order to the Elect-Knights, have for the most part been drawn after the form of those certifying Election; only instead of the last Clause, which therein requires the Elect Knights repair to the Soveraign: for receiving the Garter and George from him, in these was an allowance to Appendix. Num. XIX. use them, as to their Election appertain.
And these were the two general forms of Letters, sent upon the foresaid occa|sions: all further difference lay, not in the body, but direction of the Letters, which were evermore worded according to the quality of the person to whom sent: as to a Knight Batchellor, the direction was, To our trusty and wellbe|loved, c. to a Baron, Right trusty and wellbeloved, c. to an Earl, Right trusty and right wellbeloved Cousin, c. and to a Duke, Right trusty, and right entirely beloved Cousin, c.
But we observe the forms of those Appendix. Num. XX. Letters, sent upon like occasion to Knights-Subjects, when the present Soveraign was beyond the Seas, were pen'd after another manner, and (the necessity of those times requiring) contained some other particulars, namely (besides a large preamble relative to the Election of Knights, eminent for noble birth and heroick virtue) additional clauses of (1.) Power to wear the Star of Silver about St. George's Cross: (2.) The great Col|lar of the Order: And (3.) to stile themselves Knights and Companions of the Order of the Garter, in as ample manner as if they had been Installed at Windesor; with an assurance of receiving the whole Habit there, when the Soveraign was restored to the possession thereof.
And it appears from some of these To the Duke of Ormond Marq. of Mor|tross, c. Letters, that by reason Sir Edward Walker Garter was otherwise employed in the Soveraign's service, when they were sent, therefore the Soveraign made choice of other persons to carry both the said Let|ters and Ensigns of the Order, nevertheless Letters to Duke Hamil|ton. Marq. of Newcastle. c. reserving unto him as Garter, the rights of hs Office.
Howbeit, the said Sir Edward looking on the disposing this employment to others, as an invasion upon the rights of his Office, and having a just regard to the preservation of the interest of his Successors, no less than his own; humbly petitioned the present Soveraign for redress, and obtained his gracious Refe|rence thereupon to several Knights-Companions of the Order, to examine the

matter, and make report both what they found, and what they thought fit to be done therein; upon whose Report the Soveraign did him full right, by his gracious Declaration. All which Proceedings we think necessary to insert here, for cleering and setling the interest of so ancient an Office.

Ex Collect. E. W. G. To his sacred Majesty, Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter. The most humble Petition of Sir Edward Walker Knight Garter, principal King of Arms, and Officer of the said Order.
In all humility representing,
THat by the especial favour of his late Majestly your Royal Father, of ever glorious and blessed memory, he was created Garter Principal King of Arms, and was thereby to enjoy all immunities and advantages thereunto be|longing, as amply as any of his Predecessors.
That since your Majesties accession to the Crown, he hath by right continued in the said Office, it being granted during life by Letters-Patent.
Notwithstanding which, there have lately some disputes arisen about the exe|cution of that part of his Office, wherein he conceives himself most concerned, and for which his Office was at first erected.
He therefore, in all humility, appeals to your Majesty, as Soveraign of the said Order, and Protector of the Officers thereof, for the vindication of his just rights, which were never questioned, until this time of general Invasion, hoping clearly to make it appear.
First, when any Foreign Prince is chosen, that the Ensigns of the Order are sent and delivered him by an Ambassador, and Garter joined with him in the presenting thereof.
Secondly, that until this time of Rebellion (wherein your Majesty cannot formally either Elect, or Install any subject) the Garter hath rarely been sent to any of them, but according to the Statutes was always delivered them in the Chapterhouse, Garter, and the rest of the Officers of the Order assisting.
To prove the first, he refers himself to the Statutes, and to the constant pra|ctice; As for example, the Garter was delivered by the Earl of Arundel, and Garter King of Arms, to Philip the second King of Spain, in the time of Queen Mary. By the Lord Spencer, and Sir William Dethick Garter, in joint commission with him, to the Duke of Westemberg, in the first year of King James. By the Lord Carleton, and Sir William Seagar, to Maurice Prince of Orange. By Mr. Peter Young Gentleman Vsher, and Mr. Henry St. George, Richmond Herald, Deputy to Sir William Seagar Garter, to the King of Sweden, by whom they were both Knighted: and, as he remembers by Sir William Boswell, and Mr. Philpot Deputy to Sir John Burrough Gar|ter, to the now Prince of Orange, from all which, Garter and his Deputies re|ceived large and honorary rewards.
To the second, by the Statutes, no Knight chosen or elect shall be installed by Attorney, except he be a Stranger, or bused without the Realm, for the affairs of the Soveraign; nor receive the Garter, but in Chapter, so that the sending of the Garter to any subject, rarely happens. The only example he remembers, is, of that sent by Garter to the Lord Scroop President of the North, in Queen Eli|zabeth's time. As for the other alledged of that sent to the Earl of Holland, into France, it is subsequent in time, and was only the delivery of the Garter, and no compleating of the Order, and may (if it were so) for ought appears to the contrary, have been done by Garter's consent. Besides, he is in the affirma|tive, and so to be believed touching the rights of his own Office and Profession, before others that understand them not.
By all which he hopes it is evident, That Garter is the proper Office to be sent with an Ambassador, to present the Order to a Foreign Prince, and that your Majesty sends not Embassadors, to your own Subjects. So then it follows,

when any such cases happen (as of late have done) that Garter only, or his De|puties, and none other, ought of right to be employed therein.
Wherefore, not to mention at large, how that your Majesty hath by your Royal Letters, with dispensation, fully invested eight most noble and eminent persons with the Order, and all the rights and honorary advantages thereof, and his preparing the Letters, and setling the manner and form, without any notice ta|ken of him for doing thereof as yet, and that a great advantage hath been made by another, be performing that which he hopes fully to evidence is the right of his Office.
He doth therefore in all humility appeal unto your Majesty, Soveraign of the said most Noble Order, beseeching that he may be heard, to make the particu|lars appear either before your Majesty alone or attended by as many of the Com|panions of the Order, Peers and Council, as your Majesty shall please to call to that purpose, or by any other way that shall seem best to your Majesty: And that he who hath disputed it may be present, and then if it shall appear that the right is his, that he may have your Majesty's Declaration to fortifie it, with di|rection, that the same be entred in the Register Book of the said Order, that so the Precedents that have been of late made, may not for the future be brought in example against him, or his Successors, to the prejudice of his right, and the loss of the greatest honor and advantage of his Office. The which will more re|flect on him than any that have held that Office formerly. He having had the extraordinary happiness to enjoy more of his Soveraign's favours and employ|ments, than any of his Predecessors.
And (as in duty bound) he shall ever pray, c.
At the Court at Breda the 21. of April 1650.

His majesty is graciously pleased to refer the consideration of this Peti|tion, to the most honorable Lords, the Dukes of Buckingham and Hamil|ton, and the Marquess of Newcastle, Companions of the most Noble Or|der of the Garter, to examine the Allegations of this Petition, and such other proofs as the Petitioner shall produce, for the justifying of his right; and thereupon to make report unto his Majesty what they find, and think fit to be done therein.
Rob. Long.



Breda 27. May 1650.
WE George Duke of Buckingham, William Duke of Hamilton, and William Marquess of Newcastle, Knights of the most Noble Order of the Garter, having read and considered the within written Petition, do find the Allegations therein mentioned to agree with the Statutes and ancient practice of the said Order. And that Garter King of Arms; and his Deputies, ought to bear all Letters-Patents, appertaining to the Brethren of the said Order, and all Elections to the Knights-Elect. And we do therefore make this Report to your Majesty, to the end you may be pleased to maintain the Petitioner in his just rights. And that no examples lately made may be brought in Precedent against him, or his Successors in the said Office.

G. Buckingham.
Hamilton.
W. New-Castle.




His Majesties Declaration of the Rights of Garter King of Arms to Sir Edward Walker.
Charles R.
Ex od. Col|lect. CHARLES the Second of that name, by the Grace of God, King of Eng|land, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, c. And Soveraign of the most Noble Order of Saint George, called the Garter. To all and singular the Princes and Peers, Knights and Companions of the said most Noble Order, Greeting. Whereas we have for the continuation and ho|nor of the said most Noble Order (in this time of general Rebellion in our Dominions) by our power, as Soveraign of the said Order, lately Elected in|to the Fellowship thereof, divers eminent persons, whom for their great Nobi|lity, Courage, and Fidelity, we have esteemed worthy of the same; and have by our necessary dispensations, fully invested them with all the honorary privi|ledges and advantages thereof, and have employed divers of our Servants, and others unto them, with Letters missive declaring the same. And whereas we have been by the humble Petition of our trusty and well beloved Servant, Sir Edward Walker Knight, Garter, principal King of Arms, and Officer of the said Order, informed, That by the Statutes and ancient practice of the Order, when any of our Predecessors, have Elected any Foreign Prince thereinto, that the Ensigns thereof were always sent and delivered by an Ambassador, and Garter King of Arms joined with him in the doing thereof. And that when any of our Subjects was Elected, the Garter was delivered him in the Chapter-house, or (being employed abroad) was sent unto him by Garter King of Arms Officer of the said Order. All which we having taken into our consideration, were graciously pleased for the preservation of the rights of the Officers of the said Order, to refer the examination of the particulars unto our right trusty and entirely beloved Cosens and Counsellors, George Duke of Buckingham, Wil|liam Duke of Hamilton, and William Marquess of New-Castle, Knights and Companions of the said most Noble Order, who upon due examination of the particulars, have made their Report, That they find all the allegations above-mentioned, to agree with the Statutes and ancient practice of the said Order. And that Garter, King of Arms, and his Deputies, ought to bear all Letters, Patents appertaining to the Brethren of the said Order, and all Ele|ctions to the Knights Elect; Wherefore, to the end that the rights and privi|ledges of the Officers of the said Order may be fully preserved and established, We are graciously pleased (by the advice of the said most Noble Companions) hereby to declare, that although we have (in regard of the other employments of the said Sir Edward Walker Garter, in our service) sent the said declara|tory Letters with the Garter, by others, unto the persons Elect, yet that the doing thereof shall not be brought in example against him the said Sir Edward Walker Garter, or his Successors in the said Office, to the prejudice of his right, We being fully satisfied, that it is his right, and properly belongs unto his Office, as Garter, King of Arms to perform the same. And we do there|fore hereby command, that an Entry be made hereof, in the Book of the said most Noble Order, by the Register thereof, assoon as conveniently it may be done, To the end it may appear, we have preserved the said Garter King of Arms, and his Successors in their just rights, and that he hath not failed to prove the same.
Given at the Castle at Breda this 28. day of May, in the second year of our Reign. Anno Domini 1650.By his Majesties command Rob. Long.

We shall further add, that together with the Letters signifying an Election and the Ensigns of the Order, it was anciently in use, to send the Book of Statutes under the Common Seal of the Order, no less to a Knight-Subject, than (in like case) to a Stranger; and to the same end, viz. that he might peruse and advise thereupon, whether he would accept of the Election or not: for so it appears by the Appendix. Num. XXI. Letters signifying Election sent to Sir Iohn Fastolf, an 4. H. 6.
Within a few days after his Highness Prince Rupert was Elected into this Or|der (being then in Holland) a Palmer's large Iournal p. 45. Commission of Legation was prepared to be sent thither with the Garter and George by Sir Iohn Burrough Garter, to perform the Investiture with them: but Sir Iohn Ibid. p. 48.  53. falling sick and dying, prevented the de|signed Ceremony. Nevertheless, some while after the Prince had been in Eng|land, the then Soveraign thought fit to command Sir Pag. 48. Iames Palmer Chancellor of the Order to attend his Highness, to declare the reasons, why the said Com|mission was not sent and executed, as was designed, as also to deliver him the Commission it self; to the intent (being prevented of receiving his Installation at Windesor, because that Castle continued in the possession of the Rebels) it might remain with him as a memorial of this Soveraign's Princely favour, and respect to his quality and merits, as also for a further evidence of his admi|ttance into this Noble Order, since there was no other memorial thereof, but the minutes of his Election and this Commission.
On Pag. 48. Monday therefore the 14. of Ian. 1644. the said Chancellor accompa|nied with Dr. Chr. Wren Register, and Sir Edward Walker, then newly made Garter, attended the Prince at his Lodgings in Oxford, who having notice of their coming, received them with all obliging civility: and after a little pause, the Chancellor made known to his Highness the Sovereign's Commands in the fol|lowing Speech.

Ibid. p. 49. May it please your Highness,
THE Kings of England Soveraigns of the most Noble Order of the Gar|ter, ever since that honorable Foundation, have thought fit (not only for the reward of eminent services done by their own Subjects, but also for incou|ragements to noble acts of Chivalry and virtue, and partly for further augmen|tation and extention of the renown and honor of that most Noble Society) have made it so estimable amongst all the Foreign Princes of Christendom, that they have  thought their fames sufficiently advanced, till they have been taken notice of by this Princely Society, and Elected into this most Noble Order of the Garter. Which lction hath been so welcomed, even to the Emperors and Kings of higest degree of Renown in Europe, that no tye of allyance, amity, or league hath proved a stronger bond of affection between this and Foreign Crowns, than that of the Companionry of the most Noble Order of the Garter; in which nine Chri|stian Emperors fity five crowned Kings, and four hundred Princes and Peers, having taken the Oath of homage and fealty to the King of England, as their Soveraign in the said most Noble Order, have already had their Names and glorious Acts registered in the Records thereof.
According to which Example of his Majesties Progenitors of famous memory, his Majesty King Charles my Master Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, did at a Chapter held at his City of York, the 20. of April in the 18. year of his Reign (when though many Stalls remained vacant) yet did think sit then to elect but two Knights only; namely, Prince James Duke of York his Son, and your Highness his Nephew; whom his Majesty thought worthiest to make choice of, not only for your Princely descent of Blood, but for his own particular interest in that noble consanguinity (as being the Son of his only be|loved Sister the virtuous Queen of Bohemia) and for many eminent virtues be|sides (as well heroical as moral) inherent in your person.
And that his Majesties affection to you might be the more emphatically ex|pressed, he elected your Highness a Companion of the Order in the company

of his own Son, both to manifest thereby the intimateness of affection to your Highness, as well as to shew Prince James his tender years, a glorious pat|tern for his Princely imitation of valour and martial Atchievements; in which choice, his Majesty did not prove himself a King of Grace and Goodness only, but a King and a Prophet also; as if he could by his foreseeing judgment di|vine, how happy an instrument of valour and safety you would after prove, to his Crown and dignity, in their greatest distresses. In the conduct of whose Ar|mies, your, Highness hath hitherto been so prosperous and successful, that it will be my duty to truth, as well as to the propriety of my Office, to give a timely recordation of each particular to the Register of the Order, that he may eternize the memory of your noble Acts, to remain in the Records of the Or|der, that posterity may know as well as we find, what happy assistance your Princely Conduct (of his Majesties Armies) hath brought to his Kingdoms and Dominions.
Sir, the Reasons and Motives of this your Election being so many, it be|hoves me now to inform your Highness, the reasons why this Commission hath not been sooner delivered unto your hand; and those are, that immediately up|on your Election at York, his Majesty commanded me to draw up a Com|mission of legation to Sir John Burrough Knight (then principal King of Arms and Garter) o bring the Ensigns of the Order, together with the no|tice of your Election, unto your Highness then in the Low Countries, and to perform the same with all the Solemnities thereunto belonging. Another Com|mission also under the Broad Seal of England was directed to the right Honora|ble the Earl of Arundel and Surrey, Earl Marshall of England; and to the Lord Goring his Majesties Embassador extraordinary with the States of the United Provinces; to give your Highness the honor of Knighthood, a Cere|mony always by the Statutes of the said Order necessarily to be performed to any Elected Knight, before he can be admitted to be a Companion, and receive the Ensigns of the Order of the Garter. But the said King of Arms then fall|ing sick shortly after dyed, and your Highness suddainly coming in person into England, that Ceremony was prevented by those casualties, and his Majesty at Nottingham himself performed that Office, in delivering both the Garter and George unto your Highness; since which time your continual employments in his Majesties Wars, and your absence thereby necessarily inforced from Ox|ford (where the Commission and Seals of the Order remained) the delivery thereof was necessarily delayed till this present; when his Majesties express command to me, and to those Gentlemen Officers of the most Honorable Order, is to deliver it now unto your Highness hands, considering the place of your In|stalment at the Castle of Windesor is necessarily prevented (by reason of the possession thereof by the Rebels) and no other memory, but your Election and this Commission remains upon Record. But his Soveraign Majesty is so desirous to invest you and the Prince his Son, in the full priviledges of the said Order and society, that assoon as a competent number of Knights can be assembled to make a Chapter, his Majesty determines to consult of a course how the In|stalment at Windesor may (if possibly it can) be dispensed with, that rather than you should be deprived longer of the full enjoyment of all rights of Instal|lation, his Majesty is fully determined to make ordinary rules of Ceremony and Order, to give place to extraordinary Examples of merit and fidelity, al|ready so amply performed by your Highness to his Crown and dignity, which is the sum of what his Majesty hath commanded me to present unto your High|ness, which he desires, you to take in good part till the rest can be performed.

At the ending of this Speech, Sir Ibid. p. . Iames Palmer presented the Commission to the Prince, who gave this Majesty many humble thanks for this gracious Message, and acknowledged his Majesties favours far beyond his desert; but promised he would study to be more worthy by his actions, than in return of words, with many thanks to the Chancellor and the other Officers of the Order for their pains: where|upon they took their leave, and the Chancellor went immediately to his Maje|sty, and rendered him an account of this Employment.



SECT. V. The Manner of a Knight's Investiture.
IN ancient time it was part of the Ceremony, belonging to the Investiture with the Garter, of an Elect-Knight (whether a Stranger or Knight Subject) to give him an Oath, which we find called, The Oath in such cases accustomed to be taken, and was to this effect, that the Knight Appendix. Num. XXI. should well and faithfully keep and observe, so far as God should enable him, all that was contained in the Statutes of the Order. But we find not of late, that the taking such an Oath, at performing this Ceremony hath been imposed upon any but Foreign Princes, of which anon.
It is also observable that an. 4. H. 6. a particular Appendix. Num. XXII. Commission issued to the Earls of Warwick, Salisbury, and Suffolk, with power to any two or one of them, to receive this Oath from Sir Iohn Fastols, upon his Investiture: And this was besides the Oath, which his Proctor was afterwards to take at Installation, as is manifest out of the Letters of Procuration, whereby the said Sir Iohn Fastols gave to his Procter license to take on his behalf, Regist. Char|tac. fol. 14. b. such Oath as should be required at the time of his Installation.
As to the Ceremony and manner of Investing a Knight-Elect with the Garter and George, albeit we have discourst thereof before, we nevertheless think it necessary to subjoin two or three considerable Instances as most proper to this place.
When MS p. 3. Philip Prince of Spain, an. 1. Mariae, had these Ensigns of the Order sent him, the Soveraign joined Garter King of Arms, with the Earl of Arundel to perform the Investiture, who upon notice of his arrival on the Coast of Eng|land, set forward on their journey to Southampton, where on MS p. 3. Friday the 20. of Iuly, they took Water, and meeting the Prince before he landed, entred his Barge, Ib. p. 4. and gave him notice of his Election in a short speech, which being end|ed, Garter having the Garter in his hand, Ib. p. 4. kissed it, and so presented it to the Earl, who forthwith fastned it about the Princes Leg: in like manner Garter presented the Earl with the George hanging at a Chain of Gold, who put it also about the Princes neck.
The Ceremony of Investiture being thus performed, the Prince came on shore at Southampton, and on the uppermost stair there were ready attending his land|ing, the Ib. p. 4. Marques of Winchester, Lord high Treasurer of England, with divers other Lords; the Prince gave the Ib. p. 4. Lord Williams his White Staff, and made him Lord Chamberlain of his Houshold; and Sir Anthony Brown Master of his Horse, presented him from the Queen a Horse with a Footcloth of Crimson Vel|vet, richly embroidered with Gold and Pearls, having the Bridle and all other Furniture sutable, whereon he rode to the Cathedral, and after Prayers to the Lodgings prepared for him.
Touching Garter's Investiture of the Earl of Warwich, at Newhaven in France, the first of May, an. 5. Eliz. it was as followeth,
First Garter repairing to the Earls Lodgings, MS fol. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 10. b. put on his Mantle in the next Chamber to the Earls, and thence proceeded into the Earls Chamber, where having made three Reverences, he buckled the Garter about his left leg, and next put on the George and Ribband about his neck; reading to the Earl the words of Signification, appointed to be pronounced at the Investiture; which done, Gar|ter retired into the Room, where he had put on his Mantle and there disrobed himself, and so the Ceremony ended.
And it seems to have been a custom about these times, for the Nobility and others, the Allyes or Friends to the Elect-Knight, to send unto him by Garter several Garters and Georges, as tokens of congratulation for the Honor he was

at this time to receive; which so soon as the Investiture was finished, and Gar|ter returned from putting off his Robe, he delivered unto him, with the parti|cular services and respects of those his Friends who had so bestowed them; for such we find to have been sent by Garter, and presented to the aforesaid MS fol. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 10. b. Earl of Warwick at New-haven, and to the Ex. Collect. W. le N. Cl. Lord Scroop at Carlisle, an. 26. Eliz.
At Garter's return to Court, he is obliged to deliver an account to the Soveraign how he hath discharged his employment, and therewith by special directions from the Elect-Knight, also present the Lib. C. p. 95. highest thanks he can express, as well to the Soveraign as the rest of the Knights-Companions, for honoring him with a reception into so illustrious an Order.
We shall close this Section, with a brief account of the Investiture of his High|ness the late Duke of Gloucester at the Hague, on Easter-day in the morning, be|ing the Lib. Carolin; p. 16. 14. day of April 1653. in reference to which Ceremony there was provided,

1. Collect. E. W. G. A Garter with the Motto, to be tyed about his left Leg.
2. A George in a Ribband, to put about his Neck.
3. An embroidered Cross of St. George within a Garter and Star, to be sowed on the left shoulder of the Dukes Cloak.
4. A Velvet Cushion, whereon the Ensigns and Ornaments of the Order, as also the Letter signifying his Election, were to be laid.

Moreover, for the honor of the Order, and his said Highness, Sir Edward Walker Garter, humbly proposed as followeth.
Collect. E. W. G. That he might be assisted by two or four Knights, in performing his duty.
That his Highness the Duke, might receive the Ensigns of the Order, in the Pre|sence Chamber of the Princess Royal, or in his own, accompanied with the Queen of Bohemia, her Highness Royal, and some other persons of Honor and Quality.
That his Highness having placed himself under the State, Garter should take the Cushion upon his Arms, on which were to be laid all the particular Orna|ments above mentioned; and being assisted with the Knights, and a passage left for him to make his three obeysances, he should proceed up towards the Duke, and lay the Cushion with the Ornaments on a Stool set neer his Highness for that purpose.
That he should signifie to his Highness, in few words, the cause of his coming; and then deliver into his hand the Soveraign's Letter.
That his Highness having received it, should break it open, and deliver it back to Garter to read, which he having done should return it to his Highness.
That after this, he should proceed to the Investiture of his Highness with the Ensigns of the Order.
Which having finished, briefly to represent unto his Highness, in a Speech somewhat of the quality and splendor of the Order.
And lastly, to kiss his Highness hand, and attend what he should please to say and so depart.
According to these proposals and in the same order, were all things performed; and the Speeches then made to his Highness by Sir Edw. Walker, and first that sig|nifying the cause of his coming was as follows.

Ex cod. Cl lect. May it plse your Royal Highness,
HIs sacred Majesty the King your Royal Brother, Soveraign of the most Noble ancient and renowned Order of Saint George, called the Gar|ter, hath commanded me Garter Principal King of Arms and Officer of the most Noble Order, humbly to attend your Highness, and from his Ma|jesty to deliver unto your Highness the Ensigns of that most Noble Order, together with Letters of Dispensation, for the present investing your Highness in all the honorary Ornaments and accidents thereof. And because the Reasons inducing his Majesty to Elect your Highness, into this most Noble Society and Fellowship of the Order, are best exprest in his Majesties graci|ous

Letters, I do humbly present them unto your Highness, that they may be read, and then I shall proceed in full obedience to his Majesties Commands, to Invest your Highness with the Garter and George therewith sent.
Having spoken this, he proceeded to the Investiture, which being finished, he thus continued his Speech.
Now that your Highness is by his Majesties Royal Election and Dispensation for the present Invested, and made a Companion of this most Noble and fa|mous Order, I shall humbly presume (according to the obligation of my Office) succinctly to represent unto you Highness, somewhat of the antiquity and rea|son of the Institution, what qualifications are requisite to all persons Elected, and how in all ages (since the Institution) this Order hath been highly valued and esteemed: All which, I believe, your Highness having lived from your Cradle un|der the power and barbarous restraint of the most unparallel'd Rebels and Tray|tors usurping in England, hath not yet known.
And first, for the Antiquity and Institution of this most Noble Order, your Highness most glorious and victorious Ancestor King Edward the Third (for the honor and encouragement of Martial Actions, and to oblige unto him by the neerest tyes of Royal favour and society, such persons of eminent birth, as by valiant and noble acts had highly merited of him) Instituted this Order, and Elected into the Fellowship thereof (with himself the Soveraign) the number of 25. other renowned Knights, by giving them the Garter, with this most significant and generous Motto, HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE, assigning them likewise a peculiar and stately habit, ordaining them yearly to attend him on the Feast of St. George, at his Castle of Windesore (the seat of the Foundation) where be regally entertained them, and framing Statutes which themselves and their Successors were obliged to observe, for the honor of the Soveraign and the Order.
By which Statutes, in the second place, the proper qualifications are fully de|clared, which are principally, that every person elected into this most Noble Or|der, be a Knight without reproach, a Gentleman of Blood and Arms, of three descents by Father and Mother, a man of courage, a lover of Iustice, and of unblemish'd fame and honor; who likewise at his Installation is by Oath obliged to defend and sustain the honor, quarrels, rights, and dominions of the Sove|raign, and to endeavour the augmentation of the Order; And if any one elect|ed into this most Noble Society shall be either convict of Heresie, Treason, Cow|ardise in flying from the Kings Banner or Standard in the field, or that by pro|digality he hath wilfully wasted his Patrimony, he may (if the Soveraign and Companions please) be degraded and deprived of the Order as unworthy thereof.
Lastly, The Institution of this most Noble Order hath been so inviolably ob|served, as that the Soveraign and Companions have never augmented their number, and but very rarely dispensed with any of the qualifications, whereby the dignity and splendor of the Order hath been entirely preserved. And so great a value and high esteem hath been set upon this most Noble Order, as the greatest and most powerful Monarchs of Europe have accounted it an honor to be Companions thereof, amongst whom the Emperor Sigismund, in the Reign of King Henry the Fifth, and that most potent and glorious Emperor Charles the Fifth, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, came personally into Eng|land to receive it. And although the number of the Companions from the first Institution (now full 303 years) is with your Highness but 444 persons, yet of them there have been 8 Emperors, and 52 Kings and Princes of Foreign Coun|trys, besides other most illustrious and eminent persons, some of them Stran|gers, the rest Subjects to the Kings of England, Soveraigns of the most Noble Order.
Thus Sir, I have represented unto your Highness, the noble ends for which this Order was Instituted, the qaulifications required, and the care in pre|serving the dignity and honor thereof: I shall now presume to add, that as your Highness most Royal extraction is equal to any Prince of Europe, so your

most towardly and generous inclination gives great assurane, that you will en|courage magnanimity and honorable enterprises, appear equal to the most re|nowned Princes that have been Companions of this most Noble Order; And as your Highness bears the Title of the Duke of Gloucester, so that you will inhe|rit the great and heroick virtues of that excellent Prine your Predecessor, Humphry Plantagenet Protector of the Realm and Person of his Nephew King Henry the Sixth, who by his great wisdom, bounty, and justice, obtained the title and appellation of the good Duke.
I shall conclude with my humble and real Prayers for long life, honor, and all prosperity to your Royal Highness, the most high, mighty, and excellent Prince, Henry Duke of Gloucester, Knight, and Companion of the most Noble Order of the Garter.



SECT. VI. Allowances and Rewards given to Garter for his service in this Employment.
THE Soveraign of this most Noble Order bears the charges of Garter, whensoever, and as often as he is sent to any Elect Knight Subject; either with Letters to signifie his Election, or the Garter and George, wherewith to invest him; and this is commonly proportioned, according to the length or shortness of the Journey.
The allowance for that Journey which Sir Gilbert Dethick Garter made into the Counties of Lincolne and Cumberland (by the Lib. C. p. 96. Soveraign's command given in Chapter) first to the Earl of Rutland, and next to the Lord Scroop, an. 26. Eliz. appears to have been Appendix. Num. XXIII. 20 l.
Besides the Soveraign's allowance to Garter, he hath been accustomed to re|ceive honorable gratuities and rewards from the Elect-Knight himself, after the Investiture performed; and these have usually been proportioned according to the esteem of the honor he receives, and his particular inclinations to Garter, and the service done by him. Among whom we find the Ex vet. MS. fol. penes Iohan. Vincent Gent. p. 159. Earl of Arundel, an. 17. H. 8. gave to Thomas Wriothesley Garter 10 l. in Angelotts, being then at his Mannor of Dawnley, and Ex vet. MS. fol. penes Iohan. Vincent Gent. p. 159. Ralph Earl of Westmerland, elected at the same time with the said Earl of Arundel, then at Myle-end, 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. But the Ib. p. 160. Earl of Northumberland, an. 23. H. 8. gave Garter for the verbal certifying him of his Ele|ction 4. l. though he went no farther than the Chapter-house door.
Lastly, an. 26. Eliz. the Earl of Rutland honorably rewarded Garter at Newark; and the Lord Scroop gave unto him Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. 30 l. in Gold, a Velvet Cloak, and a Gal|laway Nag, and to William Dethick York Herald, who then went along with Garter to Carlisle Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. 10 l. But since these times, the Knights-Elect have greatly en|larged their Gratuities to Garter, for his service upon this occasion.




CHAP. XI. OF Preparations FOR THE Personal Installation OF A KNIGHT.

SECT. I. That Installation gives the Title of Founder.
THE Installation or Inauguration of a Knight of this most Noble Order, consists in a conjunction of many Ceremonies, and contains the most so|lemn part of those, whereby so great an honor is conferr'd; indeed that which compleateth all the rest. And till this great Ceremony be duly and solemnly performed, the person Elected hath not the honor of being reckoned among the number of Founders, but barely passes for an Elect Knight, and no other. For the express Text is, E. 3. Stat. Art. 19. That in case a Knight Elect dye before his Installation, he shall not be named one of the Founders. And the reason is there given, E. 3. Stat. Art. 19. foras|much as he hath not had the full possession of his state; and in this point do the other H. 5. Stat. Art. 19. H. 8. Stat. Art. 20. Bodies of the Statutes agree. Howbeit assoon as the Ceremonies of In|stallation are compleatly finished, the Knight is unquestionably vested in full pos|session of all the Honors and Priviledges belonging to a Founder of this most No|ble Order.
But to quicken each Elect Knight, who is either a Subject to the Soveraign, or resides within his Realm (and consequently in a more ready capacity of re|ceiving Installation, then one remaining in Foreign parts) to the full attain|ment of his honor, or otherwise to wave what hath been conferr'd on him, by the Act of Election; the compass of E. 3. Stat.  19. H. 5. Stat. Art. 19. H.  Stat. . 20. one year after such his Election, is allow|ed him by the Statutes for Installation (albeit for sooner speeding thereof, the Statutes do as well appoint him to use all convenient diligence) otherwise his

Election is ordained to be absolutely Ibid. nul and void. Nor can any thing hinder but that the Soveraign may then freely proceed to a new Election; unless theIbid. Elect-Knight send or produce an excuse for such delay, sufficient and fit to be accepted by the Soveraign, or his Deputy, and the whole Society; or that the So|veraign himself think fit to defer the Ceremony of Installation for some longer time.
For which cause, when certain Articles concerning the honor of the Order had been prepared by the Soveraign's Lieutenant, and ten Knights-Companions, approved by the Soveraign, and in a Chapter held Lib. R. fol. 14  15. 24. April an. 21. Iac. R. order|ed to be observed; one of them was for hastning the Installation, after a Knight had been Elected, nevertheless with this Exception, Ibid. unless for some special cause, the Soveraign should think fit to defer the same, until the Eve or day of Saint George next following the time of Election.


SECT. II. Of the Time and Place appointed for Installation.
THE Feast of Installation hath not been hitherto fixed to any certain time, but always rested in the pleasure of the Soveraign to assign a convenient day; which hath been obtained, either upon the sute of the Knight-Elect, or some other of the Knights-Companions, whose favour and esteem with the Sove|raign was best able to prevail. Such a one do we find the Lord Burghley, MS. fol. penes. G. O. Y. p. 203. an. 35. Eliz. (partly in regard he had been Lieutenant at St. Georges Feast immedi|ately preceding, and partly by reason of his being Lord Treasurer of England) who on the behalf of the Earls of Shrewsbury and Cumberland obtained the 19. of Iune in the foresaid year, to be appointed for the day of their Installation.
It sometimes fell out that though the day for Installation was set down, nevertheless, upon some extraordinary occasion intervening, it hath been pro|togued to a further and more convenient time for the Soveraign's Affairs: and the most remarkable instance is that, an. 3.  4. Ph.  Mar. when the Lib. C. p. 20. Earl of Sussex, the Lord Grey, and Sir Robert Rochester, Knights Elect, had their Lib. C. p. 20. Instal|lation together with St. George's Feast, prorogued to the 10. of May in the year aforesaid. But Ib. p. 21. many and urgent affairs, relating both to the King and Queen, hapning about that time, not only the Ib. p. 21. Grand Feast, but the Solemnity of their Installations were in a Chapter held the 3. of the same Month, prorogued to the Ib. p. 21. 5. of December following, and on the last day of October preceding, were they again prorogued to the first Sunday after Twelf-day, in case the King should not return into England before the said 5. of December. After all this on the 5. of Ianuary following, the Grand Feast was prorogued a fourth time to the 20. of February next coming. Nevertheless it was then Ordered, that the Earl of Sus|sex (one of the three Elect Knights) should be forthwith Installed, which was per|formed on the 8. of the same Ianuary. And the 6. of February following, the Lord Grey also obtained an appointment for his Installation, and that was cele|brated the 20. of April ensuing; but we do not find that Sir Robert Rochester ever received that honor.
But though the time of Installation be arbitrary and uncertain, yet hath the place been from the Institution of the Order, fixt (as an essential Priviledge) only to the Soveraign's free Chappel of St. George in the Castle of Windesor; within whose Choire stand erected the Soveraign's and Knights-Companions Stalls, and under its sacred Roof their Banners and Atchievements are set up, as Monu|ments of their high deservings, and so great honor. For albeit the celebration of the Grand Feast of St. George, hapned to be withdrawn from Windesor, by a

Decree past an. Lib. C. p. 54. 9. Eliz. nevertheless the Ibid. Feast of Installation was therein ex|cepted, and appointed to be solemnized at that place. And this was again pro|vided for among the before mentioned Orders, an. Iac. Regis 21. to wit, p. 15. That after an Election made of a Knight of the Order, his Installation should be perform|ed at Windesor, according to the ancient Custom and Statutes of the Order.
When therefore the Soveraign hath been pleased to prefix a certain day, for Installation, in order to this great Solemnity, several things are necessarily to be prepared; as namely, (1.) a Commission to admit and install the Elect-Knight, (2.) Letters to each of the Commissioners, and the Elect-Knight, for their repair to Windesor, (3.) Warrants for the Soveraign's Livery, (4.) a Bill or Warrant for the removal of Stalls and Atchievements (all which are to be obtained from the Soveraign under his Sign manual by the Chancellor of the Order) and (5.) lastly the Knights own Preparations; among which his Atchievements are to be got in readiness for setting up, so soon as he is Installed.


SECT. III. Of Commissions for Installation.
IN the first place we are to note, that no Elect-Knight can be Installed unless by the Soveraign of the Order himself, or (being present) by such of the Knights-Companions whom he shall verbally authorize, or (if absent) by his Com|mission drawn up in writing, and past under the great Seal of the Order, di|rected either to his Lieutenant, or Knights-Commissioners.
We have met with but one Instance, where the Soveraign ath been pleased to honor a Knight by performing the Ceremony of Installation himself, and that was in the case Philip King of Castile and Leon an. 22, H. 7. yet it is probable enough that Sigismond the Emperor, and anciently some other Foreign Princess of eminence and dignity, might receive Installation from other of the Sove|raigns, though no memorial thereof hath been transmitted to us. As to the So|veraign's verbal appointment, we shall mention it Chap. 12. Sect. 6. by and by: But in reference to Installation by Commission we shall speak of it here. For it was Ordained by the Statutes of Institution, Art. 25. vide eliam H. 5. Stat. Art. 25. That in case the Soveraign should be absent out of the King|dom at the time of Installation of any of the Knights, so that he could not personally perform those things his Office obliged him to, it should be lawful for him to consti|tute as his Deputy in this affair, whomsoever of the Society he should think fit, and he to have power and authority in the Soveraign's name to perform and execute those things, which it would have been his own part to have done, had he been present.
By virtue of this Article the Soveraign's Deputy or Lieutenant (in his absence) performed the Ceremony before the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, which was usually done at the Feast of St. George (for the Celebration of which he had ano|ther Commission) but in the Commission given out for Installation, formerly the Lieutenant was first named, and the Appendix Num. XXIV. Knights-Companions appointed for his Assi|stants at the said Feast, were joined with him in the Commission for Installa|tion, to assist in that Ceremony also; but of later times, the Commission hath pass'd to the Num. XXV. Lieutenant alone.
King Henry the Eight enlarged the powers given by the former Statutes to a Deputy, to H. 8. Stat. Art. 28. two or more of the Knights-Companions, that should exercise the same by the Soveraign's Letters of Commission. And therefore by the liberty and priviledge of this Article, whensoever after the Soveraigns did appoint an Instal|lation, at other times of the year, than at the Feast of St. George, they then dele|gated their authority to such of the Knights-Companions as were thought most fit to perform this great Ceremony.
And the very next year after making this Statute, we find such a Appendix Num. XXVI. Commission

issued to the Marquess Dorset, and Earls of Devonshire and Kent, to Instal the Lord Ferrars of Chartley; the substance of which hath been ever since, and is yet retained, though the form hath received some little Variation, as may be seen by two other Commissions immediately following in the Num. XXVII  XXVIII. Appendix.
The particular powers granted by the Commissioiners are these, to accept and admit the Knight Elect into the Order, to receive his Oath, and to Instal him: and the general power is, to do and accomplish every thing which belongeth to his due Admittance and full Installation, as to the Statutes and laudable Usage, Rules, and Customs of this Order appertaineth.
We shall only add this observation out of the Commission given to the Lib. N. Pa. 306. Mar|quess Dorset and the Lord Cobham, an. 5. E. 6. for Installation of the Lord Dary (which else is the same verbatim, with former Commissions) that in the last clause of general power, the word Lib. N. Pa. 306. Vsage is put down, instead of the words Statutes and laudable Customs, which were generally inserted in the more ancient Com|missions; perhaps, as restraining the Ceremonies of Installation, to such as were in use about that time, (when many Ceremonies accustomably used were forborn) not what the Statutes and laudable Customs of formerly days, had appointed and pracised: Howbeit, shortly after, these words were restored to the Commissi|ons of Installation as appears from a Appendix Num. XXIX. Commission made to the Earl of Hunting|don, and Lord Clynton, an. 2.  3. Ph.  Mar. for the Installation of Anthony Brown Viscount Mountague.


SECT. IV. Letters of Summons.
BEsides the Commission impowering the Soveraign's Lieutenant, or Knights-Commissioners therein named to Instal the Elect-Knight, it hath been usual for the Soveraign (upon the Chancellors motion) to issue out Letters of Sum|mons under his privy Signet (but of late under the Signet of the Order) both to the Commissioners for Installation, and to the Elect Knights. Those to the Commissioners are directed severally to each, nominated in the Commission: the effect whereof, is to give them notice of the Installation, and to require their repair to Windesor, against the day therein assigned, to the end the Elect Knight might proceed to his Installation; a Precedent whereof is also added in the Num. XXX. Ap|pendix. But at the Installation of Algernon Earl of Northumberland, an. 11. Car. 1. a Numb. XXVIII. Clause to this purpose is inserted into the Commission it self.
Those directed to the Elect Knight, pass likewise under the Soveraign's Sign manual and Signet of the Order, by which he is required to repair to Windesor Castle, at a certain day therein prefixt, to proceed to his Installation, according, to the Statutes of the Order; and of this kind we have also inserted a Form in the Numb. XXXI. Appendix. Where note, that if there be two or more Knights appointed to be Installed on the same day, the like Letter is sent to each of them, the difference being only in the direction.
Besides these Letters sent from the Soveraign, the Chancellor (in case the So|veraign afford his presence) in his Circular Letters to the Knights-Companions for their repair to the Feast of St. George, gives them also intimation of the de|signed Installation. And if the said Feast be held either by the Soveraign or his Lieutenant, he dispatcheth a Letter to the Prelate of the Order, signifying the Soveraign's commands for his attendance at the day appointed: In both which cases, as also if the Installation be dispatcht by Commissioners, he writes his Letters to the three inferior Officers of the Order, purporting the same com|mand. The conveyance of all which appertain to Garter, and are left to his care and trust by the Cap. . Constitutions relating to the Officers of the Order; whose allow|ance and reward upon these and such like service, shall be noted in its due place.



SECT. V. Warrant for the Livery of the Order.
THE third thing to be obtained by the Chancellor of the Order, is the Sove|raign's Warrant, directed to the Master of the Great Wardrobe for the time being, to deliver so much Velvet for the Livery of the Order as will make the Knight Elect a Surcoat and Hood, and as much Sarcenet or Taffety, as will line them.
Of such a Warrant there is an ancient Precedent in Latin entred in the Black Book of the Order, and transferred to the Num XXXII Appendix; together with which, we have also inserted another Num XXIII. Precedent in English, for delivery forth of materials for the Livery, to Sir Iohn Wallop Knight, Lib. N. p. 291. Elected an. 35. H. 8. And in the same form run all the Warrants we have seen in the Reigns of Ex vet. Cod. MS. in Offic. mag. Gard. Regin pag. 72.81.126.127.148. c. Videfis lib. Warr. dormant in eod. Offic. pag. 57.60.68.94. c. Et lib. tertium Warr. particul. pag. 126.171.231.110.298. Queen Mary, and Ex vet. Cod. MS. in Offic. mag. Gard. Regin pag. 72.81.126.127.148. c. Videfis lib. Warr. dormant in eod. Offic. pag. 57.60.68.94. c. Et lib. tertium Warr. particul. pag. 126.171.231.110.298. Queen Elizabeth.
There is also to be provided a Book, wherein King Henry the Eighths En|glish Statutes are written in a fair and legible hand upon Vellom: having in the beginning the Soveraign's Arms impaled, with those of the Order, and the proper Arms of the Knight for whom the Book is provided, both fairly limned and surrounded with the Garter.
This Book of Statutes is prepared by the Register of the Order, to whom, for the writing there is an allowance made, which generally in the Reigns of King Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Eliz. was Ex Autogr. pene W. Le N. Cl. 2 l. but at King Iames his coming to the Crown, it was enlarged to Ex Autogr. pene W. Le N. Cl. 3 l. 6 . 8 d.


SECT. VI. The Removal of Atchievements and Plates.
BEsides these particulars before mentioned, there is a Warrant or Scheme pre|pared for the Soveraign to sign, wherein the order of the Stalls in the Choire at Windesor is set down, according as he appoints them to stand at the ensuing In|stallation; by virtue of which, Garter is impowered to removed the Plates and Atchievements of the present Knights-Companions, that so way be made for the Elect Knight, or Knights, and to fix the new Plates and Atchievements within and over the Stalls, in such order as they are ranked in the said Scheme.
In reference to this alteration, Garter (so soon as the Soveraign's pleasure is known touching an Installation) brings to the Chancellor of the Order, the Names of the present Knights-Companions, ranked in the order they then sit in, their Stalls (in which the Stalls void are to be so noted) to the end he may pre|sent them to the Soveraign; who, upon observing the series wherein they be al|ready placed, may the better consider and determine how to alter and seat both them, and the new Elect Knights.
And we find in the vacancy of Garter's Office, this Employment was put up|on Clarenceux; for Ex Collect. R. Cook modo Clarenc. pag. 8. an. 27. Eliz. the Soveraign's Warrant for removal and placing of Plates and Atchievements was delivered to Ex Collect. R. Cook modo Clarenc. pag. 8. him five days before the Installa|tion of the Earl of Rutland, the Lords Cobham and Scroop, who thereupon fixed them according to the direction therein given.
This Section may be further enlarged, by adding thereunto an account, upon what ground this Alteration and Removal came to be made, and how it

continueth now in practice, seeing it was otherwise at the Institution of the Or|der; wherein we must first have recourse to the Statutes of the Order, and an|cient practice grounded thereupon.
Among the Statutes,1. The Elect Knight to succeed in|to the Stall of his immediate Predecessor. those of Institution did Ordain, E. 3. Stat. Art. 21. vide etiam H. 5. Stat. Art. 21. H. 8. Stat. A. 22. That if any Earl, Baron, or Knight Batchellor should depart this life, he that succeeded in his place, of what condition or state soever, should possess the same Stall, which his Predecessor held be|fore, without changing: So that it might happen for an Earl (or Duke) to succeed a Knight, and a Knight an Earl (or Duke). And it was thus at first appointed, E. 3. Stat. Art. 21. That it might be known who were the first Founders of this most Noble Order.
Now how punctually this Article of the Statutes hath been observed, and what care was generally taken (for a long time after the Institution of the Order) that none chosen should interrupt or change this course, we shall shew in the follow|ing Instances; conceiving it very material to make use of those Tables, yet pre|served in the Chapter-house at Windesor (but heretofore in the Heylin's Hist. of St. George, Part. 3. c. 4. sect. 1. Choire of St. George's Chappel there) wherein are collected the Names of all those Knights Companions, who succeeded one another in each Stall until the beginning of King Henry the Seventh's Reign, a transcript whereof we have inserted in the Appen|dix next after the Constitutions belonging to the Officers of the Order.
From which Series of succession, and other Authorities, we shall note how exactly the Law in this point hath been kept and observed, even unto King Henry the Eighth's Reign (when it received some alteration in this particular) with reference no less to Election than Installation: for we find in the Annals se|veral Knights designed to the Stall of their immediate Predecessor, by the ho|nor only of Election, albeit prevented of Installation by death, or other acci|dental occasion, and the Statutes do not bind him only, who shall fortune to attain the honor of Installation, but him E. 3. Stat. Art. 21. who shall come after or succeed the de|sunct Knight, which may as well be understood of, and applied to an Elect, as Installed Knight; though the before mentioned Tables take notice only of the latter of these.
First therefore, we shall instance in foreign Kings, among whom we see the King of Denmark [Ericus] to have received Installation in Lib. N. pag. 18.  64. King Henry the Fifth's Reign, not according to his own state and degree (as a King) but into the Stall of that Knight-Companion whom he succeeded, namely the Duke of Bavaria, it being the eighth on the Soveraign's side, whose first Predecessor and Founder was Sir Iohn Grey of Codnore Castle in the Country of Darby.
Besides, Iohn [the First] King of Portugal (a Knight-Companion in Lib. N. pag. 18.  64. King Henry the Fifth's time also) was installed in the second Stall on the Soveraign's side, which belonged to Henry Duke of Lancaster, his first Predeccessor, and to this King did succeed (in the same Stall) his Son Edward King of Portugal elected Ibid. p. 91. an. 13. H. 6. to whose Successor [Humfry Duke of Gloucester] Ib. p. 114. an. 34. of the same King, succeeded Alphonsus [the Fifth] King of Portugal, and to him, as saith the French Table, Iohn [the Second] King of Portugal. But I rather doubt this Ta|ble (as to the last King) is mistaken for the second Stall, not on the Soveraign's but Princes side; because there we find (as may be seen) George Duke of Clarence seated; and the Black Book saith, this King of Portugal was Elected, an. 22. E. 4. Ib. p. 149. in the place of George Duke of Clarence, whose Stall had been long vacant, and whereinto an. 19. E. 4. had been Elected (though perhaps not installed) Ib. p. 145. sub finem. Henry King of Spain. So the King of Poland [Casemir] was Elected. Ib. p. 105. an. 28. H. 6. into the sixth Stall on the Princs side, at that time void by the death of the Duke of Conimbero, whose first Founder was Sir Iohn Mohun.
Again Alphonsus King of Aragon and Naples, Ibid p. 105. an. 38. H. 6. was Elected into the Stall of Don Albro Vasques Dalmadea Count d' Averence, being the seventh on the Soveraign's side, Sir Hugh Courtney first possessing it. Ferdinand King of Naples and Sicely, Elected MS. penes Syl. Taylr. fol. 160. an. 3. E. 4. was Installed in the third Stall on the Princes side, Ralph Earl of Stafford having been the first installed therein. To this King succeeded Hercules Duke of Ferrara, Lib. N. p. 145. Elected, an. 19. E. 4. and after him Guido Vbaldus Duke of Vrbin, chosen a Companion of this most Noble So|ciety by King Henry the Seventh.
Lastly, we find that Alphonsus King of Sicely and Ierusalem, being Elected al|so by King Henry the Seventh, received his Installation in the second Stall on the Princes side, whose first Predecessor was Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick.
In the second place, if we descend to Foreign Princes, it may be observed that William Duke of Gueldres, Elected by King Richard the Second, was in|stalled in the sixth Stall on the Soveraign's side, which Sir Iohn Beauchamp, one of the first Founders sometime possest. That William of Henault Earl of Oster|vant (afterwards Earl of Holland, Haynalt, and Zeland) chosen Companion of the Order by the said King Richard, was installed in the eleventh Stall on the Sove|raign's side, whose first Predecessor was Sir Iohn Chados. That Robert Count Palatine of the Rhine, and Duke of Bavaria, Elected by King Henry the Fourth, was installed in the eighth Stall on the Soveraign's side.
That Philip Duke of Burgundy was Elected by Lib. N. p. 7. King Henry the Fifth (though not Installed) into the Stall of Sir Iohn Clifford, which appears to be the eleventh on the Princes side. Sir Iames Audeley one of the first Founders, having been first placed therein. And that an. 28. H. 6. Henry Duke of Brunswick was Elect|ed into the Duke of Suffolk's Stall (viz. the seventh on the same side) it having been the Stall of Sir Thomas Holand (Earl of Kent) one of the first Founders. And lastly, that Frederick Duke of Vrbyn sat in the twelfth Stall on the Sove|raign's side, he therein succeeding Sir Walter Blount, an. 14. E. 4. and having Sir Otho Holand (Brother to the aforesaid Sir Tho. Holand) for his Founder.
Add to these the Sons of Kings, and we find Peter Duke of Conimbero, one of the Sons to Iohn the First King of Portugal (Elected Ibid. p. 84. an. 5. H. 6.) to have been Installed in the sixth Stall on the Princes side, therein succeeding the Duke of Exceter. So also Henry Duke of Visen (another of this Kings Sons) Elected an. 21. H. 6. succeeded Sir Simon Felbrige in the lowest Stall on the Princes side, whose first Predecessor therein was Sir Walter Pavely.
And as the Statute was carefully observed with reference to the Election and Installation of Foreign Princes, so no less in relation to the Princes of the Blood at home, among whom, let us (in the third place) observe the placing the Sons of the Founder of this most Noble Order, where first we see Lyonel Duke of Cla|rence his third Son to have been Installed in the sixth Stall on the Soveraign's side, whose immediate Predecessor was Sir Iohn Beauchamp one of the first Foun|ders. In like manner Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster his Fourth Son was In|stalled in the seventh Stall on the Princes side, having Sir Thomas Holand for his Predecessor, and a Founder.
Again Edmund of Langley Duke of York his fifth Son was Installed in the se|venth Stall on the Soveraign's side, Sir Hugh Courtney, one of the first Founders, being first placed therein. And Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester his sixth Son sat in the eighth Stall on the Soveraign's side, whose first Predecessor was Sir Iohn Grey, one of the first Founders likewise.
It may be further observed that the Rule in the Statute was strictly pursued in relation also to the Sons of King Henry the Fourth, for Thomas Duke of Cla|rence his second Son, was seated in the seventh Stall on the Princes side. Iohn Duke of Bedford and Regent of France his third Son, was installed in the seventh Stall on the Soveraign's side; viz. opposite to the Duke of Clarence his elder Brother, and in a Stall of higher dignity. And Humfry Duke of Gloucester his fourth Son, st in the eleventh Stall on the same side.
To instance next in the Brothers and Sons of King Edward the Fourth; George Duke of Clarence was placed in the second Stall on the Princes side. Richard Duke of Gloucester (afterwards King of England and Soveraign of this Order) was Installed in the fifth Stall on the Soveraign's side, whose first Predecessor was Sir Iohn Lisle. And Richard Duke of York, the said Kings second Son, received his Installation in the fourth Stall on the Princes side.
In the last place, if we review the foresaid Tables, we shall find, that as the Knights-Companions of higher dignity, assumed the Stalls (when they became vacant) though often of the lower sort, so some of the lowest degree among them, have had the honor to be Installed in Seats of superior rank; and this meerly by virtue and observance of the Law in this case provided.
Among these Knights-Companions we shall first reckon Sir Philip la Vache, a Gascon, who in the Reign of King Richard the Second was first Installed in the Princes Stall (that being void by the death of Iohn of Gaunt, in whose room he hapned to be Elected) though afterwards removed to the third Stall on the So|veraign's side. As also Sir Iohn Dabrichcourt, Elected an. 1. H. 5. who died pos|sest of the said Princes Stall in the fifth of the said King.
Next, Sir Nicholas Sarnesfield, Standard-Bearer to the Founder, who succeed|ed Hugh Earl of Stafford, and after him Sir William Arundel, imediate Succes|sor to the said Sir Nicholas, were both installed in the second Stall on the Sove|raign's side. Sir Iohn Robsart an Heynower, was an. 9. H. 5. installed in the se|cond Stall on the Princes side. Sir Gilbert Talbot, and after him Sir Iohn Grey were both installed in the third Stall on the Soveraign's side. And in the third Stall on the Princes side was Ralph Stafford one of the first Founders installed, in which Stall successively sate Sir Alan Boxhull, Sir Bryan Stapleton, and Sir Wil|liam Scroop.
We could add here divers other instances, how the Knights-Companions, both in the case of Elections and Installations, have succeeded in the Stalls of their immediate Predecessors; but these already inserted may suffice, since they in|clude the chief and most considerable particulars; and sufficiently manifest that the usage and practice down to the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, was pursuant to the ancient Law of the Order.
But we are here to note, that notwithstanding each Knight was by the before mentioned Article appointed to succeed his immediate Predecessor, in the Stall void by his death; yet doth there follow an Exception, as to the Stall belonging to the Prince of Wales. This Stall is the first on the left hand at the entrance into the Choire of St. George's Chappel at Windesor, and wherein Edward the Black Prince was Installed; from this Stall doth the whole range of Stalls on the same side take their denomination, and to which the E. 3. Stat. Art. 21. H. 5. Stat. Art. 21. H. 8. Stat. Art. 22. Prince of Wales assoon as he is Elected into the Order, hath a due Title.
But though this Stall de jure belongs to the Prince of Wales; nevertheless heretofore when the Soveraign had no Heir, then was it (for the present) di|sposed of (otherwise a defect in the full number of Knights-Companions would have ensued) to some other Knight, who received the honor of Installation therein.
The first that obtained that honor (besides Princes of Wales) was Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, it being conferr'd on him by Decree of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions (Richard the Second, having no issue, neither then nor afterwards) and thereupon removed thither, from the seventh Stall on the same side, wherein he had been installed at his first admission into the Order.
But the first Knight-Companion that hapned to be installed in it, was Sir Philip l Vache (a little before remembred) and a very great honor it was, for one of his rank: But it fell to him by the then Law of the Order, being elected into the room of the said Duke of Lancaster, who dyed possest thereof.
Howbeit shortly after (such was the change of times) King Henry the Fourth coming to the Crown, and his eldest Son being Rot. Parl. an 1. H. 4. n. 72. created Prince of Wales, laid then claim to this Stall by virtue of the foresaid Statute, and had it surrendred to him. Nevertheless, that the former possessor might suffer as little deminution in the honor of his Session, as might be, he was removed no lower than to the Stall, which King Henry the Fourth lately held when Earl of Derby, viz. the third on the Soveraign's side, and had now relinquished for the Soveraign's roy|al Stall.
Upon the death of King Henry the Fourth, and removal of King Henry the Fifth from the Princes Stall (whereby a vacancy therein ensued) to the Soveraign's Seat: Sir Iohn Dabrichcourt (Elected an. 1. H. 5.) was Installed therein, and he (an. 5. of the same King) dying possest thereof (of which a notable testimony re|mains, by the continuance of his Plate in that Stall to this day) and the Sove|raign yet unmarried, the Emperor Sigismond became the next Successor to Sir Iohn Dabrichcourt, both into the Society of the Order, and the Princes Stall.

He dying Lib. N. p. 94. Albert Duke of Austria, afterwards Emperor (there being hitherto no Prince born) was Elected in his room, an. 16. H. 6. but this Emperor was never Installed, and thereupon during his life (neer 20. years after his Election) the Princes Stall was not otherwise disposed of, but remained vacant, and so is it noted in several Pages of the Ibid pag. 95.101.104.108.109.112.113.114. Black Book.
But some few years before King Henry the Sixth dyed, he had a Son born, to wit, in the 32. year of his Reign, in which regard, though the Emperor Fre|derick was Elected into the Order, Ib. p. 117. an. 35. H. 6. upon the death of Albert, yet was the said Stall reserved for the Prince (but he never possest it) and the Em|peror Ib. p. 119. an. 37. H. 6. Installed by Proxy in the Duke of Somersets Stall, then late|ly deceased, being the eighth on the Princes side.
In King Edward the Fourth's Reign, we find the right in this Stall returned again to Edward Prince of Wales, his eldest Son; and in King Henry the Seventh's Reign to Prince Arthur; but upon his death, Maximilian Son of Frederick King of the Romans, and after Emperor, sat therein: So also did the Emperor Charles the Fifth (his Grandchild) in regard that as yet, there was no Son born to the Soveraign.
But Prince Edward being born, while this Stall was possest by Charles the Fifth, it hapned also that the King of Scots dyed, which caused King Henry the Eight to reserve his Stall (the third on the Soveraign's side) for the Prince, al|beit he never had possession of it, nor was ever Elected into the Order, though we find him An. 32. H. 8. Lib. N. p. 281. once registred in a Scruteny. And King Henry the Eighth dying, Prince Edward became both by inheritance and succession, Soveraign of this most Noble Order, by virtue of the first Article of the Statutes; not needing any Ce|remony to make him so.
From this time to the eighth year of King Iames there was no Prince of Wales; which King, finding the Princes Stall void at his entrance upon the English Throne, did (in a Chapter held the Ex. Collect. A. V. W. 3. of Iuly, an. 1. Iac. Regis) advance the French King Henry the Fourth, from the second Stall on the Soveraign's side in|to it; and appointed Prince Henry to be Installed Ex. Collect. A. V. W. in that Kings void seat, where he remained till an. 3. Iacobi. that Christierne the Fourth King of Denmark came to be Installed by his Proxy, to make way for whom, the Prince (though his Se|nior both by Election and Installation) was removed yet lower, viz. to the Ex. Collect. praef. R. Cooke, 1. fol. 17. se|cond Stall on the Princes side, and the said King Installed in the Seat which Prince Henry had to that time possest. And yet MS. penes Edw. Fau|conbridge. an. 9. Iac. R. upon the death of the foresaid French King, not the Prince (as was his right, since now he was created Prince of Wales) but the MS. penes Edw. Fau|conbridge. said King of Denmark was translated to the Princes vacant Stall; hereupon Prince Henry was returned again to the MS. penes Edw. Fau|conbridge. second Stall on the Soveraign's side, which he enjoyed while he lived, and upon his death MS. penes Edw. Fau|conbridge. Prince Charles was removed into it, an. 11. Iac. R. and there rested all King Iames his Reign.
In like manner, when the present Soveraign came to be Installed, the then So|veraign finding him prevented for assuming the Princes Stall (the foresaid King of Denmark yet living) assigned to him the second Stall on the Soveraign's side, (wherein himself sat, while Prince of Wales) and where hitherto the present So|veraign's Plate remains fixt as a memorial of his Installation therein.
2. Removal upon extra|ordinary Oc|casion, by Order of Chap|ter.Albeit (as hath been before cleered) that the Knights-Companions at their Election or Installation succeeded the immediate defunct Knight in his Stall, yet do we also observe, that somtimes, after Installation, as an especial mark of fa|vour and indulgence, the Soveraign hath been pleased (though but seldom and rarely) to advance a Knight-Companion to a higher Stall (when it became va|cant) then that wherein he was at first Installed. And though there be no such liberty given by the Law of the Order, nevertheless in the first Precedent (very early after the Institution) in the case of Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster (who as is before noted was removed from the seventh Stall on the Princes side (wherein he was first placed) to the Princes Stall it self) this act is said to be done See the second Table in the Appendix. by the decree of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions; and no doubt, but as this was done by so good authority, so upon no less inducements to the Soveraign and

whole Society. But there are few of these extraordinary cases, which (taking up little time) we will remember here.
William of Henalt Earl of Ostervant, was advanced by King Richard the Se|cond from the eleventh Stall on the Soveraign's side, to the Duke of Britains Stall, it being the second on the Princes side. Next, Humfry Duke of Gloucester, in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, having been first installed in the eleventh Stall on the Soveraign's side, was (when he came to be Lord Protector) removed to the second Stall on the same side. Afterward Richard Nevill Earl of Warwick, by the Lib. N. p. 121. consent of the Knights-Companions in Chapter, an. 39. H. 6. was translated to the Duke of Buckingham's Stall, the Lord Bonvill, to the Lord Scales his Seat, Sir Thomas Kyriell to the place of the Earl of Shrewsbury, and the Lord Wenlock to the Stall of Viscount Beaumont. And lastly, Ferdinand King of Naples and Sicily, was removed to the third Stall on the Soveraign's side, after he had been installed in the third on the Princes side: yet this was an advance of so little honor, as it is scarce worth taking notice of, being but the very next above that, wherein he was first Installed.
But King Henry the Eighth thinking it requisite for the Soveraigns of this most Noble Order,3. Translation at pleasure by the Soveraigns Warrant. to be impowered by a general Law, to do that at pleasure, which the former Soveraign's did not but by the power of particular Acts or Orders in Chapter; after he had confirmed the Art. 22. ancient Law of succeeding in the Stall of the immediate Predecessor, not to be changed without the Soveraign's License (ne|vertheless excepting Strangers) he in the next succeeding Article established this Priviledge upon Himself and Successors, Art. 23. That if there were any Place or Stall void, the Soveraign at his own pleasure might advance and translate any Knight of the Society into the void Stall, so that it were higher than that wherein he sat before.
This in effect did vacat the ancient Law of succeeding in Stalls by him seem|ingly confirm'd to Knights-Subjects; for afterward Translations preceding to Installations, became so frequent, that the right an Elect-Knight had to his Pre|decessors Stall was seldom enjoyed. Howbeit, hereby he setled a power to gratifie and oblige such of the Knights-Companions as should be thought worthy the honor of advancing, without recourse had to a Chapter for a special and particular allowance: and from hence the Custom began to issue out Warrants under the Soveraign's Sign manual for the Translation of Stalls, some conveni|ent time before the day of Installation approched, and consequently the alte|ration and removal of such of the Knights-Companions Helms, Crests, Banners, and Plates, who should receive the honor of a higher Place; their Atchieve|ments being by virtue of such Warrants set up over the Stalls, to which they were advanced, there to remain during the time their owners continued therein.
And now that we may see in what manner King Henry the Eighth made use of the powers and priviledges setled by the foresaid Articles, both as to the re|moval of Stalls, and doing it by special Warrant (which is Garters discharge) we shall exhibit a few Examples; first shewing in what order the Stalls were ranked, shortly after passing this Law, that by comparing some following years with these Schemes, the alteration may with greater readiness be discerned.

Knights of the Order of the Garter, as they stood ranked in their Stalls, Anno 17. H. 8.


The Soveraign's side.
The Princes side.


1. The Soveraign.
1. The Emperor Charles the Fifth.Ex Collect. Tho. Wrothes pen. G. O. Y. f. 1. b.


2. Duke of Richmond.
2. Archduke of Austria.


3. Marquess Dorset.
3. Duke of Norfolk.


4. Marquess of Exceter.
4. Earl of Northumberland.


5. Earl of Shrewsbury.
5. Duke of Suffolk.


6. Earl of Essex.
6. Earl of Arundel.


7. Earl of Worcester.
7. Viscount Lisle.


8. Viscount Fitz Walter.
8. Lord Bergaveny.


9. Lord Dacre.
9. Lord Ferrars.


10. Lord Dudley.
10. Lord Darcy.


11. Earl of Westmerland.
11. Lord La Ware.


12. Earl of Rutland.
12. Lord Sandys.


13. Viscount Rocheford.
13. Sir Richard Wingfield.




Knights of the Order of the Garter as they stood ranked in their Stalls Anno 18. H. 8.


Ibid.1. The Soveraign.
1. The Emperor Charles the Fifth.


2. Duke of Richmond.
2. Archduke of Austria.


3. Marquess Dorset.
3. Duke of Norfolk.


4. Marquess of Exceter.
4. Earl of Northumberland.


5. Earl of Shrewsbury.
5. Duke of Suffolk.


6. Earl of ssex.
6. Earl of Arundel.


7. Earl of Westmerland.
7. Viscount Lisle.


8. Viscount Fitz-Walter.
8. Lord Bergaveny.


9. Earl of Rutland.
9. Lord Ferrars.


10. Lord Dudley.
10. Lord Darcy.


11. Void.
11. Viscount Rochford.


12. Lord Mountjoy.
12. Lord Sandys.


13. Sir William Fitz Williams.
13. Sir Henry Guldeford.


In the latter of these two Schemes, drawn for the Translation of Stalls, an. 18. H. 8. it may be observ'd, first, that on the Soveraign's side the Earl of Westmer|land was advanced from the eleventh Stall to the seventh, being void by the death of the Earl of Worcester: The Earl of Rutland from the twelfth to the ninth, that being also void by the Lord Dacres death; then Viscount Rochford from the thirteenth Stall to the eleventh on the Princess side, where the Lord La Ware lately sat, but then also deceased. And lastly, the Lib. N. p. 252. three newly Elect Knights were thus disposed of at their Installation; first the Lord Montjoy into the twelfth Stall, then lately void by the removal of the Earl of Rutland, next Sir William Fitz Williams into the thirteenth Stall, from whence Viscount Rochford was removed, and lastly, Sir Henry Guldeford into that void by the death of Sir Richard Wingfield, viz. the thirteenth on the Princes side; but the Stall from whence the Earl of Westmerland was removed, remained yet void.


An appointment for the Translation of Stalls upon admission of Francis the French King, An. 19. H. 8.


Ex Collect. prefat. Tho. Wrothersley, fol. 12. vide etiam MS. in Offic. Arm. [M. 17.] fol. 31.1. The Soveraign.
1. The Emperor.


2. The French King.
2. The King of Bohemia.


3. Duke of Richmond.
3. Duke of Norfolk.


4. Marquess of Exceter.
4. Marquess Dorset.


5. Earl of Shrewsbury.
5. Duke of Suffolk.


6. Earl of Essex.
6. Earl of Arundel.


7. Earl of Westmerland.
7. Viscount Lisle.


8. Viscount Fitz Walter.
8. Lord Bergaveny.


9. Earl of Rutland.
9. Lord Ferrars.


10. Lord Dudley.
10. Lord Darcy.


11. Earl of Oxenford.
11. Viscount Rochford.


12. Lord Mountjoy.
12. Lord Sandys.


13. Sir William Fitz Williams.
13. Sir Henry Guildford.


The setlement of Stalls made the Ex Collect W. le N. Cl. 26. of Ianuary, in the following year, af|fords us these observations.
First, by reason of the French King Election (which past the Lib. N. p. 215. 21. Oct. an. 18. H. 8.) and to make room for his Instalment in the second Stall on the Soveraign's side (which hitherto had been possessed by the Duke of Richmond) both the said Duke and Marquess of Dorset were removed lower, the Duke into the said Mar|ques's Stall, and the Marquess into the Earl of Northumberlads, then lately void by death.
And this was now so done, that the Soveraign might express what honor he could to a King, between whom and him there had lately past so great endear|ments. All the rest of the Stalls may be observed to stand ranked, as they did the year before; and the void Stall on the Soveraign's side to be here supplied by the Installation of the Earl of Oxford, Elected in the same Chapter with the French King.
In the 20.21, and 22. years of King Henry the Eighth, the Stalls received no alteration; and but little an. 23. of the same King; when the death of the Mar|quess Dorset occasioned advancing the Duke of Suffolk into his void Stall, and placing the Earl of Arundel in the Dukes. Whereupon the Earl of Northum|berland (Elected in the room of the Marquess Dorset) was Installed in that which the Earl of Arundel relinquished: and in this order they continued the MS. in Offic. Arm [M. 17.] sol. 33. b. 24. and 25. years of this King.
Nor was there any removal made an. 26. H. 8. for albeit the Earls of Beau|mont and Newblnke [French Noblemen] were elected in a Chapter held at Callire the 27. of Oct. an. 24. H. 8. yet at their Installation, they were placed in the two Stalls, then void by the death of two of the Knights-Companions, viz. the Ex Cllect. Tho. Wrothe|sley Garter, pe|nes G. O. Y. f. 6. b. first in the Stall of the Lord Dudley, and the other in that of Sir Henry Guilford.
But the alterations became yet more considerable, and extended almost to a general Translation, which were made in the Stalls, an. 27. H. 8. upon the ad|mission of Iames the Fifth, King of Scotland, (one Stall being then void by the death of the Lord Montjoy) for there remained unchanged only these five, viz. the Earl of Rutland, and Earl of Beaumont (but called only Lord Beaumont in the Warrant for Translation) on the Soveraign's side; and the Emperor, the King of Bohemia, and Duke of Suffolk on the Princess side.
Nevertheless this so great an alteration was not made but upon consultation in Lib. N. p. 267. Chapter held at Greenwich on St. George's day, in the aforesaid year, where the Soveraign with the assent of the rest of the Knights-Companions present, thought it expedient, that forasmuch as the said King of Scots, was newly ad|mitted into the Society of the Order, and that there ought to be assigned a Stall answerable to his greatness; that the Stalls of the Knights-Companions should be translated, Ibid. so as the said King should be placed next to the King of the Romans, and the rest to be ranked according to the Soveraign's pleasure; and thereupon it was given in charge to Garter, to see the same accordingly perform|ed. The setlement of the Stalls at this time, as it was sub-signed by the Sove|raign, coming to our hands, we have exactly transcribed hither.


The Kings Highness appointment for the Stall of the King of Scots, An. R. sui 27.23. April 1535.


1. The Soveraign.
1. The Emperor.


2. The French King.
2. The King of the Romans.


3. The King of Scotland.
3. The Duke of Richmond.


4. The Duke of Norfolk.
4. The Duke of Suffolk.


5. The Marquess of Exceter.
5. The Earl of Shrewsbury.


6. The Earl of Arundel.
6. The Earl of Essex.


7. The Earl of Northumberland.
7. The Earl of Westmerland.


8. The Earl of Wiltshire.
8. The Earl of Sussex.


9. The Earl of Rutland.
9. The Earl of Oxenford.


10. The Lord Beaumond.
10. The Viscount Lysle.


11. The Lord Burgaveny.
11. The Earl of Newblanke.


12. The Lord Ferrars.
12. The Lord Darcy.


13. The Lord Sandys.
13. Sir William Fitz William.



Henry R.


In this Scheme we find the King of Scots, placed in the Duke of Richmond's Stall, who with the Duke of Norfolk, the Earls of Shrewsbury, Arundel, Essex, Northumberland, Westmerland, and Sussex, were all removed into the next Stall below that which each of them sat in before, whether it were on the Soveraign's or Princes side. The Marquess of Exeter to the next below his own on the So|veraign's side, Viscount Lisle from the seventh to the tenth Stall on the Prince's side, the Lord Abergaveny from the eighth on the Prince's side, to the eleventh on the Soveraign's side; the Lord Ferrars from the ninth on the Prince's side, to the twelfth on the Soveraign's side; the Lord Darcy from the tenth on the Prince's side, to the twelfth on the same; and the Lord Sandys from the twelfth on the Prince's side, to the thirteenth on the Soveraign's.
And as these before mentioned Knights Companions were removed lower, so the Earls of Oxford, Wilts, and Newblanke, were honored with higher Stalls than they before possest; for the first of them was advanced from the eleventh Stall on the Soveraign's side to the ninth on the Prince's, the second from the eleventh on the Prince's side to the eighth on the Soveraign's and the third from the thir|teenth of the Prince's to the eleventh on the same side. So that in this last ex|ample, though many of the Knights-Companions were removed lower, yet it may be observed, that the English Nobility were now ranked according to their Degrees; first Dukes, next a Marquess, then Earls, next Viscounts, afterwards Barons, and last of all Knights.
Some few removals were made in the following years of this King, but none of so great note as this last mentioned, and therefore we need not enlarge our Instances. Nor were there any considerable translations, in the Reigns of King Edward the Sixth, or Queen Mary.
But immediately after Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, by consent of the Knights-Companions in Chapter held the 12. of Ianuary an. 1. Eliz. the At|chievments of Lib. C. pag. 28. Philip King of Spain (late Soveraign of the Order) were re|moved to the Stall of the Emperor Ferdinand, void by his being advanced in|to the Princes Stall, for which Lib. C. pag. 28. Garter had then command given him.
And when the French King Charles the Ninth was Elected into this Order, to wit, on the Lib. C. p. 48. morrow after St. George's day an. 6. Eliz. it occasioned the Soveraign then to alter some Stalls, to leave one vacant for him: and the better to observe this alteration (which was considerable) we shall first shew how they stood ranked on the Eve of the said Feast.


Elizabeth R.



MS. pen. W. D. N. fol. 14.1. The Soveraign.
1. The Emperor Ferdinand.


2. The King of Spain.
2. The Duke of Savoy.


3. The Constable of France.
3. The Duke of Holstein.


4. The Earl of Arundel.
4. The Marquess of Winchester.


5. The Earl of Derby.
5. The Earl of Penbroke.


6. The Duke of Norfolk.
6. The Lord Clynton.


7. Void.
7. The Marquess of Northampton.


8. Void.
8. Void.


9. The Lord Effingham.
9. The Earl of Sussex.


10. The Earl of Shrewsbury.
10. The Lord Hastings.


11. The Viscount Mountagu.
11. The Lord Robert Dudley.


12. The Earl of Northumberland.
12. The Earl of Warwick.


13. Void.
13. The Lord Hunsdon.


The 14. of May following, being appointed for the Installation of Francis Earl of Bedford, and Sir Henry Sidney, Elected at the same time with the French King, the Stalls were removed, by the Soveraign's appointment, and setled in the following order.


Elizabeth R.



1. The Soveraign.
1. The Emperor Ferdinand.Idem fol. 17.


2. The King of Spain.
2. Void.


3. The Duke of Savoy.
3. The Constable of France.


4. The Earl of Arundel.
4. The Duke of Holstein.


5. The Marquess of Winchester.
5. The Earl of Derby.


6. The Earl of Penbroke.
6. The Duke of Norfolk.


7. The Lord Clynton.
7. The Marquess of Northampton.


8. The Lord Effingham.
8. The Earl of Sussex.


9. The Earl of Shrewsbury.
9. The Lord Hastings.


10. The Viscount Mountagu.
10. The Lord Robert Dudley.


11. The Earl of Northumberland.
11. The Earl of Warwick.


12. The Lord Hunsdon.
12. The Earl of Bedford.


13. Void.
13. Sir Henry Sidney.


Where, beside the translation of the Stranger Princes (whom we shall men|tion a little below) we see the Marquess of Winchester, the Earls of Derby and Penbroke, the Duke of Norfolk, and the Lord Clynton, were each of them seat|ed in the next lower Stall to that they enjoyed before. And by the advance|ment of the Lord Effingham, Earl of Shrewsbury, Viscount Mountagu, and Earl of Northumberland, each a Stall higher on the Soveraign's side; and the like advance of the Earl of Sussex, Lord Hastings, Lord Dudley, and Earl of Warwick, on the Princes side; the eighth Stall on the Soveraign's side, and that opposite thereunto on the Princes, were now filled up. The Lord Hunsdon was likewise advanced from the lowest Stall on the Princes side, to the twelfth on the Sove|raign's; and lastly the two Elect-Knights were installed in the twelfth and thirteenth Stall on the Prince's side.
Beside the power established upon the Soveraign's of this most Noble Order, of translating Stalls, when a vacancy hapned, King Henry the Eighth further added this larger Prerogative Art. 23. That the Soveraign once in his life, might if it pleased him, make a general Translation of all the Stalls at his pleasure, except of Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Dukes, who (being setled in Stalls agreeable to their Dignities) should keep their Stalls and Places (if such a general Translation happened) unless advanced to a higher Room and Stall. In which Translation, the long continuance in the Order, and the praises, worthiness, and merits of the Knights-Companions were to be considered and remembred.
But this branch of the Soveraign's Prerogative in the Order, was never yet made use of as we can find (though that Translation an. 27. H. 8. came som|thing neer it) perhaps lest it might raise too great animosities among the Knights Subjects, forasmuch as that of translating only (when there hapned a vacancy) Begot great emulations, which at length introduced an alteration, and to which we shall pass, after we have taken notice of a Clause added in the 22. Article of King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, relating to Stranger Princes.
Here therefore it is to be observed, that the ancient Law of succeeding in Stalls, was also, in relation to them, whollyaltered: For King Henry the Eighth upon the establishment of his Body of Statutes, not only appointed those Stran|gers, then present of the Order, to be seated next himself, but that Art. 22: all Emperors, Kings, and Princes should hold their Stalls after their Estates, and the very next un|to the Soveraign, though Knights-Subjects upon vacancy became removeable at pleasure.
Hereupon the Emperor Collect. W. le N. Cl. Maximilian the Second,Collect. W. le N. Cl. and after him Rudolph the Second his Son, had the Princes Stall assigned them after their Election into the Order.
The French Kings MS. in Offic. Arm. [M. 17.] f. 31. Francis the First, Ex ipso Autogr. Henry the Second, Ex ipso Autogr. Charles the Ninth, Collect. A. V. W. Henry the Third, and Ex Collect. praef R. Cok f. 12. Henry the Fourth, were Installed in the next below, being the second on the Soveraign's side. And when there were more then one King at a time in the Order, the second Stall on the Prince's side was assigned to him, of whom the former had precedency allowed him, in relation to his State and Dignity, not of antiquity in the Order; as it was by the King of Ex praef. Collect. Tho. Wriothesly. Bo|hemia, an. 19. H. 8. The King of MS. penes W D. N. f. 19. Spain, an. 8. Eliz. So also upon the same Rule, and for the same Reason was somtimes the third Stall on the Soveraign's side possest by Kings, as in the cases of Ex ipso Autogr. Iames the Fifth King of Scotland, an. 27. H. 8. and Collect praef. R. Cook f. 6. Frederick the Third King of Denmark, an. 25. Eliz.
And lastly we find, that Princes Strangers were placed next to Kings, ac|cording to their state as were the Dukes of Ex ips Au|togr. Savoy, Montmorency, and Holstein an. 3. Eliz. MS. penes G. O. Y f 115. Iohn Casimire Count Palatine of the Rhine an. 25. Eliz. and Collect. A. V. W. Frederick Prince Palatine, and Maurice Prince of Orange, an. 11. Iac. Regis.
But notwithstanding these Assignments of Stalls to Strangers, they were ne|vertheless subject to removal; somtime to Stalls higher than their own, upon the death of a Stranger, who died possest of a superior Stall, and somtimes again to others lower, for the advancing a Knight of greater dignity, where the up|per Stalls were already fill'd: else could they not be placed or hold their Stalls according to their respective States, as the Statute doth enjoin; nor indeed would any Stranger King (since the ancient manner of succeeding in Stalls re|ceived alteration) have accepted of Election into the Order, unless room had been made to seat him in a Stall sutable to his Dignity.
Instances of Advancement in translation of Stalls are of Ferdinand Emperor of Germany, who after the death of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, his Brother, was advanced from the second Stall on the Prince's side into the Prince's Stall, Lib. C p 28. an. 1. Eliz. Of Philip the Second King of Spain, advanced from the second on the Prince's side to the Ib. p. 37. second on the Soveraign's an. 2. Eliz. after the death of the French King Henry the Second. Of Henry the Fourth of France, advanced from the second on the Soveraign's side to the Collect. A. V. W. Prince's Stall, an. 1. Iac. R. Of Christerne the Fourth King of Denmark, an. 9. Iac. R. from the second on the Soveraign's side to the said MS. penes Ed Faucn|bridge ge. Princes Stall, after the death of the French King Henry the Fourth. And of Christierne the Fifth King of Denmark, advanced from the fourth Stall on the Prince's side, to the second on the Soveraign's, an. 22. Car. 2.
Among the Princes Strangers, we find Emanuel Duke of Savoy advanced from the third on the Prince's side to the Lib. C. p. 37. second of the same side, an. 2. Eliz. Iohn Casimire Count Palatine from the fourth on the Soveraign's side, to the Cllect. W. le N Cl. third on the rince's an. 32. Eliz. four years after the Duke of Holstein's death. Frederick Prince Palatine an. 1. Car. 1. was advanced from the second on the Prince's to the Collect. W. le N Cl. second on the Soveraign's side: And Henry Frederick Prince of Orange, from the third on the Soveraign's to the Collect. W. le N Cl. second on the Prince's, an. 10. Car. 1. up|on the death of the King of Sweden.
In those instances of Removals lower after Installation, we shall first remem|ber, That an. 6. Eliz. when the French King Charles the Ninth was Elected, the superior Stalls were already fill'd with Strangers, and there was no way left to make room for him to the Stall designed him by the Soveraign, but by removal of some of those Knights Strangers lower, and thereupon for the present, Emanuel Duke of Savoy was removed one Stall lower, viz. to the MS. penes W. D. N. f. 17. third on the Sove|raign's side, Anne Duke of Montmorency to the MS. penes W. D. N. f. 17. third on the Prince's side, and the Duke of Holstein to the fourth on the same side.
But the said French King was not Installed until the 16. of Ianuary an. 8. Eliz. and before that it was concluded to MS. fol. 24. b. remove the King of Spain to the Duke of Savoy's Stall, voided as before, and to Instal the French King in the King of Spain's void Stall, MS. fol. 24. b. which was accordingly done; so that on this occasion there were four Strangers, and five Knights Subjects (before remembred) removed lower, to make way for the French King.
The 20. of April, an. 2. Iac. Reg. the Duke of Wirtemberg was installed in

the Collect. praef. Rob. Cooke, p. 15. third Stall on the Prince's side, and on St. George's Eve in the following year advanced a Stall higher, viz. to the third on the Soveraign's side. The 16. of May ensuing Ib. p. 16. Vlrick Duke of Holst had assigned him that Stall from whence the Duke of Wirtemberg was advanced, and installed therein: But against the Installation of Christierne the Fourth King of Denmark (which hap|ned to be the 9. of September in the same year) the Ib. p. 17. Duke of Wirtemberg was removed back to the Seat wherein he was Installed, and the Ib. p. 17. Duke of Holst ad|vanced into his void Stall. All which will appear more clear, from the ap|pointment of Stalls on these occasions which follow.


A Remove of Banners and Plates at the Installation of Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, Anno. Iac. Reg. 2.Ex Collect. praef. R. Cooke f. 15.


Iames R.



1. The Soveraign
1. The French King.


2. The Prince
2. Void.


3. Earl of Nottingham.
3. Duke of Wirtemberg.


4. Earl of Ormond.
4. Earl of Dorset.


5. Earl of Shrewsbury.
5. Earl of Cumberland.


6. Earl of Northumberland.
6. Earl of Worcester.


7. Lord Sheffield.
7. Earl of Suffolk.


8. Earl of Devonshire.
8. Sir Henry Lea


9. Earl of Sussex.
9. Lord Scrope.


10. Earl of Darby.
10. Lord Burghley.


11. Duke of Lenox.
11. Earl of Southampton.


12. Earl of Marr.
12. Earl of Penbroke.


13. Void.
13. Void.




The order of Stalls at St. George's Feast, Ibid. an. Iac. Regis 3.


Iames R.



1. The Soveraign.
1. The French King.


2. The Prince.
2. Void.


3. Duke of Wirtemberg.
3. Earl of Nottingham.


4. Earl of Ormond.
4. Earl of Dorset.


5. Earl of Shrewsbury.
5. Earl of Cumberland.


6. Earl of Northumberland.
6. Earl of Worcester.


7. Lord Sheffield.
7. Earl of Suffolk.


8. Earl of Devonshire.
8. Sir Henry Lea.


9. Earl of Sussex.
9. Lord Scrope.


10. Earl of Darby,
10. Lord Burleigh.


11. Duke of Lenox.
11. Earl of Southampton.


12. Earl of Marr.
12. Earl of Penbroke.


13. Void.
13. Void.




A Remove of Banners and Plates at the Installation of Vlrick Duke of Holst,Ibid. Fol. 16. the 16. of May an. Iac. R. 3.


Iames R.



1. The Soveraign.
1. The French King.


2. The Prince.
2. Void.


3. Duke of Wirtemberg.
3. Duke of Holst.


4. Earl of Nottingham.
4. Earl of Ormond.


5. Earl of Dorset.
5. Earl of Shrewsbury.


6. Earl of Cumberland.
6. Earl of Northumberland.


7. Earl of Worcester.
7. Lord Sheffeild.


8. Earl of Suffolk.
8. Earl of Devonshire.


9. Sir Henry Lea.
9. Earl of Sussex.


10. Lord Scroope.
10. Earl of Derby.


11. Earl of Exceter.
11. Duke of Lenox.


12. Earl of Southampton.
12. Earl of Marr.


13. Earl of Penbroke.
13. Earl of Northampton.




Ib. Fol. 17.A Remove of Banners and Plates at the Installation of Christierne the Fourth, King of Denmark, the 8. of Sept. an. Iac. Reg. 3.


Iames R.



1. The Soveraign.
1. The French King.


2. The King of Denmark.
2. The Prinoe.


3. Duke of Holst.
3. Duke of Wirtemberg.


4. Earl of Nottingham.
4. Earl of Ormond.


5. Earl of Dorset.
5. Earl of Shrewsbury.


6. Earl of Cumberland.
6. Earl of Northumberland.


7. Earl of Worcester.
7. Lord Sheffeild.


8. Earl of Suffolk.
8. Earl of Devonshire.


9. Sir Henry Lea.
9. Earl of Sussex.


10. Lord Scrope.
10. Earl of Derby.


11. Earl of Exceter.
11. Duke of Lenox.


12. Earl of Southampton.
12. Earl of Marr.


13. Earl of Penbroke.
13. Earl of Northampton.


Here in this last Scheme we see Prince Henry was removed from the second on the Soveraign's, to the second on the Prince's side, to make room for the King of Denmark. And though the Duke of Chevereux An. 3. Car. 1. upon the death of the Duke of Brunswick, was advanced from the third Stall on the So|veraign's side into the MS. penes Edw. Fau|conbridge gen. Duke of Brunswick's void Stall, namely the second on the Prince's side: nevertheless, the year following, upon the admittance of Gu|stavus Adolphus King of Sweden, he was removed MS. penes Edw. Fau|conbridge gen. two Stalls lower; and at that time the Prince Elector Palatine one.
4. The ancient Law of suc|ceeding in Stalls altered. But let us return from the Removal and Translation of a Knight-Subject, af|ter he had been installed, to the Assignment of his Stall at the time of Installa|tion it self, and (in the last place) note, That on the 24. of April an. 6. Eliz. in|stead of the ancient Law which appointed each Elect-Knight to succeed in the Stall of his Predecessor, and the latter, which permitted a Translation at plea|sure, a new one was introduced; being framed (as was conceived) upon a more equal ground than the former, and to avoid as much as might be the danger of emulation, which was this, Lib. C. p. 49. That all Knights who for the future were admitted into the Society of the Order, should take and be installed in the lowest Stall, ac|cording to the course and seniority of their Election; except only stranger Kings and Princes.
Whereupon it came to pass, that when a Knight-Subject Elect was to be In|stalled (he taking the lowest Stall) all the Knights-Companions, between him and the vacant Stall, were removed higher, to the end such vacancy might be supplied: or if two or more were to be Installed at one time, they took the lowest Stalls according to the seniority of their Election; the senior Knight-Elect being placed higher than the junior. And albeit this manner and order in Removals is now become a thing of course, and the method easie; yet may it not be done, or the Atchievements, Banners, or Plates removed, unless the So|veraign Sign a Warrant as formerly, wherein they are orderly ranked, to ju|stifie Garter for so doing, which will be the more easily understood by the inser|tion of a Scheme or two.



The order of Stalls as they stood at the Feast of St. George an. 29. Eliz.Ex Collect. . V. W


Elizabeth R.



1. The Soveraign.
1. Void.


2. The French King.
2. The King of Spain.


3. The King of Denmark.
3. Void.


4. Duke Iohn Casimire.
4. Void.


5. The Viscount Mountague.
5. The Earl of Leicester.


6. The Earl of Shrewsbery.
6. The Earl of Warwick.


7. The Lord Hunsdon.
7. Void.


8. Void.
8. The Earl of Worcester.


9. The Earl of Huntingdon.
9. The Lord Burghley.


10. The Lord Grey.
10. The Earl of Derby.


11. The Earl of Penbroke.
11. The Lord Howard of Effingham.


12. Void.
12. The Lord Cobham.


13. The Lord Scrope.
13. Void.




A Translation of Stalls made against the Feast of Installation, an. 30. Eliz.


Elizabeth R.



1. The Soveraign.
1. Void.


2. The French King.
2. The King of Spain.


3. The King of Denmark.
3. Void.


4. Duke Iohn Casimire.
4. Void.


5. The Viscount Mountague.
5. The Earl of Leicester.


6. The Earl of Shrewsbury.
6. The Earl of Warwick.


7. The Lord Hunsdon.
7. The Earl of Worcester


8. The Earl of Huntingdon.
8. The Lord Burleigh.


9. The Lord Grey.
9. The Earl of Derby.


10. The Earl of Penbroke.
10. The Lord Howard of Effingham.


11. The Lord Cobham.
11. The Lord Scroope.


12. The Earl of Essex.
12. The Earl of Ormond.


13. Sir Christopher Hatton.
13. Void.


The first of these Schemes shew how the Stalls were ranked on St. George's Eve, an. 29. Eliz. and the second how altered against the Installation of the Earls of Essex and Ormond, and of Sir Christopher Hatton, the 23. of May an. 30. Eliz. by which those three Elect Knights appear to be Installed in the lowermost Stalls, (as the last mentioned Decree enjoins) and by reason that the Earl of Essex and Sir Christopher Hatton were setled on the Soveraign's side, the vacancy before in the eighth and twelfth Stalls of the same side became filled up; the Earl of Hun|tingdon (seated before in the ninth Stall) being advanced into the eighth, the Lord Grey into the ninth, and the Earl of Penbroke into the tenth Stall.
So also by the like advance of the Earl of Worcester into the seventh on the Prince's side, the vacancy is therein supplied, and the other Knights-Companions seated below him, by a joint and orderly removal, left the twelfth Stall for the Earl of Ormond, and the thirteenth void for the next Elect Knight.
The like order was observed by King Iames, as appears by another Scheme of the Stalls, setled in Chapter held the Lib. C. p. 10. 3. of Iuly an. 1. Iac. R. at the Election of the Duke of Lenox, the Earls of Southampton, Marr, and Penbroke.



Ex Collect. Io|bannis Vincent Gen.Stalls altered at a Chapter held at Windesor, the 3. of Iuly an. 1. Iac. R.


Iames R.



1. The Soveraign.
1. The French King.


2. The Prince.
2. Void.


3. The Earl of Nottingham.
3. Void.


4. The Earl of Ormond.
4. The Lord Buckhurst.


5. The Earl of Salop.
5. The Earl of Cumberland.


6. The Earl of Northumberland.
6. The Earl of Worcester.


7. The Lord Sheffeild.
7. The Lord Howard of Waldon.


8. The Lord Hunsdon.
8. The Lord Montjoy.


9. Sir Henry Lea.
9. The Earl of Sussex.


10. The Lord Cobham.
10. The Lord Scrope.


11. The Earl of Derby.
11. The Lord Burghley.


12. The Duke of Lenox.
12. The Earl of Southampton.


13. The Earl of Marr.
13. The Earl of Penbroke.


From hence it appears that these Elect-Knights were Installed in the lowest Stalls; and so were all other Elect-Knights Subjects throughout his Reign and since, except the Prince of Wales, and Charles Duke of York, Sons to the said Soveraign: for the Prince was Installed in the second Stall on the Soveraign's side; and upon the election of the said Duke of York, MS. fol. penes E. W. G. f. 149. a an. 9. Iac. R. the second Stall on the Prince's side was first designed for him, and in Ibid. f. 149. b. place answerable thereun|to, did he proceed to the Chappel, the morrow after St. George's day upon which he was elected. But upon Whitsunday following, at a solemn debate in Chapter, it was determined; Ibid. f. 149. b. That notwithstanding he was the Soveraign's Son, yet should he have no more preheminence than other Knights-Companions, but come in as a Puisne, and that his Ibid. f. 149. b. Atchievements (which it seems had been set up over the Ibid. f. 149. b. second Stall on the Prince's side) should therefore be removed to that Stall next above the Viscount Rochesters (being the eleventh on the same side) and so to be Ibid. f. 149. b. consorted with the Earl of Montgomery (before whom he proceeded on Whitson Monday to the Chapter-house towards his Installation) and it was moreover then Decreed, Ibid. f. 149. b. that all Princes not absolute, should be installed thenceforth in the puisne place.
But after this, endeavours were used to advance the said Duke into the Stall to which he was first appointed, and the Kings of Arms were consulted with in the case, who certified that Ex. ipso Au|togr. Richard Duke of York second Son to King Ed|ward the Fourth, was Installed in the fourth Stall on the Prince's side, and had precedence of the Duke of Suffolk, the Earls of Dowglas and Essex, who were elected long before him: That Henry Duke of York, second Son to King Henry the seventh, was Installed in the third Stall on the Soveraign's side, and had place of the Duke of Buckingham, and the Earls of Oxford and Derby his anci|ents: and lastly, that Henry Fitz Roy Duke of Richmond, base Son of King Hen|ry the Eighth, had place and precedence before the Dukes of Norfolk and Suf|folk and others. Whereupon it was thought fit, that the Soveraign's Children should be as well priviledged in this case, as Stranger Princes; and therefore in another MS. penes Edw. Fau|conbridge, gen. Chapter, held at Whitehall on the 13. of April (being Easter Monday) an. 10. Iac. R. the Order which past the year before for making the Duke a Puisne, was MS. penes Edw. Fau|conbridge, gen. abrogated, and he translated to the second Stall on the Prince's side, and paired with Prince Henry; as may be also seen by the order of the Stalls then setled, and entred in the Pag. 174. Blue Book of the Order.
We need not bring hither more instances in proof of the observation of the Chapter Act made an. 6. Eliz. as it hath relation to Knight Subjects, since the same hath been to this time punctually pursued; but in regard Strangers are therein excepted, it will be necessary to note here concerning them, that the

rule and practice continued as established by King Henry the Eighth, viz. That they were Installed in Seats next to the Soveraign, according to their state and dignity.
We shall only add an instance of the manner of placing both Strangers and Knights Subjects at one and the same time: for at the coming of King Charles the First to the Crown, there were of both conditions to be Installed in one day, namely the Duke of Brunswick a Stranger Prince, the Earls of Salisbury and Car|lisle Knights Subjects, elected by King Iames the Lib. C. p. 23. 31. of December in the 22. year of his Reign; as also the Earls of Dorset and Holland, with Viscount Andover, elected by the said King Charles, the Ibid. p. 26. 15. of May following, and the Duke of Chevereux elected the Ibid. p. 26. 4. of Iuly after. And when the Removal of Stalls was considered on for admission of these seven Elect Knights, it was determined, that the Dukes of Brunswick and Chevereux should be installed in the uppermost Stalls among Strangers, as King Henry the Eighth had ordained, but the Knights Subjects in the lowermost Stalls, according to the constant practice, since passing the Decree an. 6. Eliz. as doth appear from the setlement of Stalls then made, and thus Intituled.


A Remove of Banners and Plates at the Feast of St. George,Ex ipso An|togy. and Installation holden at Windesor the 13.14. and 15. days of December, an 1625. At which time were Installed the Dukes of Brunswick and Chevereux, the Earls of Salisbury, Carlisle, Holland, Dorset, and the Viscount Andover, as followeth.


Charles R.



1. King Charles Soveraign.
1. The King of Denmark.


2. The Prince Palatine.
2. The Duke of Brunswick.


3. The Duke of Chevereux.
3. The Earl of Northumberland.


4. The Earl of Worcester.
4. The Lord Sheffield.


5. The Earl of Suffolk.
5. The Earl of Sussex.


6. The Earl of Derby.
6. The Earl of Marr.


7. The Earl of Penbroke.
7. The Earl of Montgomery.


8. The Earl of Arundel.
8. The Earl of Somerset.


9. The Earl of Kelly.
9. The Visc. Wallingford.


10. The Earl of Rutland.
10. The Duke of Buckingham.


11. The Earl of Leicester.
11. The Earl of Salisbury.


12. The Earl of Carlisle.
12. The Earl of Dorset.


13. The Earl of Holland.
13. The Viscount Andover.


Shortly after the Restauration of the present Soveraign to his Crowns and Kingdoms, when several Knights-Companions, both Strangers and Subjects, were to be Installed, debate was had in Chapter held at Whitehall the 10. of April, an. 13. Car. 2. about placing their Atchievements over their Stalls, whereupon the fol|lowing Order issued.

Charles R.
WHereas divers Elected Knights and Companions of our most Noble Order of the Garter,Ex Collect. E. W. G. are by our special appointment, to be installed in the Chappel of our Castle of Windesor, upon the 15. day of this instant, and that some of them who are Strangers, do not yet, nor are likely to appear either in their own persons or by their sufficient Proxies, at the said Instalment, and so might run hazard to lose the benefit and advantage of their pre-election in point of rank and precedency in respect of some of our Subject Knights, who though since Elected will be first instal|led, without some expedient taken therein to prevent it. There being no reason (nor is it in our intention) that those Noble Persons should suffer that prejudice for want

of that usual formality, and for which they are not in fault, but others, who accord|ing to the Statutes and ancient Custom were to give timely, advertisement to the said Foreign elected Knights, and to summon them by themselves or Proxies to assist at the said Instalment: Our will and pleasure is you proceed forthwith to the placing of the Hatchments of all the respective Knights and Companions of our said Order, whether Installed, or Elect, Subject, or Strangers, over the Stalls which we do in manner as followeth assign and appoint them in our foresaid Chappel.


2. The Duke of York.
1. 


1. The Sove|raign
2. The Elector Palatine.


3. Prince Elector of Brandenburg.
3. Prince of Orange.


4. Prince Rupert.
4. Prince Edward.


5. Earl of Salisbury.
5. Earl of Berkshire.


6. Earl of Northumberland.
6. Duke of Espernon.


7. Duke of Ormond.
7. Duke of Buckingham,


8. Earl of Southampton.
8. Marquess of Newcastle.


9. Earl of Bristol.
9. Prince of Tarente.


10. Count Marshin.
10. Duke of Albemarle.


11. Earl of Sandwich.
11. Earl of Oxford.


12. Duke of Richmond.
12. Earl of Lindsey.


13. Earl of Manchester.
13. Earl of Strafford.


And for so doing this shall be your sufficient Warrant, any Statute or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.
Given under the Signet of Our said Order at our Court at Whitehall the 10. of April 1661. By the Soveraign's command Hen. de Vic.

To our trusty and wellbeloved servant Sir Edward Walker Knight, Gar|ter, and Principal King of Arms of our most Noble Order of the Garter.


So that here we see the Stranger Princes are setled in the upper Stalls, neerest the Soveraign, according to their several dignities and degrees, and all the Knights Subjects (among whom were reckoned the Duke of Espernon, the Prince of Tarente, and Count Marshi) according to the times of their Elections: this being in confirmation as well of the setlement made by King Henry the Eighth, as of Queen Elizabeth before remembred. And among the Knights Companions in this setlement it is to be noted, that though the Earl of Southampton did not receive his Garter and George, till the Soveraign's happy return into England, and then from his own hands yet was his place and precedence here allowed him according to the time of his Election, in the Isle of Iersey, in Ianuary an. Dom. 1649. some few days before Duke Hamilton, and the Marquess of Newcastl were elected.
But the 10. of Ianuary, an. 14. Car. 2. the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, assembled in Chapter, Ordered, Lib. Caro|lin. p. 43. That thence forward all Princes Strangers of what condition soever, should have precedence among themselves, according to the senio|rity of their Elections and Installations; and thereupon the Soveraign's Warrant issued out to Garter under the Signet of the Order, dated the 30. of March fol|lowing, to authorise him to set up their Atchievements in the Chappel of St. George at Windesor, in the order here exhibited.



Charles R.



Lib. Caroin. p. 43. 1. The Soveraign.
1. Void.


2. Duke of York.
2. Prince Elector Palatine.


3. Prince Rupert.
3. Prince of Orange.


4. Prince Elector of Brandenburg.
4. Prince of Denmark.


5. Earl of Salisbury.
5. Earl of Berkshire.


6. Earl of Northumberland.
6. Duke of Ormond.


7. Duke of Buckingham.
7. Earl of Southampton.


8. Marquess of Newcastle.
8. Earl of Bristoll.


9. Prince of Tarente.
9. Count Marshin.


10. Duke of Albemarle.
10. Earl of Sandwich.


11. Earl of Oxford.
11. Duke of Richmond.


12. Earl of Lindsey.
12. Earl of Manchester.


13. Earl of Strafford.
13. Duke of Monmouth.


Nevertheless the 19. of November, and. Dom. 1669. at a Chapter held at White|hall, upon due consideration had of the Law made by King Henry the Eighth, for placing of Strangers, as also of Queen Elizabeth for Knights Subjects, and to remove all Orders made in alteration thereof; the Soveraign by the advice and consent of the most Noble Companions present, was pleased to Ordain and Declare,
Ibid. p. 7. First, that the Princes of Wales, and such Emperors and Kings, that should be of the Order, should be placed in the neerest Stalls, to that of the So|veraign, according to their Elections and Installations.
Then, that all other Soveraign Princes, and Princes of the Blood, should be placed in the Stalls, next unto Kings according to their seniority in the Order.
And thirdly, that all other his Majesties Subjects and Strangers, not of the dignity above mentioned, should be installed in the lowest Stalls, according to their antiquity in the Order, and the ancient Practice.
Thus stands the Law for setlement of Stalls at this day. And whereas the Stall commonly called the Prince's Stall, was and had been long void, the Soveraign by the advice of the most Noble Companions (present in Chapter the said 19. of November) was pleased to order, Ib. p. 73. That the present King of Sweden should by his Proxie be placed in that Stall, and his Atchievements hung up thereon according|ly, in convenient time: All which being done as this Order directed, the Stalls at the Feast of St. George celebrated, an. 23. Car. 2. were ordered in the following manner.


1. The Soveraign.
1. The King of Sweden.


2. King of Denmark.
2. Duke of York.


3. Prince Elector Palatine.
3. Prince Rupert.


4. Prince of Orange.
4. Prince Elector of Brandenburgh.


5. Prince Elector of Saxony,
5. Duke of Ormond.


6. Duke of Buckingham.
6. Duke of Newcastle.


7. Earl of Bristol.
7. Prince of Tarente.


8. Count Marshin.
8. Earl of Sandwich.


9. Earl of Oxford.
9. Duke of Richmond.


10. Earl of Strafford.
10. Duke of Monmouth.


11. Duke of Albemarle.
11. Void.


12. Void.
12. Void.


13. Void.
13. Void.






SECT. VII. Preparations made by the Knight Elect.
HAving in the preceding Section laid down the ancient Law of succession in|to void Stalls, and of Translation from one Stall to another; with several instances, both while such removals were at the Soveraign's pleasure, and after, when they became confin'd to the regular course now observed; and having al|so discourt concerning those things which are to be prepared for the Installa|tion of a Knight Subject on the Soveraign's part, and for which his Warrants and Letters issue forth, as is before shewed at large: we come now to consider, what is further to be prepared for the Knight Elect, at his own charge, against the day of this great Solemnity, and they are chiefly these which follow.

1. A Mantle or upper Robe, with its appurtenances.
2. A Collar of the Garter, and Great George.
3. A Cap of black Velvet adorn'd with Plumes.
4. An Helm, Crest, Mantlings, and Sword.
5. A Banner of his Arms.
6. A Plate of his Arms and Stile.
7. A Cushen, to carry his Robes and Collar upon.
8. Lodging Scutcheons.

 MantleWe do not find that the Mantle of the Order was anciently bestowed by the Soveraign upon Knights Subjects, as was the Kirtle or Surcoat; nor indeed of late (unless now and then as a peculiar favour) for seeing the Lib. R. p. 43.  120. Injunction for returning the Mantle upon the death of a Knight-Companion, is restrained to such only on whom the Soveraign should vouchsafe to bestow them, it is thence evident, that the Soveraign is not obliged to give the Mantle at all, nor to all, but only where himself pleaseth. But it appears that the Soveraign always be|stowed the Mantle (together with the rest of the Habit) upon Strangers, after he had Elected any of them into the Society of the Order. And when the whole Habit was sent over by Garter to the King of Portugal an. 13. H. 6. the Ex lib. vocat Cotom. in Offic. mag. Gardrob. fol. 92. Mantle, Surcoat, and Hood were accompted for together in the Accompts of the Great Wardrobe; and the like hath been done in all such cases since.
Howbeit of late times the Soveraign, as an especial mark of favour, hath been pleased now and then to give a Knight-Subject the Mantle also: as did King Iames to Lib. Warr. in Offic. praed.  fe|sto S. Mich. 1623. ad an. 1624. Iames Marquess Hamilton, an. 21. Iac. R. and King Charles the First to Warr. curr. in eod. Offic. de an. 1628. Theophilus Earl of Suffolk an. 4. Car. 1. to Lib. Warr. de an 1629. William Earl of Northampton, an.] 5. Car. 1. and an. 14. Car. 1. Sir Iames Palmer by this Soveraign's direction Ex Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Palmer. paid for the Velvet and Taffety of the Earl of Kelly's Mantle and Surcoat to Sir Peter Richaut, and put it upon the Accompt of Ex Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Palmer. extraordinary charges of the Order.
Besides which the present Soveraign, as a mark of like favour, caused 17 Mantles (with the usual Liveries of Surcoat and Hood) to be provided against the Grand Feast of St. George, an. 13. Car. 2. which were bestowed not only among the new Elect Knights, but the three senior Knights-Companions also namely, the Earls of Salisbury, Berkshire, and Northumberland; for which see the Warrant in the Numb. XXXIV. Appendix.
But the Elect Knight being otherwise to provide the Mantle at his own charge, directions may be had in the Sect. 2. Chapter of the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, as to all the materials for making thereof.
The Collar of the Order with the Great George is to be provided by the Elect Knight, unless where the Soveraign is pleased to bestow the Mantle; and in such case he also bestows the Collar, and then a like Warrant issues to the Master of the Iewel-house, as did for providing the 17. Collars Appendix Num. XXXV. an. 13. Car. 2.
The Black Velvet Cap,3. Cap: mentioned and described hap. 7. Sect. 4. before, and therefore needless to speak of it here; is also to be provided at the charge of the Knight Elect.
Likewise the Helm,4. Helm, Crest, c. and Crest, with Mantlings thereunto belonging, also a Sword and Girdle (usually called within the verge of this Order, the Atchieve|ments of a Knight-Companion) are to be got in readiness, by the care and dire|ction of Garter, but at the Elect Knights cost; all which are to be set over his Stall, assoon as his Installation Fees are paid.
This honor, that every Knight-Companion should have his Helme, Crest, and Sword, hung up over his Stall in the Chappel of St. George at Windesor is parti|cularly provided for, in all the several Bodies of Statutes; and are ordained to remain there during the lives of the possessors, E. 3. Stat. Art. 9. in memory (or as a hd. Stat. in Bl. Hattn Art. 9. Token or Mark of Honor) of him that bears them, and a testimony of the defence of the Church, as the Oaths of Military Orders require.
The Helms, used for this purpose and upon this occasion, are made of Steel large and fair, and of a more than ordinary proportion: they are likewise (for the most part) of two sorts, the one appointed for Soveraign Princes, and framed Collect W. le N. Cl. open, with large Bailes or Bars; the other for Knights Subjects, whose Vizors are made Collect W. le N. Cl. close. About King Henry the Eighth's Reign the Knights Subjects Helms were parcel gilt with fine Gold in Oyle, wrought with Rabeskys and other works, and burnished with fine Gold. But in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and since, it hath been the Custom to gild their Helms all over, placing St. George's Arms in the middle before the Vizors.
The Mantlings that hang down on either side the Helm, which, with the Wreath, are in some places called Lib. N. p. 67.70. videsis Stat. in Pabl. Ha  Art. 7.  . 8. Stat. Art. 8. Appendixes, are all of Tissue or Cloth of Gold, and heretofore lined with Collct. W. le N. . Sarcenet; but in Queen Mary's Reign they began to make use of Collect. W. le N. . White Satin, for of such were the Linings to the Mant|lings of Collect Io. Vincent. Anthony Brown Viscount Montague, and Collect Io. Vincent. William Howard Lord Admiral.
At the bottom of these Mantlings hang a pair of gilt knobs, burnished with Gold, from which issue Tassels of either Gold or Silver (according as is the me|tal in the Knights Coat Armour) mixed with Silk of the chief Colour in his Arms.
Upon the Helm and Mantlings is placed a Wreath of corded Silks, of the Knights colours, which was heretofore made of Sarcenet, but now of Taffaty.
The Crest of the Knight is placed either upon these Wreaths, or issuant out of a Crown, or ducal Cap; turned up with Ermyn, and of what kind soever the Crest is, the same is neatly carved in wood, and either gilt or wrought in its proper colours in Oyl.
Directly before the Helm, an arming Sword hangs down, the Pomel, Cross, and Chape are gilt; the Scabberd is made of the same Tissue or Cloth of Gold, as are the Mantlings, and so is the Girdle thereunto belonging; but the Buckles and Pendants are of Copper gilt.
It appears a little before, that the custom of setting up the Helm, Crest, and Sword, over the Knights Stall is as ancient as the Institution of the Order; but when their Banners were first hung up, is not so clearly manifest; for neither do the Statutes of Institution, or King Henry the Fifth's Statutes take notice of them.
The first mention of them that we find is in the Black Book of the Order, an. 2. H. 6. where the Lib. N. p. 7. Banner of the King of Portugal, is particularly named among the Atchievements then set up over his Stall, but Henry the Eighth's body of Statutes makes particular Art. 8. mention of them.
The fashion of the Soveraign's and all the Knight-Companions Banners are square; but it doth no where appear to us, of what size their Banners anciently were; yet in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, we find them Collect. W. le N. Cl. videsis MS. 4. penes E. W. G. two yards and a quarter long, and a yard and three quarters broad, beside the Fringe (which is made of Gold or Silver and Silk, of the colours in the Wreath) and thereon are wrought or beaten upon Taffaty-Sarcenet, double-Sarcenet, or rich Taffaty, with fine Gold and Colours, on both sides, the paternal Coat of the Knights Companion,

together with his Quarterings, or so many of them as he please to make use of, wherein Garter is to take care that they be warrantably marshalled.
And because a Collect. W. le N. Cl. single Coat was conceived not to stand fair enough in a Ban|ner of this proportion, therefore the Soveraign hath been pleased (where a Knight-Companion wanted Quarterings) to grant a new Coat to bear in Quarter with his paternal Coat; as did King Iames to Collect. W. le N. Cl. Robert Carr Viscount Rochester, afterwards Earl of Somerset; to whose paternal Coat (8. Iun. an. 9. Iac. R.) he first added a Ex. Collect. I. V. gen. Lyon passant gardant Or, in the dexter part, as an especial gift of favour, and then a new invented Coat to be born in quarter therewith, viz. Ex. Collect. I. V. gen. Quarterly Or and Gules, a Lyon Rampant sable over all. He also granted to Sir Thomas Erskin (afterwards created Earl of Kelly) a Coat of Arms to be quar|tered with his paternal Coat, viz. Ibid. Argent, a pale Sable.
These Banners of Arms are fixed to the end of long Staves, painted in Oyl, formerly with the Colours of the Wreath, but now Red: Their ends are put into Sockets of Iron, well fixed in the Wall, directly over the Knights-Compa|nions Helms and Crests; and commonly lined with thick Fustian, to preserve them.
6. Plates of Arms.Besides these, there is also to be provided a Copper-plate gilt, whereon a Scutcheon of the Knight-Elect's Arms, and Quarterings within a Garter, are en|graved and enamelled in Colours, with his Helm, Crest, and Supporters, and underneath his Style and Titles of honor: which Plate, Garter usually takes care to provide, and is to be fixed on the back of the Knight-Elect's Stall assign|ed for his Installation.
7. Cushen.Moreover a Velvet Cushen is to be also provided, whereon to carry the Knight-Elect's Mantle, Collar, Hood, and Book of Statutes before him, in the proceeding to the Choire at his Installation. Concerning the materials and garnishings of some of these Cushens, we find this account of those used at the Installation of the Lord Treasurer Weston, the Earls of Exceter and Lindsey, Installed an. 6. Car. 1. that each of them contained one yard and a half of Crimson Velvet, one Ell of rich Taffaty for their lining, and 4 yards of Fringe, and 4 great Tassels.
8. Lodging Scutcheons.Lastly, there hath been commonly provided a convenient number of Lodging Scutcheons, of the Elect-Knight's Arms, invironed with a Garter, with his Stile and Titles underneath; and these Garter also gets in readiness, for it hath been an ancient custom, to distribute at the Inns in the Knight's passage, to and at Windesor, these Scutcheons, to be set up in the principal Rooms of those Houses, as a memorial of the honor of the Knights Installation.
Such of the foresaid particulars as are committed to the care of Garter to prepare and make ready, the charges thereof have been sometimes cast up, and the Accompt stated and paid off beforehand; by which means he was the better enabled to furnish out the same, for so did the MS. fol. penes G.O.Y. p. 203. Earls of Shrews|bury and Cumberland, an. 34. Eliz. And in Garter's Bill there is to be inserted the price of a Trunk, the charge for Carriage of those things he provides for the Knight-Elect to Windesor, and for their setting up.
Lastly, besides all these things before mentioned, to be prepared and pro|vided either by the Chancellor of the Order, or Garter; there are other to be taken care for, by the Knight-Elect, relating more particularly both to him|self and his retinue; as his own Apparel, the number of his Attendants and Ser|vants, with their Clothes and Liveries, his Coach and Sadle Horses, both for himself and them; with divers other things necessary for setting forth his Caval|cade and Proceeding, to and at Windesor; all which have usually been the rich|est and best that could be made or gotten, that so the show might be furnished out, with all possible splendor and gallantry.
Together with these, the Provisions for Dyet at Windesor (if the Feast be kept at the Elect-Knight's charge and expence) is to be considered of, and to that end for the most part some one of the Clerks of the Soveraign's Kitchin is to be consulted, who commonly undertakes the management of that Affair.
To conclude this Chapter, the Hall or Room where the grand Dinner is to be kept, the Chapter-house and Chappel, ought chiefly to be set forth and adorned with rich and sumptuous Furniture, against this solemnity, over and beside what is of ordinary and necessary use.
The Hall or Dining room, to be furnished with rich hangings and if the Soveraign or his Lieutenant hold the Feast, then must there be a Collet W. le N. Cl. Cloth of State set up at the upper end of it: but not if the Installation be performed by Com|missioners.
The Chapter-house is then also to be hung, a rich Carpet spread upon the Ta|ble, and set about with Velvet Chairs and Cushens; and because in the late times of plundering, this place had suffered its share, and nothing found there upon the present Soveraign's happy return, that was worth taking away; his said Majesty in a Chapter held the 14. of Ianuary an. 12. Car. 2 amng other preparations relating to the Order, caused directions to be given to the Mster of the Wardrobe, to provide Velvet for Chairs to furnish the Chapter-house, and Cushens to be used in the Choire of St. George's Chappel, which accordingly were made ready for the service of the following Fest.
Against the Installation of Philip King of Cstile and n. a. 22. . . Te Ex  MS. penes W  N. l. vide Lib. N. p 183. Table in the Chapter-house was covered with cloth of Gold, and the Forms with Baudkin; before the Soveraign was laid a Cushen of Cloth of Gold, whereon a Crucifix lay, and the Ex  MS. penes W  N. l. vide Lib. N. p 183. Evangelists turn'd open to the place of the Canon, with several Tapers burning on either side. At the upper end of the Table towards the right hand was set a Chair for the Soveraign under a golden Cnopy with Cushens of Cloth of Gold, and on the left hand a Stool with like garnishing, for the King of Castile.
In St. Georges Chappel, the high Altar is to be richly adorned with Plate, the Soveraign's Stall with a Canopy, and other usul ornaments, and lastly the Stalls of the Knights-Companions present at this Ceremony with Velvet Cushens.
As to the furnishing of other places in the Castle of Windesor, on such a so|lemn occasion, we will in the last place borrow an account from the Relator of the Ceremony of Installation of the aforesaid King of Castile and Leon, whose words are these.
To writt of the gret rich cobbord,Ibid. which continually stode in the gret ball, which was all guilt Place; or of the gret and rich beds of estate hangyngs of rich Cloth of Gold, or of the rich and sumptuous clothes of Arras, with divers Clothes of estate, both in the Kings Logging, and in the King of Castil's Loggings, so many Chambers, Haulle, Chappell, Closetts, Galleries with odir Loggings, so richly and berely well appointed, with dibers odir things, that I suffice nor cannot discern, and as I suppose few or none that there were, that ever saw Castell or odir Logging, in all things so well and richly appointed, and the great continual fare, open household, so many noble men soo well appareilled, and with soo short warnyng, heretofore as I thinke hath not been seen.




CHAP. XII. THE Personal Installation OF A Knight Subject.

SECT. I. Of the Cavalcade to Windesor.
IN former times, the Knights-Elect frequently took their journey from Lon|don to their Installation at Windesor, in the nature of a solemn and stately Cavalcade; and this Proceeding on Horseback was generally set forth with exceeding pomp; whether we consider the great number of their honorable Friends, who on gallant Coursers rode along with them, or the multitude of their own Attendants well mounted, the richness of whose Ap|parel, Jewels, Gold Chains, rich embroideries, and Plumes of Feathers of their Lords Colours, even dazled the Eyes of the beholders.
Suitable thereto was the Feast, which had in it all manner of magnificence and plenty, as well as provision, as all other things that could add glory there|unto: and in which the lect-Knights (when kept at their charge) strove not only to exceed their Predecessors, but one another: Insomuch that Embassa|dors and Strangers esteemed it one of the goodliest sights, that was to be seen in Christendom; and to which (as is noted by a vi Chi| ron. Sx. b. 26. Stranger) a great concourse and innumerable multitude of People, used to flock from London and other places, some reasonable distance from Windesor, to behold the Solemnity. But to make the splendour of the Cavalcade no less conspicuous to the City of Lon|dn than Town and Castle of Windesor, the Knights-Elect have taken up their Lodgings sometimes in the Strand, at other times in Salisbury Court, then in Hol|born, or within the City; to the end it might pass through some of the eminent streets, for the Peoples satisfaction, whereof we shall here descend to some par|ticulars.
Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury, in order to his Cavalcade an. 34. Eliz. was lodged

in MS. fol. pe|nes G. O. Y. pag. 203. Mr. Gresham's house (afterwards knighted, and this house since known by the name of Gresham Colledge) whence he rode MS. fol. pe|nes G. O. Y. pag. 203. through the City, accompanied with sundry of his honorable Friends, and a numerous and gallant Train of At|tendants and Servants to Charing Cross; where he met MS. fol. pe|nes G. O. Y. pag. 203. George Earl of Cumber|lnd (his Companion Elect) and thence both together rode towards Windesor, within a mile or two of which place, MS. fol. pe|nes G. O. Y. pag. 203. Garter King of Arms met them, and set their Attendants in order; and thence the Elect-Knights took their way, in goodly Equipage through the Town into the Castle, the Proceeding being thus ordered.

Trumpets, two and two.
Gentlemen in Blue Coats and Gold Chains.
Gentlemen of note.
Garter.
Gentlemen-Vshers.

Earl of Ormond.
The two Elect-Knights.
Baron of Essingham.

With their Footmen about them.
Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen of Quality.
All their Servants in the rear.

In like manner Custom and Peace begat many such glorious Cavalcades, du|ring the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, and King Iames, specially that at the Instal|lation of MS. penes E. W. G. f. 147. Robert Earl of Salisbury, and Thomas Viscount Bindon, May 21. an. 4. Iac. R. who came to Windesor honorably MS. penes E. W. G. f. 147. accompanied, with a great appea|rance of Nobility, Knights, and Gentlemen of special note.
But the fate of this Solemnity, much like that glorious body the Sun (whose lustre at such times it strove to outshine) had at sometimes its short intermitting Clouds, at others, long nights, and the glory thereof appeared but now and then, when the pleasure of the Soveraign grew auspicious, or the honor of the Order became placed upon more generous Spirits. And to say truth, there may grow an excess in such Solemnities, even to surfet; which is then best cured by a long abstinence. Nor was this Festival at all times free from this distemper; but then the Soveraign readily cured it, by taking away the cause, and prohibiting ex|cess in their Attendants.
Hereupon it was that King Iames, observing those Excesses the Knights-Elect run into upon this occasion, and willing to check the growing inconveniences, took occasion against the Installation of Francis Earl of Rutland, Sir George Vil|lrs Knight (after created Earl, then Marquess, and lastly Duke of Buckingham) and of Viscount Lisle, an. 14. of his Reign, to forbid Ibidem. Livery Coats, for saving charge, and avoiding emulation; and shortly after, in a Chapter held at Whitehall, an. 16. Iac. R. with the consent of the Knights-Companions then assembled, put some restraint upon the number of Attendants; and Decreed, Lib. C. p. 191 That every of the Knights-Companions should have 50 persons to attend him unto the annual Solem|nities of the Order, and no more.
Some litle exceeding (above that allowed number) we meet with afterwards in the Attendants of Gentlemen and Yeomen upon William Earl of Northampton an. 5. Car. 1. to the number of fourscore, who began his Cavalcade to Windesor, from Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. Salisbury House in the Strand; and certainly would have exhibited a more glorious show, had not the continual Rain for Lib. R. p. 47. three days space together impeded: Nevertheless conceiving that a Proceeding designed with so much gallantry as it was, ought to outlive the accident of foul weather, we shall insert the order of it here.

The order of riding to the Installation of William Earl of Northampton,Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. the 20. of April, 1629.
Trumpets, whose Banners were of Damask, and thereon the Earls Arms within a Garter, with his Crest and Supporters.
The meanest of his Servants, as Grooms, and Teomen, in Blue Coats, two and two.
His Lordships other Servants in Blue Coats as Gentlemen, Esquires, and Knights two and two.
Two Secretaries; Mr. Ralph Goodwyn, and Mr. Francis Mewse.

Steward, Mr. Cuthbert Ogle.
Controller, Mr. William Goodwyn.

Two Pages, Thomas Floyd, and Francis Browne.
His spare Horse, led by the Gentleman of his Horse.
His Chaplain to distribute his Alms.
Pursuivants at Arms, two and two.
Heralds at Arms, two and two.

Gentleman Vsher, Mr. Walter Thomas, bareheaded.

Earl of Berkshire.
Earl of Northampton.
Earl of Salisbury.

The Senior Herald covered.

Noblemen in their places, two and two.
Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, which accompanied him.
The Commissioners Servants.
Other Noblemens, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemens Servants.

Thus Henry Earl of Danby, and William Earl of Morton, being to receive the honor of Installation, an. 10. Car. 1. so disposed of themselves, for their more commodious passage and the peoples view; that the one lodged at Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. vide Lib. R p. 93. War|wick House in Holborne, the other at Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. vide Lib. R p. 93. Dorset House in Salisbury Court neer Fleet|street, and proceeded severally through the Streets to Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. vide Lib. R p. 93. Hide Park, each between two Noblemen to support him, with their Footmen in rich Coats on either side them.
Their Gentlemen-Vshers rode bare-headed, and before them the Officers of Arms wearing their Coats, then their Servants in Blue Coats and Cognizances (as was the ancient manner) all led on by Trumpets. The rest of the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen followed after each Knight-Elect in Troop, according to their Degrees, those of the best quality formost. In particular, the Proceed|ing of the Earl of Morton, was marshalled in the following order.

Trumpets,Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. two and two.
Grooms in Coats, two and two.
Yeoman two and two.
Gentlemen, two and two.
Secretaries.

Steward.
Gentleman of the Horse.

Pages.
4 Officers of Arms.

Gent. Vsher bare.
Lancaster Herald covered.
Earl Morton
supported between two chief Lords.

Footmen on each side in rich Coats.
Noblemen and Gentlemen, according to their Degrees.

At Slow (two miles on this side Windesor) they all made a stand, and being put again into order, proceeded to Windesor Castle, where alighting in the lower Court, the Knights-Elect were thence conducted to their several Lodgings.
To these already mentioned, we shall add the order of that stately Cavalcade, set forth by Algernon Earl of Northumberland, from Dorset house in Salisbury Court, toward Windesor the 13. of May an. 11. Car. 1. which though the last this age hath beheld, yet was it not the least in pomp and glory; and disposed as followeth.


Mr. Butler.Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Mr. Havelocke.
Mr. Hillman.
Mr. Eglebie.
Mr. Gradye.
Mr. Williams.
Mr. Sheares.
Mr. Collins.
Mr. Simpson.
Mr. Barnard.
Mr. Gates.
Mr. Iohnson.
Mr. Fenwick.
Mr. Granger.
Mr. Cappon.
Mr. Browne.
Mr. Rushton.
Mr. Percy.
Mr. Gibbons.
Mr. Musgrave.
Mr. Millar.
Mr. Heron.
Mr. Potter.
Mr. Dodsworth.
Mr. Githens.
Mr. Blackstone.
Mr. Harris.
Mr. Hall.
Mr. Newland.
Mr. Hubbald.
Mr. Lambe.
Mr. Clarke.
Mr. Emery.
Mr. Meriwether.
Mr. Guppie.
Mr. Cobbie.
Mr. Holdridge.
Mr. Baldwine.
Mr. Thorneton.
Mr. Edmunds.
Mr. Francis Mose.
Mr. William Mose.
Mr. Cartwright.
Mr. Cardinal.
Mr. Wivild.
Mr. Pagler.
Mr. Smith.
Mr. Taylour.


Pages, being Earl Sons, viz.
Mr. William Herbert.
Mr. Philip Cecil.
Mr. Iohn Herbert.
Mr. Algernon Sidney.


Heralds at Arms, two and two.
Mr. Bludevile Gent. Vsher, bareheaded.
Norroy King of Arms.
Marquess of Winchester.
Earl of Northum|berland.
Earl of Kent.

And somewhat behind him the rest of the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen in order, the best formost, two and two, the Coaches closing up the Troop.
There was a publick Cavalcade desn'd from Somerset House in the Strand to Windesor Castle, when the present Soveraign was to be Installed; which though it took not effect, yet is fit to be remembred by the insertion of the then Chan|cellor's Letter to each Knight-Companion, for making preparations to accompany him thither.

May it please your Lordship,
THE Kings Majesty Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Row Iournal. p. 39. having determined to create the Prince his eldest Son Knight, and to propose him in Election to be a Companion of his Order, for the better conveniency of his Instal|lation hath prorogued by a Commission under the Seal of his Order, given the 25. of February now remaining in my Custody, the celebration of the Feast of St. George from the 22.23. and 24. of April next, whereon it should have been solemnized, un|to the 21.22. and 23. of May, immediately ensuing, and thereby given Command to all the Knights-Companions, and Officers of his Order, that they should attend his royal person at his Palace of Whitehall upon those days appointed. In discharge of the duty of my place, and by special order, I do signifie unto your Lordship his Ma|jesties will, and that it is his pleasure for the more honor of the Prince, and the noble Feast of his Election and Installation, that your Lordship should be attended with your Servants and Retinue according to solemn Custom, and be prepared to

accompany his Highness from Somerset-house in the Strand unto the Castle of Windesore, upon the 19. of that moneth, to assist at the Ceremony, and Feast of his Installation upon the day following: Praying your Lordship that you will be pleased to take knowledge hereby, both of the time and place designed, and of the Soveraign's order, I humbly rest
In all due obedience and observance Tho. Rowe.
St. Martin's Lane
27. Feb. 1637.

When this Letter was sent, the Soveraign intended to create the Prince Ex Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Palmer Knight of the Bath, which Ceremonies were designed to begin at the old Pa|lace at Westminster, upon the 21. day of May an. 13. Car. 1. as also to hold the Feast of St. George, for that year, at Whitehall, on the 23. of the same Moneth; and to take the Scruteny that Evening for his Election into this Order: The next day was designed to invest him with the Garter and George, and the day follow|ing, to set forward the Cavalcade towards Windesor, wherein also the Knights of the Bath (intended to be created with the Prince) were to ride in their Robes. But this resolution being changed, and the intention of creating the Prince a Knight of the Bath, altered to that of a Knight-Batchellor, the Ceremony thereof was defer'd to Windesor; and so the Cavalcade followed not.
It was the manner heretofore, for the Soveraign's Lieutenant (when the Sove|raign thought fit to appoint the Installation at the same time with the Feast of St. George) to ride to Windesor, attended with a gallant Train, and no small num|ber of his own Gentlemen and Yeomen richly habited, and in all things well appointed; as was seen in that Cavalcade of the Collect. Io. V. Gen. Duke of Norfolk Earl Marshal of England, and Lieutenant to the Soveraign, for St. George's Feast, an. 5. Eliz. (at which time the Earls of Northumberland and Warwick were to be Installed) who had then attending on him Collect. Io. V. Gen. 200 of his own Gentlemen and Yeomen.
The Lieutenant and his Assistants (or otherwise the Knights-Commissioners, if the Feast of St. George be not then held) being arrived in the Castle, forthwith retire to their Lodgings, which most usually have been prepared at the Deans house, the Rooms therein being the fairest, and best fitted accommodation in the Ca|stle (next those of the Soveraign's in the upper Ward) but the Knights-Elect were at all times furnished with Lodgings, in some of the Prebends houses.


SECT. II. The Offering in the Chappel, on the Eve of the Feast.
IF it so happened, that the Installation passed by Commissioners, and the Ca|valcade set forth from London in the morning of the day preceding the In|stallation, and arrived at Windesor Castle early that afternoon; then the Knights-Commissioners have been accustomed to put on their MS. fol. penes, G. O. Y p. 203. Mantles only (at the Chapter-house door) and enter St. George's Chappel to offer; but without the atten|dance of MS. fol. pe|nes E. W. G. f. 147. Heralds, or any solemne Proceeding before them into the Choire (on|ly brought in by the Prebends) where having taken their Stalls with usual Re|verences (the order of which shall be discoursed at large in the 20. Chapter) and heard an Anthem, they pass'd up to the Altar, with the MS. fol. pe|nes E. W. G. f. 147. Verger and MS. penes G. O. Y. loco cit. Garter be|fore them, and there made their MS. penes G. O. Y. loco cit. Offering, both of Gold and Silver, according to usual custom. As soon as the Vespers were ended, they descended from their Stalls (after the accustomed manner) and departed to their Lodgings; and in this case the Knights-Commissioners Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. put not off their Mantles, till after Supper.
In this manner was the Ceremony of Offering (on the Eve of the Installation)

performed by the x d MS. pen G. O. Y. lo ante iate. Lord Admiral, and Earl of Ormond, Commissioners for the Installation of the Earl of Shrewsbury and Cumberland, an. 34. Eliz. as also by the Earls of MS penes E. W. G f. 47. Nottingham, Worcester, Suffolk, and Southapton, Commissioner appointed for the Installation of the Earl of Salisbury, and Viscount Bindon, a. 4. Ia. R. But at the Installation of the Earl of Rutland, and others, an. 26. Elz. the Lord Hunsdon (one of the Commisioners for that Solemnity) refused to go to the Chappel to Offer alone, albeit he arrived at Windesor Castle MS. 4 pe|nes W. le N. Cl. timely enough on the Eve; because he wanted the company of Viscount Mountague (joined in Commission with him) who came not thither till the MS. 4 pe|nes W. le N. Cl. next morning.
The Offering thus made, at the Knights-Commissioners coming to the Castle, on the ve of Installation, is in conformity to an Article in the Statutes to this ef|t  F. 3. Stat. Art. 6 vi|de etiam H 5. Stat Art  16.  H. 8. Stat. Ar. 17. That if any of the Knights-Companions being upon a Iourney,F. 3. Stat. Art. 6 vi|de etiam H 5. Stat Art  16.  H. 8. Stat. Ar. 17. should acci|dentlly pass by Windesor Castle, he is to turn in thither (if he can with conve|nience, and be not hindred by some just and allowable cause) in honor of the place, and prepare himself to enter into the Chappel to Offer; first putting on his Mantle, without which he must never presume to enter into it.
After the Knight-Companion had entred the Castle, the Canons-Resident were by this Article appointed to meet and receive him, and with due reverence con|duct him into the Choire. If it were in the time of high Mass, the Knight was ob|liged to stay and hear it, in honor of God and St. George, but if he came thither in the afternoon, he was to stay till the Canons, with the rest of the Choire, had sung the Anthem de Profundis, which being ended, he proceedd to the high Altar and Offered, and returned to his Stall, with usual Reverences, and then departed.
But if the Knight-Companion Ibid. passed through the Town of Windesor, and did not go to the Chappel to Offer, in manner as before is ordained; so often as he omitted doing thereof, he was bound upon his obedience to walk a mile on foot to the Chappel, in honor of St. George, otherwise for every time he failed to offer one Penny,Art. 17. which by King Henry the Eighth's Statutes is inlarged to a Groat.
It seems at last, there hapned some dispute about the just distance (intended by this Article) from the Castle, and to the end the Knigts-Companions might fully know when they came within the breach of this Injunction, it was thought requisite by King Henry the Eighth, to t down a certain bound, which in his Statutes is there declared to be Art. 17. two miles: within which, if any of the Knights-Companions come, and do not repair to the Chappel and Offer, he is liable to the penalty or mulct above specified.
And because it oftentimes fell out, that some of the Knights-Companions did accidentally ride within the said limits, whilst they took the pleasure of hunting in Windesor Forest (some part of it lying neer the Castle) nevertheless could not conveniently leave their sport to perform all the Solemnity required, they usually (in such case) sent their Offring in money to the Canons, which being received, the Knights took it for a dispensation of the Ceremony, enjoined by the Statutes.
But they still apprehending inconvenience in this Article, endeavours were used to have it interpreted with greater latitude, which so far took effect, that at a Chapter held at Windesor the 10. of October, an. 15. Car. 1. it was ordered to be considered of at the next Chapter, Sir Iames Palmer's Iour|nal pro anno 1639. p. 60. that so some provision might be made to save the Knights from breach of their Oath, if they came within the foresaid li|mited distance of Windesor Castle, and passed thence without Offring. But no|thing being then done, nor at any time since, the Law stands as it did.



SECT. III. The Supper on the Eve.
THE Supper at night, after their arrival at Windesor, is but in the nature of a private Meal; and prepared for the Lieutenant (or Commissioners) and the Knights-Elect, generally in the Deans House; and where, on the Eve of Installation of the Collect. W. le. N. Cl. Earl of Rutland and Lord Cobham, an. 26. Eliz. the Commis|sioners, supped together, with such Lords and Gentlemen of account, as came along with them; no Nobleman having above Collect. W. le N. Cl. one servant to wait on him at the Table; the rest had their diet prepared in the Town at their own Inns.
But now and then they have been permitted to sup in some of the Rooms in the Soveraign's Lodgings; for MS. in Offic. Arm. [L.1.] p. 19. there was the Supper made ready at the Installa|tion of the Lord Russel and other Elect Knights, an. 31. H. 8. and at the Installa|tion of the Earl of Shrewsbury, and Lord Hunsdon, an. 3. Eliz. the Lieutenant and Knights supped in the Ex. Col|lect. W. le. N. Cl. Great Chamber there, all sitting together at one Ta|ble, in the Ex. Col|lect. W. le. N. Cl. same order as was used at other times; but the Ex. Col|lect. W. le. N. Cl. Heralds then sup|ped in St. George's Hall. And in the 34. of Queen Elizabeth, when the Earls of Shrewsbury and Cumberland were Installed; all the Lords and Gentlemen supped together at one long Table set in the MS. penes cund. G. O. Y. p. 203. Council Chamber.


SECT. IV. The order in Proceeding to the Chapter-house.
WE come now to the chief Circuances of this great Solemnity; name|ly the particular Ceremonies of Installation, managed and ordered after either the Soveraign, (or in his absence his Lieutenant or Commissioners) and Knights-Elect, are arrived at Windesor. In reference to which we shall premise this general note; That since neither the Statutes of Institution, nor the Statutes of King Henry the Fifth afford us a Formulary, for the personal Installation of a Knight-Elect (though each of them contain some part of those Ceremonies, ob|served at the E. 3. Stat. Art. 20 H. 5. Stat. Art. 20. Installation of Strangers by Proxy) yet those made by King Henry the Eighth do exhibit (in short) the Art. 20. order and method thereof; which we shall make use of as we pass along, and regularly place those directions, un|der their proper heads.
We must further observe, that if the Installation be appointed together with the Feast of St. George, then either the Soveraign (and consequently the Knights-Companions) or else his Lieutenant and Assistants are present; but if any other time of the year, then it passeth by Commissioners only: and where we men|tion the Soveraign and his Lieutenant, and Commissioners together, there the Case or Rule inserted, will sute with every of them.
After such time therefore as the Soveraign (his Lieutenant or Commissioners) have prefixed an hour wherein to begin the Proceding to the Chapter-house, in order to the Installation of the Elect Knight (which Ceremony for the most part hath been performed and dispatcht on the Evening of their arrival at Winde|sor, but sometimes the next morning) all the Knights-Companions and Elect-Knights, the Officers of the Order, and of Arms, the Prebends of the Colledge, and Alms-Knights are to give their attendance: that is to say, the Knights-Companions and Officers of the Order on the Soveraign in his inward Lodging

the Elect-Knights and Officers of Arms in the Presence Chamber, the Prebends and Alms-Knights in the Great Chamber, where they wait the Soveraign's com|ing forth.
The attendance to be given upon the Soveraign's Lieutenant, and such of the Knights-Companions as are appointed for his Assistants, is by the Officers of the Order and of Arms, the Prebends and Alms-Knights, either at his Lodgings, or else where, as he shall appoint; but not by any other of the Knights-Companions. For though we find the Knights-Companions have sometimes proceeded to the Chappel, before the Soveraign's Lieutenant, when an Installation was celebrated, yet hath it been at such time only, as they came to Windesor with the Soveraign, chiefly to hold St. George's Feast; where though the Soveraign through indispo|sition of body or weighty affairs, could not pass down to the Chappel on the Eve of the Feast, yet they being obliged by the Statutes to celebrate Vespers, did on this occasion, not that of Installation proceed thither; as it fell out at the Installation of MS. penes E. W. G. . 144. Prince Henry, and four other Knights, an. 1. Iac. R. when the Proceeding began from the Presence Chamber, and thence past to the Chap|ter-house in the following Order.

Alms-Knights.
Prebends.
Pursuivants.
Heralds.
Vlster King of Arms.

Lyon King of Arms.
Clarenceux King of Arms.

The four lect-Knights.
Knights-Companions.

Black Rod.
Register.
Garter.
Chancellor.

The Soveraign's Lieutenant, leading the Prince in his hand.

The Knights-Companions proceeded likewise before the Soveraign's Lieute|nant, at the Installation of the Duke of MS. penes Edw. Faucon|bridge gen. Brunswick and five other Elect-Knights, the 23. of Nov. an. 1. Car. 1. but the Soveraign was then at Lib. R. p. 29.  30. Windesor Castle (though not in the Proceeding) and the Feast of St. George there also solemnized.
But upon the Soveraign's Commissiones, neither the Knights-Companions, nor the Ex Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Palmer videsis alium Autogr. in Bibl. Coton. Prelate nor Chancellor do give ther attendance; only at the Grand Feast of St. George, an. 13. Car. 2. the Chancellor then waiting on the Soveraign at Winde|sor in the duties of his place, out of a particular regard to his Royal Highness the Duke of York (being then Controller of his Houshold) attended the Com|missioners in the proceeding to his Installation.
The Proceedings upon this solemn occasion, have been generally ordered on foot: Nevertheless, upon some extraordinary account marshalled and disposed on Horseback, in manner of a Cavalcade; as was set forth at the Installa|tion of Ex. vet. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. fol. 293. b. Philip King of Castile, an. 22. H. 7. and that when the MS. in Offic. Arm. [L.1.] fol. 19. Lord Russel, and other Elect-Knights were installed, an. 31. H. 8. So also at the Installation of the MS. p. 11. Earl of Sussex, an. 1. . 2. Ph.  Mar. which King Philip honored with his own presence; Himself, and several of the Knights-Companions, MS. p. 11. riding on Horseback from his Lodgings in the Castle, down to the Cloister door at the East end of the Chappel, and there alighting, proceeded directly into the MS. p. 11. Chapter-house.
When the Earl of Shrewsbury and Lord Hunsdon were installed, an. 3. Eliz. the Proceeding was likewise ordered on Ex. Collect. W. le N. Cl Horseback. So also at the Installation of the Ex. Collect. I. V. gen. Earl of Northumberland, and Earl of Warwick an. 5. Eliz. and lastly at the Installations of Francis Duke of Montmorency, the Viscount Hereford, and the Lords Burghley, Grey, and Shandos an. 14. Eliz. concerning which it is further observed; Ex. od. Col|lect. that the Soveraign's Lieutenant, and Knights-Assistants did then put on their Robes in the Soveraign's Lodgings in the Castle, and meeting in the Pre|sence-Chamber, proceeded down to the outward Hall door, in the upper Ward of the Castle, where taking their Horses, adorned with foot Clothes, they pro|ceeded on Horseback to the West door of the Chappel.
If the Proceeding was ordered on Horseback at the beginning of the Feast, it continued the same throughout at the usual times, so often as the Soveraign his Lieutenant or Commissioners) went to the Chapter-house, or Chappel; and all the returns were marshalled in the like order as the settings forth.
As concerning the marshalling this proceeding to the Chapter-house, it hath been done after the same manner and order, as that celebrated on the Eve of the Grand Feast of St. George (in relation to the degrees, whereof it was composed) of which we shall discourse at large Chap. 20. below; nevertheless, where there happened any considerable difference, it shall be noted in this Section, as we have occasion.
To begin now (as we shall do there) with Servants and Attendants belonging to the Knight-Elect; who (if they be taken into the Proceeding) pass on first, two and two in rank, according to their quality; those of the meanest condition formost.
Next the Alms-Knights in their Habits, and usual order.
Then follows the Verger of the Colledge.
After him the Prebends or Canons; but what attendance they have given here|tofore at Installations we cannot make appear; for in those Schemes left us of Proceeding to Installations in the Reigns of King Henry the Eighth, King Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, and part of Queen Elizabeth, we find them not inserted, though since they are.
Next to the Prebends of the Colledge do the Pursuivants, Heralds, and Provincial Kings of Arms, proceed in a Body.
And after them the Knight-Subject Elect, unless the Proctor of an absent Knight-Subject pass at the same time in this Proceeding, whose place is imme|diately next after the Provincial Kings: And if it so happen that the Proctor to a Stranger-Prince be then also present, he is to proceed between the Knight-Subject's Proctor, and the Knight-Subject Elect. But Prince Henry at his Instal|lation, an. Iac. R. 1. went in a place MS. sol. penes E. W. G. f. 144. a above all the Knights-Companions, and was paired with the Earl of Nottingham, the Soveraign's Lieutenant for that occasion.
Where two or more Elect-Knights proceed to their Installation at the same time, they take place, according to the seniority of their Election; proceeding two and two together; and if the number be odd, the junior Elect-Knight passeth alone.
Some other notices may here take place; as first, that the Elect-Knight passed heretofore in his ordinary Apparel (wearing over it long since a short Gown, after|wards a Cloak, and of later times a Coat) as did the Earl of Collect. I. V. gen. Northumberland, an. 5. Eliz. and the Earls of Collect. I. V. gen. Penbroke and Derby an. 16. Eliz. And this also the Annals of the Order, and other Authorities particularly note of the Earl of Lib. C. p. 114. Sus|sex and Lord Buckhurst, an. 31. Eliz. of MS. penes E. W. G. f. 149. b. Charles Duke of York and others an. 9. Iac. R. of the Duke of Lib. R. p. 18. Lenox an. 22. Iacobi, the Earl of Collect. W. le N Cl. Northampton, an. 5. Car. 1. and Marquess Lib. R. p. 18. Hamilton the year following.
But this was before any peculiar under Habit was appointed to the Knights-Com|panions; for now there being a Cloth of Silver Doublet, and Trunk Hose esta|blished to be worn at the Feasts of Installation and of St. George, the Elect-Knight proceeds in this Habit, and so did the Duke of Albemarle, an. 23. Car. 2.
Secondly, In this Proceeding to the Chapter-house he weareth only the Garter about his Leg, and the George and Ribband wherewith he was invested, either about his neck, or (as of late) drawn under his right arm; which being omitted by Sir George Villars, and Viscount Lisle, is noted to be MS. penes E. W. G. f. 153. a. contrary to order.
Thirdly, that the Earl of MS. penes E. W. G. f. 153. a. Rutland with his Fellow Elect Knights, an. 14. Iac. Reg. proceeded bareheaded, as also the Duke of Collect W. le N. Cl. Lenox, an. 9. Car. 1. and so did the Duke of Albemarle, an. 23. Car. 2.
Fourthly, the Elect Knight doth not always go in this Proceeding, but some|times stays at his Lodgings in the Castle, as did the Earls of MS. penes G O Y p. 203. Shrewsbury and Cum|berlnd an. 34. Eliz. or else at some other convenient place neer unto the Chapter-house, till he be sent for in thither, to receive Investiture with the Surcoats; an instance whereof we have in the Duke of Collect. W. le N. Cl. Montmorency, an. 14. Eliz. and the other Elect Knights that were to be installed at the same time with him,

who (before the Soveraign's Lieutenant and Assistants proceeded to the Chapter-house) went privately from the Soveraign's Lodgings down to the House of Mr. French (then one of the Prebends) for the Dean was absent at that time and his House unprovided for their Reception) and rested in the Parlour until they were sent for: Or otherwise he hath gone privately into the East Isle of the Chappel behind the High Altar and there stayed till called in, as did the Duke of Monmouth, an. 15. Car. 2.
If the Soveraign be present at the Installation, the Knights-Companions proceed next after the Knights-Elect (or the Proctor to a stranger Prince) according to the order of their Stalls; but if the Soveraign's Lieutenant, then his Assistants go in their place: of which there is a President at the Installation of the Earl of Shrewsbury and Lord Hunsdon an. 3. Eliz. the Proceeding being ordered in the following manner.

Collect. W. le N. Cl.Vergers.
Alms Knights.
Officers of Arms.
Elect-Knights.
Assistants to the Lieutenant.
Officers of the Order.
Earl of Arundel Lieutenant.

And if the Installation be dispatcht by Commissioners, then the three inferiour Officers of the Order, immediately follow the Knight-Elect and proceed next before the Commissioners (because they have no Assistants appointed them to pass between, as hath the Soveraign's Lieutenant) and thus we find them marshalled at the Installation of the Earl of Northampton, an. 5. Car. 1.

Lib. C. p. 114. videsis Autogr. in Biblioth. Cotton.The Earls Servants.
Alms-Knights.
Prebends.
Heralds.
Elect-Knights.
Officers of the Order.
The Soveraign's Commissioners.

Nevertheless once (and but once) viz. an. 16. Eliz. at the Installation of the Earls of Collect. I. V. gen. Penbroke and Derby, we find the said Officers did precede the Elect-Knights; but this was through mistake.
Something more may be added, concerning these three Officers place and order, in proceeding at the Solemnities of Installation, since there hath hereto|fore fallen out both question and dispute thereupon: For at the Installation of the said Earl of Northampton, some question and debate hapning touching their place in this Proceeding, it was at length concluded; Lib. R. p. 48. That from the Castle to the Chappel they should proceed before the Commissioners, but in returning from the Chappel to the Castle they should follow.
We suppose the Question (whatsoever it was) chanced not to be propound|ed till the Proceeding was ready to pass on, and then stared on a sudden; be|cause the Heralds not readily resolving (as the Annals note) seems rather to pro|ceed from suprize, than want of ability to answer; and it also appears, that the determination which took place was grounded but upon Tandem igi|rur per conje|cturam con|clusum est. c Ibid. conjecture; and how fit soever it was them thought, yet if well considered, will appear not consonant to Precedents and Practice, both before and since; as also to the usual rule, where all returns are marshalled answerably to their settings forth, unless the condition of any person in the Proceeding be in the mean time changed.
But perhaps it will be answered, that the ground of this resolution, of fol|lowing the Commissioners in their return, was because the authority wherewith they were impowered, seemed to cease as soon as the Knight was Installed;

and consequently the attendance, which that authority exacted from the Offi|cers, then ceased also. Yet if so, what needed any Proceeding back at all, but that the Commissioners should have put off their Habits in the Chapter-house, and pass thence privately to their Lodgings? But to proceed,
It is further to be observed, that when Installations pass by Commissioners on|ly, these three inferior Officers wear their Robes (for they are appointed to be worn. Lib. C. p. 24. at all solemn Assemblies of the Order, no less than at the Feasts of St. George) but bear not the Ensigns of their Offices in the Proceeding. And this seems to be deduced from particular Injunctions, laid down in the Constitutions appertaining to the Officers of the Order, which appoint Cap. 4. Garter, and Cap. 5. Black Rod, to bear the Ensigns of their Offices at the Feast of St. George, when the So|veraign or his Deputy shall be present, whence it may be inferred, that if either happen to be absent, they need not bear them: We also find this in practice, and their Ensigns not carried at the Installations of Ex Collect. R. Cook nuper Clar. fol. 28. Frederick King of Denmark, and Iohn Casimire Count Palatine of the Rhine, an. 25. Eliz. next of the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Earl of Rutland and Lord Cobham the following year, and thirdly so noted in the Pag. 48. Red Book of the Order. But if the Soveraign himself be present, or that he constitute a Ex Collect. I. V. gen. Lieutenant in his stead, the Register then carries the MS. penes Ed. Faucon|bridge, gen. Red Book, and Garter, and the Black Rod, bear each of them their Rods. And note also, that in every Proceeding to Installation by a Lieutenant or Commissioners Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. 32. videsis MS. Garter carries the Soveraign's Commission in his hand to the Chapter-house before them.
We now are arrived at the place of the Soveraign (his Lieutenant or Commissio|ners) which is in the Rear, and with which we shall close the ordinary Pro|ceeding.
But because we would give some instances where the Soveraign, willing to add honor to the Elect-Knights, hath appointed their Installation at such time, as he personally solemnized the Feast of St. George, we shall insert here first that memorable but mixt Proceeding on Horseback (when the Election and In|stallation of Philip King of Castile and Leon, past an. 22. H. 7.) from the Soveraign's Lodging in the Casile, to the South door of St. George's Chappel, and was thus ordered.

Lib. N. p. 183. videsis MS. vet. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 294. b. Knights according to their Degrees.
Lords after their Degrees.
Knights-Companions, in their whole Habit, bearing company with some of the Knights of the Order of Toyson d' or.

Prelate of the Order.
Archbishop of Canterbury.

The Spanish Ambassador.

Toyson d' or, King of Arms, in his Coat of Arms.
Garter King of Arms in his Coat of Arms.

The Sword.
The Prince.

Philip King of Castile.
King Henry the Seventh, Soveraign of the Order.


Another but later instance, shall be that at the Feast of St. George, an. 9. Iac. R. when MS penes E. W. G. fol. 149. b. Charles Duke of York, Thomas Earl of Arundel, and Robert Viscount Ro|chester, were installed.

MS penes E. W. G. fol. 149. b. Alms-Knight.
Prebends.
Officers of Arms.

Visc. Rochester.
Earl of Arundel.

Duke of York.
Knights-Companions.
Officers of the Order.
The Sword.
The Soveraign.

The same Soveraign with several of the Knights-Companions, proceeded also to the Chappel at the personal Installation of Lib. C p. 18. Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, an. 10. Iac. R. the Feast of St. George being then solemnized; and again at the Installation of the Ex eod. MS. penes . W. G Earl of Rutland, Sir George Villrs, and Viscount Lys, in the 14. year of the same King. The like honor did King Charles the First to the Lib. R p 20. Earl of Suffolk an. 4. Car. 1. and to the Ibid. p 8. Duke of Lenox an. 9. Car. 1. as also to the am. lrge Iourn . 11. present Soveraign, when his Installation was celebrated at Windesor an. 14, of the same King. To these examples we may add, the present Soveraign's personal appearance at the Grand Feast of St. George, held next after his happy Restauration; whereat 12 Elect Knights Subjects received the honor of Installa|tion, namely, the Dukes of Ormond, and Buckingham, Earl of Southampton, Mar|quess of Newcastle, Earl of Bristol, Duke of Albemarle, the Earls of Sandwich, and Oxford, Duke of Richmond, and the Earls of Lindsey, Manchester, and Strafford.
As also at the Installations of the Prince of Denmark, and Iames Duke of Monmouth, the 22. of April, an. 15. Car. 2. and lastly of the King of Sweden, the Duke of Saxony, and Christopher Duke of Albemarle, the 28. of May, an. 23. C. 2.
Lastly, at this Solemnity of Installation, the Soveraign proceeds in full Robes, having the Sword of State born before him by a Nobleman not of the Order, his Train-Bearers and Attendants following, and the Band of Pensioners closing up the Proceeding.
The Soveraign's Lieutenant and his Assistants (so also the Commissioners) pro|ceed in full Robes likewise, which we find not only mentioned, but the parti|culars MS. in Offic. Arm. [L 1.] fol. 19. enumerated; an. 31. H. 8. when the Earl of Arundel and his Assistants, installed the Lord Russel, and two other Elect Knights; but the Soveraign's Lieu|tenant (not any of the Commissioners) hath his Train carried up, and this ser|vice is usually performed by some of his own Gentlemen. The Collect. W. le N. Cl. fol. 4. b. Earl of Arun|del's Train was carried up by his Gentleman Usher, an. 3. Eliz. And the Ibid. fol. 11. b videsis Collect. I. V. gen. Duke of Norfolk's, an. 5. Eliz. by Sir Nicholas Strange, his Chamberlain.
The Processional wy (if the Proceeding take beginning in the Presence Cham|ber) is down thence into the upper ward of the Castle, and through the other Wards in at the Cloyster door, and so to the Chapter-house; but if from the Deans house, then the way is but short, and taken only through the Cloysters, into which there is an immediate passage from the Deanry.
The Proceeding having entred the East door of St. George's Chappel, and passed by the Chapter-house door, makes a stand in the North Isle; while first the Lib. C. p. 114. Officers of the Order, next the Knights Commissioners; or else the Knights Assistants and the Soveraign's Lieutenant; or lastly the Knights-Compa|nions, and the Soveraign (with the Sword born before him) pass into the Chap|ter-house. But the MS. in Of|fic. Arm. [H.2.] f. 8. b. Knight (or Knights) Elect, ought not as yet to enter, but as they come in at the Chappel door, fall off on the left hand into the East-Isle, behind the high Altar, where they may either walk or repose themselves at plea|sure (on Velvet Chairs or Stools, with Cushens, there prepared for them) MS. in Of|fic. Arm. [H.2.] f. 8. b. un|til they are called into the Chapter-house. And this hath been so usual a custom, that we find very frequent mention made of it; amongst others, it is thus noted of the Earl of Northumberland, an. 5. Eliz. that he entred not into the Chapter-house with the Lieutenant and Assistants, but Ex Collect. I V. gen. walked before the door, until he was called in. The like did the Lib. C. p. 110. Earls of Essex, and Ormond, and Sir Christopher Hatton, while the Commissioners appointed for that Installation, an. 30. Eliz. went into the Chapter-house. At the Installation of the Earl of Rutland, Sir George Villars, and Viscount ysle, an. 14. Iac. R. there were prepared in the foresaid Isle, Collect. W. le N. Cl. Stools set upon Carpets, one an Ell distant from another, on which they sat, according to the order of their Election, whilst the Soverign, Knights-Com|panions and Officers of the Order entred into the Chapter-house. So an. 1. Car. 1. the Earl of Salisbury, and the rest of the Elect Knights, MS. penes Ed. auconbridge. retired out of the Pro|ceeding as it entred the Chappel, and rested themselves in Velvet Chairs placed in the aforesaid Isle. Lastly, all the Elect Knights that received their Installation at the Grnd Feast of St. George, happily celebrated in the 13. year of the present Sove|raign did the like.
Nevertheless, out of extraordinary respect to great personages, they have been sometimes (though but rarely) admitted into the Chapter-house, with the So|veraign or his Lieutenant; among whom Lib. N. p. 183. Philip King of Castile and Leon, an. 22. H. 7. was one, and also MS. penes E. 1. G. f. 149. b. Prince Henry, an. 1. Iac. R. he being led in by the Sove|raign's Lieutenant, while the other four Elect Knights (installed at that Solemnity with him) sat upon Benches in the accustomed place, until they severally received their Summons to enter.
Sometimes the Soveraign and Knights-Companions in their Proceeding to In|sallation, have waved going to the Chapter-house, and pass'd immediately into the Choire, as did King Iames an. 9. when Ibidem. harles Duke of York, and others were Installed: The like did King Charles the First at the Installation of the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Earl of Suffolk; but then the Soveraign had held a Chapter in the Lib. R. p. 38. Privy Cham|ber, immediately before the Proceeding set forward, and it is to be noted, that in the former instance, when the Proceeding came as far as the East end of the Chappel, the Duke of York, and the two other Elect Knights, with Norroy before them, went out of the Proceeding into the Chapter-house, and there reposed themselves while the Soveraign proceeded on to the South door of the Chappel, and thence into the Choire.


SECT. V. The Ceremonies performed in the Chapter-house.
AFter the Lieutenant's entrance into the Chapter-house,1. Reading the Commis|sion. and opening of the Chapter; Lib. C. p. 110.  114. Garter (with three Reverences) presents first the Commission Collect. W. le N. Cl.  I. V. of Lieutenancy to hold the Feast, next that of Installation, to the Lieutenant (or if the Installation pass by Commissioners, then only the MS. penes Ar|thur Comit. An|glesey. f. 119. a. Commission of Installa|tion to the Senior Commissioner) which being received, he delivers it to the Re|gister of the Order, who forthwith Lib. N. p. 277. vide etiam Lib. C. in locis cit.  porro pag. 135.  140. reads it, for to him this duty appertains, as is recorded in the Pag. 181. Black Book of the Order, upon occasion of Garter's reading the Commission for Installation of Sir Thomas Brandon, an. 22. H. 7. the Register being then absent.
When the Register hath read the Commissions, he MS. fol. pe|nes G. O. Y. Pag. 203. returns them to the Lieute|nant (or Commissioners) and he again to the custody of MS. fol. pe|nes G. O. Y. Pag. 203. Garter, as it is noted to be done at the Installation of the Earls of MS. fol. pe|nes G. O. Y. Pag. 203. Shrewsbury, and Cumberland, an. 34. Eliz.
If the Soveraign be present,2. Receiving the Elect Knight into the Chapter-house. the Chancellor acquaints him that the Knights-Elect are without, otherwise the Lieutenant and Assistants (or Commissioners) consult together for some short space, touching the manner of calling in, and receiv|ing the Elect-Knight; which being concluded on, they immediately send out for him; and Lib. N. pag. 277. vide|sis Collect. I. V. gen.  Lib. R. pag. 5.  6. Garter is usually imployed in this service, Lib. N. pag. 277. vide|sis Collect. I. V. gen.  Lib. R. pag. 5.  6. who with all due respect invites and conducts him, to the Chapter-house door. But an. 34. Eliz. Garter went to the Ex eod. MS. penes G. O. Y. in loc. cit. Lodgings of the Earls of Shrewsbury and Cumberland, where they waited the Summons from the Commissioners, and having delivered his message, they forthwith repaired to the Chapter-house; their Train attending them to the door.
At the Installation of Francis Duke of Montmorency, the Earl of Leicester (then the Soveraign's Lieutenant) as an evidence of singular respect, sent from the Chapter MS. in quarto pe|nes W. le N. Cl. f. 25. two of the four Assistants assigned him, (namely the Earl of Bed|ford, and Sir Henry Sidney) to Mr. Frenche his Lodgings; who taking MS. in quarto pe|nes W. le N. Cl. f. 25. Garter and the Officers of Arms before them, led him thence between them, into the Chapter-house.
When there are two or more Elect-Knights that wait without in the East Isle,

expecting to be called in; Garter first conducts the x Colct. I. V. en. senior by Election, to the Chapter-house door, and afterwards the next, and so the rest in like order: for Instance, an. 14. Iac. R. when three Elect-Knights remained without, Garter came forth and made his Reverence to the Earl of Rutland (the senior Elect-Knight) and x Colct. I. V. en. first ushered him to the Chapter-house door, leaving the other two reposing upon their Seats; again, Garter returning the second time, introduced Sir George Villars, the next senior Knight-Elect; and last of all brought Viscount Lisle the junior Elect to the same place. In like mnner and order did Garter perform this service to all the Knights-Elect, according to their seniority of Ele|ction, an. 13. Car. 2.
As soon as Garter hath conducted the Elect-Knight to the Chapter-house door, two of the Commissioners (when the Installation is performed by Commissioners) or two of the Knights-Assistants (when by the Soverign's Lieutenant) or two of the senior Knights-Companions (if the Soveraign himself be present) receive him MS in Offic. Arm [H. 2] fol 8 b  ide etm MS pe|nes G. O. Y. fol 162. without. Thus did the two Commissioners receive the Earls of Collect. I. V. gen. Derby and Pebroke, an. 16. Eliz. and the Lib. C. pag. 110. Earl of ssex an. 30. liz. In like manner did two of the Lieutenants four Assistants, receive the Lib. N. p. 277. Lord Cromwell, an. 29. H. 8. as also the Earl Ex prd MS. penes eund. G. O. Y. fol. 80. of Huntington, an. 3. E. 6. and Earl of Collect. I. V. gen. Northumberland, an. 5. liz.
The Elect-Knight being thus received, is immediately Lib. N p. 277. conducted from the Chapter-house door up to the Soveraign (his Lieutenant or Commisioners) unto whom he maketh humble Reverence, and after some short congratulation, the Lieutenant (or senior Commissioners) in a short speech makes Ibid. known to him, the effect of his Commission, and Lib. C. p. 114 videsis MS. prd. penes G. O. Y. fol. 203. declares the Soveraign's bounty and ready kindness towards him, for a full admittance into this most honorable Society; which the Elect-Knight most humbly and gratefully acknowledgeth and accepts.
When Philip King of Castile and Leon, was to be Installed (which he perso|nally received at Windesor the 9. of Feb. an. 22. H. 7.) the Ex vet. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. fol. 294. Soveraign himself (being present in the Chapter-house) rose up from his Throne, and gave him in|formation of the Statutes and Ceremonies of the Order, and what they obliged him to perform; to all which he gave his ready assent.
The Complements at receiving the Elect-Knight into the Chapter-house being over,3. Investing him with the Surcoat. he disrobes himself of his Lib. N. p 274.  277. Lib. C. pag. 114.135.140.  Lib R. p. 6.  18. upper Garment, and then the Surcoat or Kirtle is taken from the Table (where it and the rest of the Habit and Ensigns of the Order are decently and separately laid in readiness before hand) and he invested therewith; at the doing of which these words of Admonition (entred at the end of King Henry the Eighth's Book of English Statutes) are to be read or spoken.
Take this Robe of Purple to the encrease of your honor,See also the Ap|pendix, Num. XXXVII. and in token or sign of the most honorable Order you have received; wherewith you being defended, may be bold not only strongly to fight, but also to offer your self to shed your blood for Christ's Faith, the liberties of the Church, and the just and necessary defence of them that be oppressed and needy.
After this, his Sword is close girt about him, over his Surcoat, by the MS. penes E. W. G. f 2 vide etiam Collect. I. V. gen. Commis|sioners (or the Assistants to the Lieutenant, or some of the Knights-Companions) and sometimes (in way of assistance) Garter hath put on the Elect-Knights Surcoat, girt his Sword about him, and laid his Hood over his shoulder, as in the case of the MS. Earl of Rutland, an. 26. Eliz. And as soon as this Ceremony is dispatcht, the Soveraign (or his Lieutenant) proceed into the Choire leaving the Elect-Knight behind them.
The Hood was heretofore put on in the Chapter-house (for so King Henry the Eighth's Art. 20. Statutes do appoint) Collect. I. V. gen. after the Elect-Knight hath been invested with his Surcoat, and before he proceeded to his Installation; but of late, because it must be MS. in Offic. Arm. [I. 1.] p. 19. taken off again in the Choire, and laid aside, to the end the Mantle may be put on, and after that laid on the shoulder a second time (over the Mantle) it hath been conceived a sort of diminution in the investiture, to take off any part of the Habit before the whole investiture be compleated. Whereupon at the beginning of King Iames his Reign, it was thought more convenient, that the Hood should

be carried upon the Cushen by Garter into the Choire, together with the Mantle and Collar, and not be put on till after the Investiture with the Mantle, and so was it observed at the Feast of St. George. an. 13.15.  23. Car. 2.
And though anciently it was laid over the left shoulder of the Elect-Knight, and so worn upon all occasions, yet an. 2.  3. Phil.  Mar. the wearing thereof being taken notice of to obscure the Scutcheon of St. George (embroi|dered on the same shoulder of the Mantle it was therefore in a Chapter held at St. Iames's, on the 22. of April, in the foresaid year Decreed, See the De|cree entred at the end of King Henry the Eighth's Book of English Sta|tutes. That thenceforth the Knights-Companions should wear their Hoods on the right shoulders, to the end the Scutcheon might be the better seen and appear.
Nevertheless there was a question moved, an. 12. Iac. R. MS. penes. E. W. G. f. 151. b. whether the Knights-Companions should not restore the usage of wearing their Hoods to the left shoul|der; which it seems was over-ruled, and the custom of wearing them on the right, thought fit to be continued, as the foresaid Decree appoints. And on the Eve of the Feast of St. George an. 23. Car. 2. some of the Knights-Companions, supposing the Hoods ought to be worn rather on the left shoulder, did so wear them to Vespers, but the next morning being better perswaded, of the Law and later Custom, they altered them to the right.
To great Princes-Strangers, there is a liberty given by King Art. 20. Henry the Eighth's Statutes, to receive (if they please) their Habit wholly within the Chap|ter-house, and before they enter their Stalls; and it thereby appears, that this was the Custom in times past; and whereof we have an Instance in Philip King of Castile an. 22. H. 7. who was Lib. N. p. 18 a. videsis vet. MS. penes W. le. N. Cl. f. 295. fully invested in the Chapter-house with the Garter, Surcoat, Mantle, Hood, and Collar, the Soveraign himself putting his hand to his Investiture with the Mantle.
Hereupon King Philip (Grandchild to the foresaid King of Castile) was invested with the whole Habit of the Order, before he assumed his Stall, for arriving at Windesor the 3. of Aug. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar. he proceeded to the Chappel, and re|ceived his Investiture within the MS. pag. 11. West door; where was prepared a Form (adorn|ed with Carpet and Cushens) and there the MS. pag. 11. Register of the Order, delivered the Mantle, to the Earls of Derby and Penbroke, who kissing it, presented it to the Queen, and Lib. C. p. 11. she her self (assisted by the said Earls) invested the King therewith; next Garter gave the Collar to the Earls of Arundel and Penbroke, who present|ed it also to the Queen, with the like ceremony whrewith the Mantle was deli|vered; and She thereupon put it about King Philips neck, and forthwith the Knight-Companions (having also robed themselves within the Chappel door) proceeded before the King and Queen, who with joined hands passed into the Choire; where being arived, the Queen Ibid. led him to the Soveraign's Stall, which having ascended, they both sat therein.
But as the foresaid Statute leaves this to the pleasure of the Stranger-Prince, and was permitted only for gaining of time, so have not any (who re|ceived a Personal Installation at Windesor since) been fully invested before they entred the Choire. For Collect R. C. Cl. f. 25  26. Francis Duke of Montmorency, an. 14. Eliz. and MS. penes E. W. G. f. 151. re|derick Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, an. 10. Iac. R. were both invested with their Surcoats only in the Chapter-house; but received the Mantles, Hoods, and Collars in their Stalls, after they had taken their Oaths.


SECT. VI. The Proceeding into the Choire.
THE Elect-Knight habited as before, forthwith passeth from the Chapter-house along the North Isle, and so in at the West door of the Choire, in solemn order; but his place in this Proceeding is changed, for here he is led

between two of the Knights-Companions. This is noted in the Ed st sinm e Consilio. p. 99. Black Book to be the order wherein Albro Vasques d' Almadea Earl of Averence, and two other Elect-Knights proceeded to their Installation, an. 24. H. 6. And albeit the Statutes of Institution, and those made by King Henry the Fifth are silent in the order of this Proceeding; yet for an Elect-Knight to be led to his Stall, between two other of the Knights-Companions is no modern Ceremony; since we also find that Ibid. p. 108. Viscount Bouchier, an. 30. H. 6. past to his Installation between the Lord Hastings and Lord Beauchamp. But the order of Proceeding is precisely set down in Art. 20. King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, to wit, That the Elect-Knight attended by his Gentlemen and Servants, shall be led between two other of the Knights-Companions, the Officers of the Order going before them.
To this Rule the constant practice hath been answerable, at all Installations since; the Knight-Elect proceeding either between Lib. C. p. 114. two of the Knights-Com|missioners, when there hath been no Lieutenant, or between two of the Lib N p 274.  27 videsis MS. in ffic. Am. [H. .] fl. 8. b Knights Assistants, where a Lieutenant was constituted, or lastly between the two Lib. C. p. 178.  lb R p 9. senior Knights-Companions, the Soveraign being present. Of which cases we shall here assign each a President.
Collect. W. le N. Cl. A Proceeding from the Chapter-house into the Choire, at the Installation of the Earl of Rutland, an. 26. Eliz. Viscount Mountagu and Lord Hunsdon being Com|missioners for that Solemnity.

Verger with his Rod.
Alms-Knights, two and two
Pursuivants, Heralds, and Norroy.

Black Rod.
Register.
Clarenceux, who then executed the Office of Garter.


Lord Hunsdon.
Earl of Rutland.
Viscount Mountagu.


Collect. W. le N. Cl. Another Proceeding from the Chapterhouse at the Installation of the Lord Russel, an. 31. H. 8. the Earls of Essex and Rutland, being then the Lieutenants's Assistants.

Heralds.

Register.
Garter.


Earl of Rutland.
Lord Russell.
Earl of Essex.


Collect. W. le N. Cl. A third Proceeding at the Installation of the present Soveraign, an. 14. Car 1. the two senior Knights-Companions being appointed to conduct the Prince from the Chapter-house to his Stall in the Choire.

Alms-Knights, two and two.
Officers of Arms, two and two.

Black Rod.
Register.
Garter.


Earl of Arundell
The Prince
Earl of Penbroke.


But when there hath been three Commissioners nominated, then the two senior Commissioners take the Knight-Elect between them, and the MS. penes Ar|thur. Comit. Anglesey. fol. 119. a junior Knight Com|missioner proceeds before them; and thus was it ordered at the Installation of the Earls of Essex, and Ormond, and Sir Christopher Hatton, an. 30. Eliz. where the Lib. C. p. 110. Earl of Essex proceeded from the Chapter-house into the Choire, between the Lord Hunsdon and Earl of Worcester, and the Lord Grey the junior Commisioner past singly before them.
In all cases where the Soveraign is present at an Installation (since the Custom of Investing with the Collar in the Chapter-house was left off) this is generally to be observed; that so soon as the Investiture with the Surcoat is finished, the

Soveraign passeth from the Chapter-house into the Choire, with the whole Pro|ceeding before him, leaving the Elect-Knight behind. And so soon as he and the Knights-Companions have taken their Stalls, in the Ex. Collect. I. V. gen. usual manner, the two senior Knights-Companions, upon the Soveraign's verbal directions, descend from their Stalls and stand under their Banners, while the Alms-Knights (but not the Prebends) Officers of Arms, and the three inferior Officers of the Order pass out of the Choire in usual manner, and proceed before them to the Chapter-house, from whence they introduce the Elect-Knight into the Choire to his Installation. But if there be more Knights to be Installed, then the two next senior Knights descend, and af|ter them the next seniors to them, till all the Elect-Knights are conducted in.
And this course is likewise observed when a Lieutenant is constituted, and hath been generally so practised, since the Investiture with the Collar, was performed in the Choire, and particularly at the Installations of the MS. penes. E. W. G. f. 144. a.  146. a. Duke of Lenox,MS. penes E. W. G. f. 144. a.  146. a. and Earls of Penbroke, Marr, and Southampton, an. 1. Iac. R. and of the Duke of Holstein and Earl of Northampton, an. 3. Iac. R. In this Proceeding to Installation, the Register usually carries a Book of the New Testament for the Elect-Knight to take his Oath upon; as also the Oath it self, fairly written in Parchment.
Lib. N p. 274.277.  Lib. C. p. 110. Garter bears before the Knight-Elect his Mantle, until he arrive at his Stall, and Art. 20. King Henry the Eighth's Statutes place this service upon some one of the Knights-Companions likewise; but we have not found in all our search, that it was ever performed by any of them.
It should seem, that about the time when this Injunction passed, it was the Cu|stom for Garter to bear the Mantle upon his arm; for we find it so carried at the Installation of the Lord MS in Offic. Arm. [L. 1.] p. 19. Russel, and others an. 31. H. 8. But it was not long after, that the laying it on a Velvet Cushen began.
The great Collar of the Order was also laid upon the Cushen; at the Installa|tion of MS. fol. 20. b. Sir Henry Sidney, an. 6. Eliz. of the Colect. I. V. gen. Earl of Derby, an. 16. Eliz. of the Ex Autogr. Earl of Rutland, an. 26. Eliz. and of the Ex eod. Col|lect I. V. gen. Earl of Shrewsbury, an. 34. Eliz. and in this manner born before the Knight-Elect, an. 13. Car. 2. and before the Duke of Monmouth, an. 15. Car. 2. and the Duke of Albermarle, an. 23. Car. 2.
With these the Hood (though heretofore put on in the Chapter-house, yet) of late hath been laid upon the Cushen, and also the Book of Statutes, and so we find them born by Garter before MS. penes. E. W. G. f. 144. b. Prince Henry an. 1. Iac. R. and Frederick Ibid. f. 151. a. Ele|ctor Palatine in the 10. year of the same King, as also before the Knights Install|ed, an. 13. Car. 2. and since.
And here we must note, that when Garter bears these Ornaments and Ensigns upon the Cushen before an Elect-Knight, or a Proctor, he is always placed be|tween the Register and Black Rod in the Proceeding.
Lastly, in this Proceeding also the Knight-Elect goeth bare headed, holding his Cap in his hand, and so did the Duke of Albermarle, an. 23. Car. 2. for it hath been thought incongruous to the order of Investiture (as is before noted of the Hood) to put on any part of the Habit or other Ornaments that must be taken off again, before the Investiture be compleated; and the due place (among the Ceremonies of Investiture) for putting on the Cap is not till all the other be finished.


SECT. VII. The Ceremonies of Installation.
WHen the Proceeding hath entred the Choire, the Alms-Knights and Officers of Arms, make their obeysances towards the high Altar, and the Sove|raign's royal Stall, in the same manner and order as we shall Chap. 20. Sect. 6. describe anon to

be done on the Eve of St. George. Then they proceed up to the steps before the Altar and Collect. I. V. gen. divide themselves, next the Officers of the Order make their like dou|ble Reverence, and last of all the two Commissioners (or Knights-Assistants, or Knights-Companions) and Knight Elect, all three together.
After this the Officers of the Order turn aside towards the Stall,1. Taking the Oath. designed for the Elect Knight, and approaching neer it, stand below in the Choire, while the Commissioners (or Assistants, or Knights-Companions) pass into the MS. penes Ar|thur Comi An|glesey, f. 119. lower row of Stalls (sometimes called the MS penes E. W. G. f. 144 a. middle row) directly under the designed Stall, Lib. C. p. 14 c.  Li. R. p. 154 leading the Elect Knight with them. And in this H. 8. Stat. Art. 20. videsis Lib. C. pag. 110.114 140. place is he to take his Oath, called in the Annals, the Lib. C. p. 50. Sacred Oath of the Order of the Garter: during which time he ought to stand between the Knights-Companions, who brought him thither.
At the Installation of Prince Henry an. 1. Iac. R. the MS. fol. penes E. W. G. lc. cit. Soveraign's Lieutenant himself, with the Lord Buckhurst (the next senior Knight-Companion) led him directly under his own Stall, and there gave him his Oath. And when the Earl of Shrewsbury was Installed, an. 34. Eliz. we find it noted, that the MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p. 206. se|nior Commissioner first entred the lower row of Stalls; but an. 31. H. 8. at the In|stallation of the Lord Russell, and others, the MS. in Offic. Arm. [L. 1.] p. 19. junior Assistant went up first.
The Knight Elect being thus placed, the Register of the Order (standing before them, but below in the Choire) Lib. N. p. 274. Lib. C. p. 114.151.  Lib. R. p. 6.19.47.61.85  145. readeth or pronounceth the Oath, for it is part of his duty, to administer the same.
In this solemn Ceremony, the New Testament whereon the Oath is taken (com|monly opened in some place of the Gospels) is indifferently held by one of the three inferiour Officers of the Order, for sometimes the Ex. Collect. I. V. gen. Register hath held it, as at the Earl of Ex. Collect. I. V. gen. Derby's Installation, an. 16. Eliz. as also at the Installation of the Autogr. Earl of Rutland, and Lord Cobham, an. 26. of the same Soveraign. At other times Garter hath held it, as an. 5. Eliz. when the MS. penes. W. le N. Cl. f. 11. b. Earl of Northumberland took his Oath, and an. 10. Car. 1. at the Installation of the MS. Earl of Moreton. But when the MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p. 206. Earl of Shrewsbury was sworn, an. 34. Eliz. the Usher of the Black Rod, per|formed this Office.
While the Oath is administring, the Elect Knight holds his right hand upon the Lib. R. p. 6. holy Evangelists, and assoon as the Register hath ended pronouncing the words, the Elect Knight answereth, Collect. W. le N. Cl. I will, so help me God, and then taketh off his hand reverently kissing the Book; and by this Ceremony sealeth his obligation to the Statutes of this most Noble Order.
The Ceremony used when Philip King of Castile and Leon, took the Oath (which to him was administred in the Chapter-house at Windesor) an. 22. H. 7. was this, The said King laid his hand upon the Lib. N. p. 184. videsis vet. MS. penes. W. le N. Cl. f. 294. Canon (under which was placed the Book of the Statutes of the Order, by the Prelate, to whom it was delivered by the Register) and repeated the words of the Oath, and having reverently kist all those things, by which he swore, he took a Pen from the Prelates hand, and sign|ed the Oath he had taken, with his own hand-writing; and forthwith delivered it to the Soveraign then present.
Now the Oath which a Knight-Subject takes, at his personal Installation, being of very great weight and concernment, it is fit we here render some account of the nature and form thereof, and (leaving those others taken by Stranger-Princes, and their Proctors, and the Deputies of Knights-Subjects, to their proper places) enquire, what was its original form, and how, when, and upon what occasion it received addition and enlargement.
First then, the form of the ancient Oath, which the Statutes of Institution ap|pointed to be taken by the Elect-Knight was very short, but comprehensive, and was, E. 3. Stat. Art. 24. That he should well and faithfully observe, to the uttermost of his power, all the Statutes of the Order.
This was the full content of the Oath, taken by the first Founders, and to which they also affixt their Lib. N. p. 2. Seals; and so it continued without alteration or addition, till towards the end of King Edward the Fourth's Reign. But at a Chapter held at the Kings Wardrobe in London the 10. of February, in the 19. year of the same King, it was Decreed, That all the Knights-Companions then alive, and all

such as were afterwards admitted into the Order (and that before they took possession of their Stalls) should be obliged to take this Oath, also Lib. N. p. 146 That they would aid support, and defend, with all their power, the Royal Colledge of St. George, within the Castle of Windesor, as well in its possessions, as all other things whatsoever.
In pursuance of which Decree, there was a form drawn up, wherein both Oaths were joined together, and entred in the Black Book, the Transcript whereof we have placed in the Num. XXXVIII. Appendix. But when the Register of the Order pronounced the Oath, (he premising such compellation as was due to every Elect Knight by name) it was altered to the form Num. XXXIX. there likewise following.
This Clause (relating to the maintenance and defence of the liberties of the Colledge) we also find retained in the Oath drawn up for the Prince of Wales, and entred for a Precedent in the Annals of the Order, which we have also thought fit to subjoin to the Appendix, Num. XL. former.
But when King Henry the Eighth new modelled the Statutes, we observe this Clause to be omitted, and some other particulars of another nature added to the general Oath, for due observation of the Statutes; as first, instead of main|taining and defending the Colledge in its rights and possessions; there is adjoin'd a Clause, to defend the Honors, Quarrels, Rights, Dominions, and Cause of the So|veraign, to augment the Honor, and accomplish all the Statutes, Points, and Ordi|nances of the Order, as may be seen at large in his Body of Art. 27. Statutes, all which we find sum'd up together, in that form of the Appendix, Num. XLI. Oath, taken by the Earl of Cum|berland, at his Installation an. 29. H. 8.
In the third year of King Edward the Sixth, at the Installation of the Earl of Huntington, and other Elect Knights, a new form was agreed on, by consent of the Earl of Derby, then the Soveraign's Lieutenant, and the Knights-Assistants ap|pointed for that Solemnity; the alteration being such, as the Reformation in Re|ligion, and the Soveraign's Interest, thought fit to make: and to the end the dif|ference between this and former Oaths may be observed, it is also inserted in the Num. XLII. Appendix.
But an. 1. Eliz. the Blue Book affords us a notable instance, of a dispensation for taking the Oath at the Installation of the Duke of Norfolk and others, in regard the Lib. C. p. 31. Rites and Ceremonies of Religion were then altered, and no new form of an Oath yet setled; for which cause the Earl of Penbroke (then the Sove|raign's Lieutenant) dispensed with their taking any Oath at that time; upon promise Ibid. they would observe such Statutes and Orders, as the Soveraign and Knights-Companions should decree to be observed and kept in the next Council of the Order.
And accordingly (within a short time after) another Form was Ordained, wherein the words of Obligation were put in the Negative: And this is the form of the Oath, taken by a Knight-Subject at this day; it being recorded at the end of the Red Book of the Order, both in Latin and English, and thence tran|scribed into the Num. XLIII. Appendix.
2. Investiture with the Man|tle, c.As soon as the Knight-Elect hath taken the usual Oath, he is led by the Knights-Commissioners (or Knights-Assistants, or Knights-Companions) up to the Stall ap|pointed for him, through that entrance next beneath it, and by them placed be|fore it. In the mean time Garter advanceth into the lower row of Stalls to the place where the Elect Knight stood, when he took his Oath, and from thence he presenteth to them (with due Reverence) the Mantle, Collar, and Book of Sta|tutes, who invest the Elect Knight first with the E. 3. Stat. Art. H. 5. Stat. Art. 19 H. 8. Stat. Art. 20. Mantle, by putting it upon his shoulders.
But we have met with some Examples, where Garter hath delivered the Man|tle, while the Elect-Knight remained in the lower row of Stalls, and wherewith he was invested before he went up to his Stall; and these were in the cases of the Ex Collect. I. V. gen. Earl of Northumberland, an. 5. Eliz. of MS. 4. penes W le N. Cl. Francis Duke of Montmorency, and others, an. 14. Eliz. the MS. penes E. W. G. f. 148. Earls of Dunbar, and Montgomery, an. 6. Iac. R. and the Palmer's large Iourn. pag. 13. present Soveraign, an. 14. Car. 1. Whereto may be added, that those Elect-Knights installed at the Grand Feast of St. George, most happily celebrated, an. 13. Car. 2.

were constrained to receive their Investiture below in the Coire, yt diretly under their proper Stalls. But this hapned through the great ccourse of peo|ple, which at that time had flockt to Windesor (greedy to behold the glory of that Solemnity, which for many years had been intermitted) and rudely forced, not only into and fill'd the lower row of Stalls, but taken up almost the whole Choire.
But it is noted in the Red Book that the Investiture with the Mantle and Collar, hath been sometimes performed by the Black Rod: as at the Installation of the Lib. R. p. 47. Earl of Northampton, an. 5. Car. 1. and of the Lord Treasurer Ibid. p 51. Weston, the Earls of Exiter and Lindsey, and Iames Marquess Hamilton, an. 6. Car. 1. Never|theless this is to be understood, of this Officers asistance given to the Knights-Companions whose Office it only is, and no otherwise.
MS. fol. 20. Whilst the Ceremony of Investiture with the Mantle is performing, the words of Admonition proper thereunto are pronounced, and are these that follow.
Take this Mantle of Heavenly Colour in sign and token of the most honora|ble Order you have received,See the Appendix. Num. XXXVI.  XXXVII. and to the increase of your honor, signed and marked as you see with a red Scutcheon of our Lords Cross, to the intent that you being always defended by the virtue and strength thereof, may ps through your Enemies, and then also overcome and vanquish, so that at the last for your worthy and approved acts, you may after this temporal Chivalry come to eternal triumphant joys in Heaven.
But at the Installation of the present Soveraign, the received some alteration, and were put into this form.
Receive this Robe of Heavenly Colour (the Livery of this most excellent Order) in augmentation of thy honor,Palm. lage Iourn. p. 13. enobled with the Shield and Red Cross of our Lord, by whose power thou mayest safely pierce Troops of thy Enemies, and be over them ever victorious; and being in this temporal warfare glorious in egregious and heroick actions, thou mayest obtain eternal and triumphant joy.
In the next place the Commissioners (or Assistants or Knights-Companions) lay the Hood upon MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 80  87. the Knights right shoulder over the Mantle, and bringing the Tippet athwart his Brest, tuck it under his Girdle, at which his Sword hangs.
And lastly, they tye the Collar about his shoulders, over his Mantle and Hood, and at this part of the Investiture these words of Admonition are also pro|nounced.
To the encrease of your honor,Appendix. Num XXXVI  XXXVII and in token of the Honorable Order you have received; Take this Collar about your Neck, with the Image of the holy Martyr and Christs Knight St. George, by whose aid you being defended, may pass through the prosperities and adversities of this world; that having here the Victory, as well of your Ghostly as Bodily Enemies, you may not only receive the glory and renown of temporal Chivalry, but also at the last the endless and everlasting reward of Victory.
This form of words received likewise alteration when the present Soveraign was to be Installed, being varied after this manner.
Wear this Collar about thy Neck,Palm. large Iournal. p. 8. adorned with the Image of the blessed Mar|tyr and Soldier of Christ St. George, by whose imitation provoked, thou maist so overpass both prosperous and adverse encounters, that having stoutly van|quished thy Enemies, both of body and soul, thou mayest not only receive the praise of this transient Combat, but be crowned with the Palm of eternal victory.
And here (before we pass further) it will be needful to observe, that ancient|ly at the Solemnities of Installation when the Soveraign or his Lieutenant was pre|sent, the Elect-Knight after he had been invested with the Mantle in his Stall, was immediately conducted out of the Choire, back to the Chapter-house (where the said Soveraign (or his Lieutenant) was accustomed to remain till he return|ed) there to receive Investiture with the Collar of the Order, from the Sove|raign (or his Lieutenant's) hands; which being done, he is said to have receiv|ed the full possession of his Habit.
And this is evident, first from King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, which direct (after the Elect-Knight's Investiture with the Mantle) Art. 20. That he shall return into the Chapter-house, where he shall receive from the Soveraign or his Deputy, the Collar of the Order; and secondly from the Practice about that time, as is mani|fest in the cases of the Lord Lib. N. p. 254 Montjoy, Sir William Fitz Williams, and Sir Henry ouldford, installed an. 18. H. 8. and the Ibid. p. 277. videsis Lib. vo|cat. Dalton. p. 119. b. Lord Cromwell, an. 30. H. 8. as also of the MS. in Offic. Arm. [L. 1.] pag. 19. Lord Russell, Sir Thomas Cheney, and Sir William Kingston, installed an. 31. H. 8. of the MS. penes G. O. Y. fol. 87. Marquess Dorset, Earl of Derby, Lord Seymour of Sudeley, and Sir William Pagit, an. 1. E. 6. of the Ibid. fol. 80. Earl of Huntingdon, Lords La Ware and Cob|ham, and Sir William Herbert, an. 3. E. 6. so likewise of the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Earl of Shrewsbury, and Lord Hunsdon, an. 3. Eliz. of the Collect. I. V. gen. Earl of Northumberland, an. 5. Eliz. and of the Collect. R. C. Cl. pag. 26. Duke of Montmorency, an. 14. Eliz.
The Proceeding back into the Chapter-house, upon this occasion, was ordered almost after the same manner, as that before mentioned into the Choire, only with this difference; that the new installed Knight took here his place, accord|ing to the dignity of his Stall: and so did the aforesaid Duke of Montmorency, when he returned to the Chapter-house, to receive his Collar; for because the Stall wherein he had been installed, was of a Ibidem. higher rank, than either of those belonging to the two Assistants, that conducted him to his Installation, they there|fore proceeded before (not on either side) him thither.
But this is observable, that when the Soveraign's Lieutenant remained in the Chapter-house, while the Elect-Knight proceeded to his Installation, the Vsher of the Black-Rod, proceeded not with the said Knight, but stayed behind, to at|tend upon the Lieutenant: as appears from the notices of the before mention|ed Installations, of the Lord Russell, Earl of Huntington, and Earl of Northum|berland; and as soon as the Investiture with the Collar was finished, the Lieute|nant proceeded to the Choire in the Rear and the new invested and installed Knight in place according to his Stall: A President or two of such Proceeding follows.
The Lieutenant's Proceeding into the Choire, at the Installation of the Lord Russell and others, an. 31. H. 8. after they had received their Collars in the Chapter-house.


Officers of Arms.
Knights newly installed, the junior formost.
Knights-Assistants.


Black-Rod.
Register.
Garter.

The Lieutenant.

In the same manner was the Lieutenan's Proceeding ordered at the Installation of the Marquess Dorset, and others, an. 1. E. 6.
After the Proceeding had entred the Choire, and the Lieutenant and Knights-Companions taken their Seats, with the usual Ceremonies; the Service of the Church began.
But when the Installation was performed by Commissioners, then was the Collar of the Order laid on the Cushen with the Mantle, and born before the Elect-Knight to his Stall, were, after his Investiture with the Mantle and Hood, he

received Investiture with the Collar also, and among sundry examples we shall instance in these; The Collect. I. V. gen. Lord William Howard, an. 1.  2. Pll.  Mar. was irst invested with his Mantle, and then had his Collar put about his neck by the Lord Collect. I. V. gen. Clynton and Lord Pagit, the two Commissioners appointed for his Installation. The Collect. I. V. gen. Earl of Lincolne, and Viscount Mountague, Commissioners for the Installa|tion of the Collect. I. V. gen. Earls of Derby and Penbroke, put on their Collars in their Stalls: and thus was it done by the Commissioners at the Installations of the Autogr. Earl of Rutland, and Lord Cobham, an. 26. Eliz. and of the MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p. 206. Earls of Shrewsbury, and Cumberland, an. 34. of the same Queen.
And in like manner, at all Installations solemnized since Queen Elizabeth's Reign, where the Soveraign hath vouchsafed his presence (the ancient Custom of returning to the Chapter-house for the Collar being laid aside) the Knights-Com|panions who led the Elect-Knights to their Stall, did there invest them with the Collars also; as we find in the case of the MS. penes E. W. G. f. 153. b. Earl of Rutland, Sir George Villars and Viscount Lisle, an. 14. Iac. R. who being come to their several Stalls, were first invested with their Mantles, next their Hoods, and after that their MS. penes E. W. G. f. 153. b. Collars. In like manner did the Auto. penes Camer. Scac|cai. Earls of Dorset and Holland invest the Earl of Suolk with the Collar in his Stall, an. 4. Car. 1. and thus hath it been observed, at all Installations since, where the Soveraign hath been present at the Solemnity.
As soon as the Ceremony of Investiture,3. Delivery of the Book of Statutes. with the Mantle, Hood, and Collar, is finished; the Commissioners (or Knights-Assistants, or Knights-Companions,) take the MS. Book of the Statutes of the Order, and deliver it into the hands of the new invested Knight. Thus this part of the Ceremony was observed to the MS. fol. penes G O. Y. p. 206. Earls of Shrewsbury and Cumberland after their Investiture, an. 34. Eliz. and to the MS penes E. W. G. f. 153. b. Earl of Rutland, Sir George Villars, and Viscount Lysle, an. 14. Iac. R. and so generally to all Elect-Knights since.
This Book the Knight is to keep safe in his own custody, both for instruction and direction, in such things as relate to the Laws and Ceremonies of this most Noble Order, therein contained.
After this, they also give unto him the Black Velvet Cap, adorned with Plumes of White Feathers; and this in particular is noted to be the last among the Ceremonies performed at the Installation of the present Lib. R. p 146. Soveraign.
All things relating to the full Investiture being ended,4. Placing the Knight in his Stall. there only remains, to compleat this great Ceremony, the Installation it self, which is performed in the following manner.
The new invested Knight, standing before his Stall, and turning himself towards the High Altar, first makes an humble Reverence thitherward, and after a like obeysance towards the Soveraign, or in his absence towards his Stall, (Thus is it noted of Ex. Collect. I. V. gen: William Lord Howard, 1.  2. Phil.  Mar.) which having done, the Lib. C. p 110.  Lib. R. p. 61. Commissioners (or Assistants or Knights-Companions) forthwith jointly imbrace him, with much joy (as their Fellow and Companion) according to the Custom of Installations, and set him down in his assigned Stall; thereto adding their wishes for his happiness and honor.
With the like MS. in Offic. Arm. [lib. L.] pag. 19. courteous and civil expressions and congratulations, we find this Ceremony was closed to the Lord Russel, an. 31. H. 8. which he answered with equal respect; giving moreover to the Knights who installed him, great thanks for the honor of their assistance: and to the Marquess Dorset and others installed, an. 1. E. 6. the Commissioners for that Ceremony, added this Vote, MS. fl pen G. O. Y. p. 87. That God would give them much honor; and after such like Complemental re|spects have past, the Commissioners (or Knights-Assistants, or Knights-Companions) take their Stalls.
But we have a notable instance in relation to this Ceremony, at the Installa|tion of Philip King of Castile, an. 22. H. 7. where the Soveraign himself, Lib N. p. 184 solemn|ly introduced him into his Stall (being the Ex ve. MS. pen. W. le N. Cl. fol. 29. next unto his own) and Ex ve. MS. pen. W. le N. Cl. fol. 29. therein placed him. At which action it seems there was a form of words pronounced, relating to the Elect-Knight's Session and act of Installation, no less than at his Investiture, though we are not so happy as to know them: the Relator of the

manner and order of this great Ceremony, having in the place of the words added an c. and left a blank for them; but with this short note at the instant of Installation; Ex vet. MS. pen. W le N. Cl. fol. 295. The Soveraign saying these words, Don ils, c.


SECT. VIII The Order observed, when two or more Knights are Installed in one day.
WHen there are two or more Elect-Knights appointed to receive the honor of Installation at one Solemnity; and that the Ceremony is performed by two Commissioners (or two Knights-Assistants) then as soon as they have finished all the Ceremonies of Investiture and Installation, due to the senior of them, they leave him so possest of his Stall, and forthwith Ex. Collect. I. V. gen. vide MS. penes Arthur. Comit. Anglesey. fol. 119. a. return to the Chap|ter-house; the Proceeding of Alms-Knights, Officers of Arms, and the inferior Offi|cers of the Order (after their usual Reverences made in the middle of the Choire) passing forth before them, to the Chapter-house, and thence they conduct the next senior Elect-Knight into the Choire, where they perform all the circumstances of Investiture and Installation to him, as they did to the first Installed Knight: Which having finished, they leave him also in his Stall, and Ex. Collect. I. V. gen. vide MS. penes Arthur. Comit. Anglesey. fol. 119. a. proceed back as before for the third Elect-Knight, and after the like manner do they introduce and in|stal him, and so the rest (if there be more that wait their Installation) till all be installed.
This seems to have been the ancient practice, for it is noted in the Annals, that Viscount Beaumont, and the Lord Sudeley, Commissioners appointed by King Henry the Sixth, for the Installation of Albro Vasques d' Almadea Earl of Ave|rence, the Lord Beauchamp, and Sir Thomas Hoo; led them into the Choire Lib. N. p. 99. singly and apart by themselves, and there installed them in their proper Stalls. And thus is it noted of the two Assistants at the Installation of the Earl of Hun|tingdon and others, an. 1. E. 6. who MS. fol. pe|nes G. O. Y. pag. 80. after they had invested and installed the said Earl, MS. fol. pe|nes G. O. Y. pag. 80. proceeded back to the Chapter-house, for the Lord La Ware, and he being installed, they MS. fol. pe|nes G. O. Y. pag. 80. returned again for the Lord Cobham, and lastly for MS. fol. pe|nes G. O. Y. pag. 80. Sir Wil|liam Herbert. In like manner, when the Commissioners had given the Proctor to Emmanuel Duke of Savoy, possession of his Principals Seat, an. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar. they Collect. I. V. proceeded back for William Lord Howard, and conducted him to his In|stallation. Thus did the Commissioners by the Earl of Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 29. Penbroke, an. 16. Eliz. when they had first installed the Earl of Derby; and by the MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p. 206. Earl of Cumberland, after the Earl of Shrewsbury had been installed.
When the Soveraign hath nominated three Commissioners to his service, in such case they have returned Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 34. altogether to fetch in the other Knights (after the Ceremonies of Installation were performed to the senior Elect-Knight) singly, that were to be installed, and alternately changed their places in the Proceeding to the several Installations: (one of them always going single and formost) an instance whereof we have at the Installation of the Earls of Essex, and Ormond, and Sir Christopher Hatton, an. 30. Eliz. where the Earl of Essex having been first conducted to his Installation, between the Lord Hunsdon, and Earl of Worcester, the Lord Lib. C p. 110. Grey the third Commissioner went single next before them, then all three Commissioners returned to fetch in the Earl of Ormond, who proceeding into the Choire, between the Lord Hunsdon and Lord Grey, the Earl of Ibid. pag. 111. Worcester went alone immediately before them; and his In|stallation being likewise dispatcht, Sir Christopher Hatton was conducted to his Stall, between the Earl of Worcester and the Lord Grey, the Ibid. pag. 111. Lord Hunsdon in this proceeding going next before them.
If the Lieutenant had four Assistants appointed him, (which was necessary when there were many Knights to be installed) the order of their Installation hath

been as followeth; first two of the senior Knights-Assistants conducted the se|nior Elect-Knight to his Installation, next the two other Assistants proceeded with the second Elect-Knight, and installed him; then again the two senior Knights-Assistants introduced the third Elect-Knight to his Stall, and in this manner they alternately changed, till all were installed. Thus was it ordered at the Instal|lation of Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. 26. Francis Duke of Montmorency, and others, an. 14. Eliz. for at this So|lemnity the Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. 26. Earl of Bedford, Sir Henry Sidney, the Earl of Worcester, and the Earl of Huntington, were appointed Assistants to the Earl of Leicester (then the Soveraign's Lieutenant) the Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. 26. two first conducted the Duke to his Stall, and the two last the Earl of Essex, then the two first proceeded again with the Lord Burghley, and the two last with the Lord Grey, and lastly the two first proceed|ed a third time, with the Lord Shandos between them.
And the like method and alternate change is observed, if four Commissioners be constituted, as at the Installation of Frederick King of Denmark, and Iohn Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, an. Ibid. fol. 31. 25. Eliz. where the Kings Proxy was conducted into the Choire, between the Earl of Ibid. fol. 31. Leicester, and Lord Hunsdon, being the two senior Commissioners, and the Prince between the Ibid. fol. 31. Earl of Huntingdon, and the Lord Charles Howard, the two junior Commissioners.
But some have been of opinion, that the Commissioners nominated to this em|ployment, ought not to divide the duty, and part of them to instal one Knight, and part another, and by such an alternation to dispatch the Ceremony, as in the former cases; but on the contrary, that all should jointly assist at each Instal|lation. And in favour of this opinion, there is an instance at the Installation of the Earl of Salisbury and Viscount Bindon, an 4. Iac. R. for the said Earl, having been brought in to the Choire, and both invested and installed by the Earls of Nottingham and Suffolk, (then the two senior Commissioners) the other two Com|missioners, who were left behind in the Chapter-house, to conduct Viscount Bin|don to his Stall, calling to mind that all four were MS. penes E. W. G. f. 147. a. joint Commissioners, con|ceived that the said Earl was not legally installed by the two other, because themselves had not been assistant at the Ceremony. And upon consultation with the senior Commissioners, it seems this opinion prevailed so far with them, that they agreed to impart it to the Earl of Salisbury, who thereupon Ibid. de|scended into the lower Seats before his Stall, and there all Ibid. four Commissioners gave him his Oath again, then led him up into his foresaid Stall, and a second time Ibid. Invested and Installed him; each of the four Commissioners putting to their hand: and the like Ibid. joint assistance was given by them to the Viscount Bindon, installed at the same time.
But this method was not only new, but different from former practice, for in all like cases as before are cited, we have observed that both the Knights-Commissioners, and Lieutenant's Assistants have constantly divided the employ|ment, by an alternate change; and besides, where the Soveraign hath autho|rized his Lieutenant to peform this Ceremony, and appointed some of the Knights-Companions to assist therein, these Assistants and not the Lieutenant have done the duty appertaining to the Installation, that part of it of investing with the Collar heretofore in the Chapterhouse, and the whole duty at the Installation of Prince Henry, excepted.
And it is to be further noted, that this way of joint assistance at the instal|lation of the Earl of Salisbury, was afterwards thought so little essential or ne|cessary, that it became no Precedent; for at the very next Feast of Installation, when the Ibid. f. 148. a. Earls of Dunbar and Montgomery were installed (in the sixth year of the same King) and for which Ceremony four Commissioners were likewise ap|pointed; the two senior of them installed the Earl of Dunbar, and the two ju|nior, the Earl of Montgomery; and this we find again in Practice, an. 10. Car. 1. when the Autogr. two senior Commissioners installed the Earl of Danby, and the other two the Earl of Morton.
But in the last place, if the Soveraign be present, and consequently that the Knights-Companions perform this Ceremony of Introduction, Investiture, and In|stallation, there is commonly then so many of them, as can go through the

whole work, without changing by turns, after the manner used when done by a few, either Commissioners or Assistants, and therefore in this case the order is thus,
First, the two senior Knights-Companions (having descended from their Stalls, and past out of the Choire to the Chapter-house with the Proceeding before them) conduct to his Installation the eldest Elect-Knight, and having performed that whole Ceremony, they return and take their Stalls with accustomed Reve|rences. Then the two next senior Knights-Companions, descend and go out, and return with the next senior Elect-Knight, to his Installation, and after that two other Knights-Companions go out and fetch in the third, and so the rest in due order.
And this method, we observe to have been practised at the Installation of Prince Henry, and other Elect-Knights, Lib. C. pag. 151. vide|sis MS. fol. penes E. W. G. f. 144. b. an. 1. Iac. R. for after the Prince had been placed in his Stall, by the Earl of Nottingham and Lord Buckhurst; the Lib. C. pag. 151. vide|sis MS. fol. penes E. W. G. f. 144. b. Earls of Shrewsbury and Cumberland, came down from their Stalls, and went to the Chapter-house, taking the Proceeding before them, and thence conducted the Duke of Lenox to his Stall, and returned to their own. In like manner the Lib. C. pag. 151. vide|sis MS. fol. penes E. W. G. f. 144. b. Earls of Northumberland and Worcester, went next out for the Earl of Sou|thampton; and having installed him, the Lib. C. pag. 151. vide|sis MS. fol. penes E. W. G. f. 144. b. Lord Sheffield, and Lord Howard of Walden, past forth of the Choire, and brought in the Earl of Marr; and lastly, the Lib. C. pag. 151. vide|sis MS. fol. penes E. W. G. f. 144. b. Lord Montjoy and Earl of Sussex, Installed the Earl of Penbroke.
The like order was observed at the Installation of the Ibid. f. 153 a Earl of Rutland, and others, an. 14. Iac. R. who having been left behind in the Chapter-house, while the Soveraign proceeded to the Choire, were afterwards by several Knights-Companions (Lib. C. p. 188. the seniors going out first) introduced to their Installations; one after another, according to the seniority of their Election.
But to be more particular in the order of the Ceremony in this case, we shall lay down the method observed at the grand Feast of St. George, held at Winde|sor, an. 13. Car. 2. which was as followeth.
First, the two senior-Knights, the Earls of Salisbury and Berkshire, descended from their Stalls with the usual Reverences, and stood before them.
Next the Alms-Knights came down in a body, from the hault paces of the Altar, into the middle of the Choire, and having there made their double obey|sances proceeded forth.
After them the Officers of Arms descended also (the Pursuivants formost) and having made the double Reverences in the middle of the Choire, went out af|ter the Alms-Knights.
Then followed the three inferiour Officers of the Order, having first made their usual Reverences.
And lastly, the two Senior Knights joining together in the middle of the Choire, (after their double Reverences) past out in the Rear.
In this order they proceeded towards the Chapter-house; and when the Alms-Knights came neer the door, they fell off and divided themselves; the like did the Officers of Arms, and both thereby opened a way for the Officers of the Order, and Knights-Companions, to pass between them into the Chapter-house; where being entred, they first brought forth the Duke of Oromnd (the senior Elect-Knight) and taking him in the middle between them, the Proceeding went before into the Choire, in the same order as it came thence, Garter then bearing (on a Velvet Cushen) his Mantle, Hood, Collar, and Book of Statutes.
The Alms-Knights being entred the Choire, made their double obeysances in the usual place, and ascended the hault-paces of the Altar, flanking on the other side.
After them, the Officers of Arms did the like.
Then the three inferior Officers of the Order, coming up into the middle of the Choire, made their double Reverences, and so passed before the Knights to the place directly under the Stall designed for the Duke, wither he (conducted as aforesaid) followed, after that he and the two Knights-Companions had also made their usual Reverences, in the middle of the Choire; for the Croud was so great through the concourse of People to this grand Festival that the Knights-Companions

could not pass into the lower row of Stalls with the Duke, (being the usual place for the Elect-Knight to be brought unto) but were necessitated to invest him below in the Choire.
After the Duke was Invested and Installed, the Proceeding (ordered in all points as before) went again to the Chapter-house, and brought the Duke of Bucking|ham into the Choire, where he received his Installation, in the manner aforesaid.
But the day being far spent, and these Proceedings to and from the Chapter|house taking up much time; the Soveraign to shorten the Ceremony, commanded that with the next Proceeding, all the rest of the Elect-Knights, being eight, (be|side two Proxies) should be introduced at once; which command being obey|ed, and each Elect-Knight placed before his Stall, they took the Oath, received their Investiture, were led up to their Stalls, and took possession of them by a solemn Installation.
And in regard so many Elect-Knights were introduced together, it was thought fit (because necessary) that their Mantles and Collars should be also brought in the Proceeding, and to effect this, each Knight-Elect appointed one of the Gen|tlemen that attended on him, to bear the Cushen (whereon his Mantle and Col|lar were laid) before him to the Choire door, which was accordingly done; and where they stood holding them in their arms, until Garter had in due order (as they were to be made use of) fetched them into the Choire.
And here we may insert this general Rule, That at all Installations where some of the Elect-Knights are not sent for in to the Chapter-house, to receive in|vestiture with the Surcoat (before the senior Elect-Knight hath been conducted to his Stall, but left to repose themselves, in the East Isle of the Chappel, during his Installation (as hath many times happened) the Knights-Commissioners or Assistants, upon their return to the Chapter-house, send Garter for the next senior Elect-Knight, whom they receive at the door thereof, and having invested him with his Surcoat, and girt his Sword about him, proceed with him to his Instal|lation in the usual order: and the same method is observed, if there be more Elect-Knights that wait their calling into the Chapter-house. And thus we find it practised to Sir MS. in Offic. Armor. [L.1.] pag. 19. Thomas Cheney, and Sir William Kingston, an. 30. H. 8. after the Knights-Assistants had returned from the Installation of the Lord Russell; and to the Earl of Collect. I. V. gen. Penbroke, as soon as the Knights-Commissioners had installed the Earl of Derby, an. 16. Eliz. as also to the Earl of MS. fol. pe|nes G. O. Y. p. 206. Cumberland, when the Com|missioners returned from the Installation of the Earl of Shrewsbury, an. 34. Eliz. and lastly to the Autogr. Earl of Morton, after the Earl of Danby had received his Stall, an. 10. Car. 1.
The Knight or Knights having now received a compleat Installation, the Knights-Commissioners (Knights-Assistants, or Knights-Companions) with all civil respect take their leaves of the last installed Knight, and descend into the Choire, and with usual Reverences take their own Stalls, but the senior Knight-Companion ascends first. Where note, if the Stalls of the Commissioners, or Assistants, or Knights-Companions be on the same side with the last installed Knight, they then descend not into the Choire, but (after their Reverences made above) pass directly to them along the Stalls, and this we find done by the Lord Ex eod. MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. in loc. cit. Howard of Essingham, and the Earl of Ormond, an. 34. Eliz. when they had finished the Installation of the Earl of Cumberland.
The Ceremonies and Circumstances of Installation being finished, the Officers of Arms first, next the Alms-Knights descend from the Steps of the Altar, and take their several stations in the Choire. Then one of the Prebends of the Col|ledge (but if the Soveraign be present, the Prelate with the Serjcant of the Vestry before him) is conducted to the Altar by the Verger of the Chappel, and there be|gins the Service appointed by the Church, which being finished, the Proceeding passeth out of the Choire in the usual order (the new installed Knight being rank|ed according to his Stall) either to the Presence Chamber, or the Lieutenants, or Commissioners Lodgings, as the occasion is.



SECT. IX. The Offring of Gold and Silver.
BUT if the Installation be solemnized in the morning, the Service of the Church having proceeded as far as the Offertory, two of the Prebends (ap|pointed to receive the Offring) are conducted to the Altar by their Verger, and forthwith first the Alms-Knights, and then the Officers of Arms ascend again to the steps of the Altar, and flank on each side as before.
After this, Garter summons down the Knights-Companions to the Offering; who descend with usual Reverences, and stand in the Choire under their proper Stalls, whilst the Soveraign's Lieutenant descends from his Stall, and offers (first) for the Soveraign (he receiving the Bezant from the senior Knight) and then returns to his Stall.
And at this instant was the usual time heretofore for offring the defunct Knights Atchievements; which by King Iames his appointment was altered, and ordained to be performed before the Elect-Knights were installed; of which we shall speak Chap. 25. anon.
The Lieutenant after a short stay in his Stall, descends again, and proceeds up to the Altar to make his own Offring both of Gold and Silver, and then returns; and after him do the rest of the Knights-Companions (including those newly in|stalled) offer in their due order, the circumstances we shall largely set down in our discourse upon the offring on the Chap. 21. Grand Feast-day.
But when the Installation passeth by Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 33. Commissioners, there is then Collect R. C. Cl. f. 33. no Offring made for the Soveraign; but the commissioners offer first, beginning with the two MS. Seniors, and after them the other Knights-Companions in their due order.
The Ceremony of Offring at the Installation of Ex ver. MS. penes W.le N. Cl. f. 295. b. Philip King of Castile, an. 22. H. 7. is remarkable, and therefore we shall note it here: For he descending from his Stall into the Choire, and Ex ver. MS. penes W.le N. Cl. f. 295. b. standing before it (as the other Knights-Compa|nions did) the Soveraign left his royal Stall, and hastned down to proced to the Offring; to which the King would have Lib. N. p. 185. followed, this the Soveraign would not permit, but obliged the King to proceed along with him Ex eod. vet. MS. on his left hand, though he Ex eod. vet. MS. desired to perform his duty as a Brother of the Order, and Knight-Companion, so that at last they both made their Offrings, Lib. N. loc. cit so neer together, that though the Soveraign had the precedence, yet was it hardly observable.


SECT. X. Of the Grand Dinner at the Installation.
ON the day of Installation, there hath from ancient time been accustoma|bly prepared, a very sumptuous and noble Feast; and though it was agreed on in Chapter, an. 3. E. 6. Lib. N. p. 302 videsi lib. vo|cat. Dalton. p. 129. b. That the Knights-Elect from thenceforth might be in|stalled by Commission without a Feast, yet after his Reign, we find the old usage of making a Feast at this Solemnity restored.
If the Soveraign appoint the Installation to be when the Feast of St. George is also celebrated, and himself personally present, the Feast is then kept at the Soveraign's charge.
If in such case he constitute a Lieutenant, the Installation Dinner is kept at the expence of the Lieutenant; and usually prepared in some of the Soveraign's

Lodgings in the Castle, but seldom in St. George's Hall; though MS penes W. D. N. f. 5. b. there, the Earl of Arundel, at the Installation of the Earl of Shrewsbury and Lord Hunsdon, kept his Feast, an. 3. Eliz.
But when the Installation is kept at any other time of the year, without the joint observation of St. George's Feast, then the Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 34. new installed Knight or Knights are at all the charge; who for the most part have had the Grand Dinner pre|pared at the Dean's Lodgings. Nevertheless, where ever it is appointed, thither do the Soveraign (his Lieutenant and Assistants, or Commissioners) together with the new installed Knights proceed in full Robes, which at the Installation of the MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 87. Marquess of Dorset and other Knights, an. 1. E. 6. we find noted to be MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 87. accord|ing to the ancient custom.
At the Installation of the Lord Russell, Sir Thomas Cheney, and Sir William Kingston, an. 31. H. 8. the Soveraign's Lieutenant MS. in Offi. Armor. [L.1.] pag. 19. washed alone, the water being brought up with three Reverences; after him did his two Assistants walh, and lastly the three new installed Knights.
The Lieutenant's place at the Table, is somewhat on the MS. penes W. D. N. f. 5. b. left hand the cloth of State, and there sat the Earl of Arundell, Lieutenant for St. George's Feast, when the Earl of Shrewsbury and Lord Hunsdon were installed, an. 3. Eliz. But the other four Knights-Companions (his two Assistants, and the two new instal|led Knights) sat towards the MS. penes W. D. N. f. 5. b. Tables end on both sides, for that they could not well sit all on a side.
But of late times, viz. at the Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. Installation of the Earl of Northampton an. 5. Car. 1. a question was started, whether the Lieutenant (or Commissioners) should sit at Dinner in their Habit, or not? since the powers given them by their Com|missions, seem to terminate as soon as the Knights are installed (though it was allowed that the new installed Knight ought to sit in his Robes) as also because at the Installation of the Ex lib. vo|cat. Dalton. pag. 119. b. Lord Cromwell, an. 29. H. 8. after all the Ceremonies were finished in the Chappel, the Knights went to the Deans house, and there put off their Habit, and Ex lib. vo|cat. Dalton. pag. 119. b. dined in their ordinary Apparel. So also at the Installation of the Earl of Autogr. Rutland, and Lord Cobham, an. 26. Eliz. the Commissioners when they were returned from the Chappel, did put off the Autogr. Habit of the Order, before they went to Dinner, and the new installed Knights kept on Autogr. only their Surcoats; and thus sat all Dinner while.
What was answered to these objections, or whether they dined without their Habit, we do not find; but the practice to the contrary, to wit, of keeping on the whole Habit till the grand Dinner be ended, hath been at other times ge|nerally observed.
At the MS. penes Edw. Faucon|bridge gen. vi|defi MS. fol. penes W. D. N. fol. 5. b.  12. b. second Course (called also the MS. fol. pe|nes E. W. G. f. 151. a.  153. b. second Mess, and second MS. fol. pe|nes E. W. G. f. 151. a.  153. b. Service) doth Garter (accompanied with the Officers of Arms) proclaim the Stiles, and Titles of honor of the Soveraign (if he be personally or by Lieutenant present) in Latin, French, and English, and crys Largess thrice: next the Stiles of the new instal|led Knights in French or English only, with two Largesses, and in that order they were installed. Thus was it done at the installation of Ibid. Charles Duke of York an. 9. Iac. R. of Ibid. Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhyne an. 10. Iac. R. of the Ibid. Earl of Rutland, and others, an. 14. Iac. R.
Ex vet. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 301. Philip King of Castile dined with the Soveraign in his Privy Chamber, the day of his installation an. 22. H. 7. whose Stile was proclaimed by Garter not in the same Room, but at the Soveraign's Ex vet. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 301. great Chamber-door, and in St. George's Hall (after Largess had been thrice cryed) in this manner.
Ex vet. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 301. Du treshault trespuissant tresexcellent Prince, Ic Roy de Castile de Leon  de Granade Archdue Daustrich, Due de Bourgoine,  Chevalier de la tres-no|ble Ordre de la Iartier.
When the Soveraign constitutes a Lieutenant, then is the Lieutenant's Stile also proclaimed, and to his other Titles is added that of this present honor of Lieutenantship; and afterwards the Stiles of the new installed Knights; which we find noted at the installation of the Earl of Shrewsbury, and Lord Hunsdon,

an. 3. Eliz. where Garter and the Officers of Arms proceeded into the middle of St. George's Hall (the Grand Dinner being held there) and after three obey|sances, proclaimed their Stiles (only in French) as followeth.
MS. penes W. D. N. f. 5. b. Du tres-noble  puissant Seigneur, Henry Fytz Allen, Conte de Arundell, Seigneur Matravers,  de Clun, Chevalier du tres-noble Ordre de la Iar|tier,  Lieutenant de cest noble Feste de St. George.
Du tres-noble  puissant Seigneur, George Conte de Shrewsbury, Seigneur Talbot, Furnivall, Verdon,  Strange de Blakmer, Chevalier du tres-noble Or|dre de la Iartier,  Iusticier des Forrestz  Chasez, de la Riviere de Trent envers le North.
Du tres-noble seigneur Henry Cary, Baron de Hunsdon, Chevalier du tres-noble Ordre de la Iartier
The order of this Ceremony is more particularly noted at the Installation of the Duke of Montmorency, and others, an. 14. Eliz. and was thus; first Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. 27. Garter cryed Largess, and next proclaimed the Soveraign's Stile, and Titles of honor, in three Languages, then going two foot back, he proclaimed the Lieutenants Stile only in French, with two Largesses; after that he cryed one Largess for the Duke, and lastly for all the other new installed Knights, only two Largesses, and the other Officers of Arms did the like; and still as Garter had finished his proclamation of the Stiles, the Heralds joined with him in crying Largess; and so with Reverence they departed the Hall.
But we are in the last place to note, that when neither the Soveraign is pre|sent, nor his Lieutenant, then the Soveraign's Stile is Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. not proclaimed, nor those of the Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. Commissioners, but only of the Ex collect. W. le N. Cl.new installed Knights.
Assoon as Dinner is ended, the Knights-Companions rise from the Table, and withdraw to disrobe themselves, and therewith the Solemnity of Installation takes ending: but if at any time the Solemnities continue to that evening and the following day; it is only, because the Soveraign (or his Lieutenant) is pre|sent, upon the account of celebrating the Feast of St. George, and not with re|ference to the Solemnity of Installation.
We shall conclude with this Observation, that the ancient custom of preserv|ing the memory of remarkable actions by some Emblematical Representations, Figures and Devises (whereof, for the last Century, Sylloge Nu|mismatum E|legantiorum. Lukius affords plenty of Examples) is still continued in use; and therefore upon consideration had of the honor they thereby brought the persons to whom they related, was it, that the late Soveraign, of ever blessed memory, thought fit to perpetuate the So|lemnity of the present Soveraign's Installation, by certain Medals; whereof the forms and inscriptions were these.





SECT. XI. Of setting up the Knights Atchievments.
THE last thing to be done, at this great Solemnity, is setting up the Helm, Crest, Sword, Banner, and Plate of the new installed Knight, over his Stall, in the Chappel of St. George at Windsor; to which purpose they are to be pro|vided in readiness, according to the Chap. 11. Sec. . directions before given. This, though it be no part of the Ceremony of Installation, yet is it a consequent thereunto, and an unseparable appendix; and therefore proper enough to be added here.
The setting up of Trophies, Ensigns, and Atchievements of honor anciently in Churches, as well in the life time of such worthy and deserving men, who had performed some gallant action, as on their Tombs and Monuments after their death, was chiefly designed to this end; that the Beholders thereby put in mind of their great virtues, might be excited to the imitation and pursuit of true Nobility, Valour, and Virtue.
Hereupon at the Institution of this most Noble Order, the Atchievements of the Knights-Companions, were thought fit to be set up in the Choire of the said Chappel; and hence also the remarkable Plates, wherein their Escotcheons of Arms, curiously wrought in enamel, were fastned to the back of their Stalls. Lib. N. p. 10 Not that the out|ward form of such things, have in them any great force; but that the memory of great actions done, beget that ardour in the breasts of excellent persons, which never is at rest, till some eminent atchievements of theirs have over-taken the others fame and glory.
By the Statutes of Institution it is ordained, that the time for setting up the Atchievements shall be E. 3. Stat. Art. 19. when the Elect-Knight comes to Windesor Casil, that is, to his Installation, and not before; and the reason is there likewise given, Ord. Stat. in Bibliuth Harton Art. 19. lest it should happen (he not coming within the time limited for his Installation and consequently the vacating his Election thereupon ensuing) that a new Election being made, those Military Ensigns might seem to be disgracefully withdrawn, and an Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. p. 18. occasion of dishonor given, which otherwise could not be avoided, if they should be suddenly taken down from a place so high.
Now 'tis most clear, that the intention of this Article extends to the inishing the Ceremonies of Installation, before the Atchievements ought to be set up, by so carefully providing against the dishonor of taking them down, in case the Election should become void, which must certainly happen, if the Knight-lect died but the hour before he were compleatly installed. And accordingly in the ancient Deputation both to Appendix, Num. XLIX. and . Sir William Philip, and Sir Iohn Fasil power is given their Proctors first to demand, receive, and obtain their Principals Stalls, and next to tender their Helms and Swords, to be hung up in the Choire of Windesor according to custom: and for clearer information of the order and course in this Ceremony, it may be observed, that the Soveraign impowered his Commissioners Appendix, Num. L1. first to give the Deputy possession of his Principals Stall, and ater to receive the Atchievements, and place them over it. Herewith it may be consi|dered, That the Atchievements are set up in memorial of the Knight-Elect's being installed a Companion of the Order; and 'tis incongruous in the rules of Honor, to have the sign or memorial of an action, precede the action it self.
Again, the Statutes of this most Noble Order expresly provide, That the Knights Atchievements shall not be permitted to be hung up, until all the E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 12 H. 8. Stat. Art. 24. Duties and Fees enjoined by the Statutes, to be paid the Colledge, be first discharged: but 'tis certain there are no Fees due (and consequently cannot be challenged) till the Ceremonies upon which they become due are compleatly inished. And it is remembred as the Custom in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, for the Elect-Knights Collect. A. V. W. Steward, or some other of his Servants, to bring money with them to Windesor

and there pay the Fees at the Chappel door, so soon as the Installation was di|spatcht, to the end the Atchievements might immediately after be set up.
But to clear all doubts which may arise upon this point, it was in a Chapter held at Whitehall, the 4. of February, an. 22. Car. 2. Ordained and Decreed, Lib. Carolin. p. 81. That not any of the Atchievements of an Elect-Knight shall be set up in the Chappel at Windesor, before he be Installed and the Fees of Installation paid.
It should seem that though anciently they did not set up the Elect-Knights At|chievements before he was installed, yet were they prepared and brought to Windesor, and disposed of or E. 3. Stat. Art. 19. set before his Stall: and in case of his not coming to receive Installation, then (being no otherwise placed) might be the easier re|moved without the Choire, in as decent a manner as could be, that so the ho|nor of Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. p. 18. Knighthood might be preserved entire; nevertheless to be thenceforth kept for Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. p. 18. publick use, and benefit of the Colledge.
Where we find mention made in the Annals of any person employed to set up the Atchievements of a Knight, it is to be understood, that he was his Proctor, and installed on the behalf of that Knight whose Atchievements he so hung up. And the Lord Lib. N. p. 64. Fitz Hugh, who set up the Atchievements of the King of Denmark an. 9. H. 6. took also possession of that Kings Stall, for, and on his behalf, and in his name.
There is but a single instance (as we remember) where one man hung up a Knights Atchievements, and another was installed for him: and this hapned, an. 29. H. 6. where the Lord Ibid. p. 105. Ryvers, having been Elected to the Stall of the Lord Hungerford, the Regist. Chart. f. 28. b. 4. of August that year, his Sword and Helm were hung up on the 8. of September next after, by William ouden, ib. Bobden his Esq and Guyen Herald, and he installed the Ibid. 30. of October following, by Sir Ibid. William Crafford his Proctor: But this was contrary to the Law of the Order.
Moreover, where the setting up of a Knights-Atchievements, is barely men|tioned without taking notice of the Installation, it is to be understood, that such Knights Installation was also solemnized at that time: as in the case of the Lib. N. pag. 76. King of Portugal, concerning whom the Annals only Lib. N. pag. 76. note, that he had taken care to set up over his Stall his Helm, Sword, and Banner, and all things belong|ing thereunto, at the Feast celebrated at Windesor, an. 2. H. 6.
In what manner and order these Atchievements are fixed, will partly appear from the Statutes, viz. the E. 3. Stat. Art. 9. vide Ord. Stat. in Bibl. Hatton. Art. 9. Helm and Crest, are thereby appointed to be set over each Knight-Companion's Stall, and the Sword to hang directly underneath them. But the Plate is nailed to the Back of the Knights Stall.
And here for a Corollary to this Chapter, let us add, That as the Statutes of two of the most noted Orders of Knighthood in Christendom, have in them the substance of those of the Garter, and being of later Institution, cannot but be acknowledged Copies from this Original; so we here think it requisite, to ex|hibit the manner of Investiture with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order of St. Michael, of our King Edward the Sixth, Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and Robert Earl of Leicester, to the end the Reader may also observe, that the order of our Ceremonies used at the Investiture of a Knight-Companion of the Garter, is also the Precedent to theirs of St. Michael.

The manner of receiving the Order of Saint Mychaell, by King Edward the Sixth.
MS. penes Ar|thur Comit. Anglesey f. 874. aFIrst, the King's Majesty to be in his Privy Chamber, accompanied with his Noble-men, and all them of the Order of the Garter, to have their Collars about their necks, and the French King's Ambassador to enter with the Order, and so after his obeysance, the proposition to be given, and after the proposition done, the King's Majesty must put off his uppermost garment, the Ambassador shall invest him with the Robes of that, and afterwards, when the King is full invested, then all the Noblemen to proceed afore the King, and the Ambassadors which be in Com|mission to go afore the King, with the Noble-men, in order, to the Chappel, and

after them the two French Lords, then the King of Arms, then the Sword, then the King's Majesty himself, then the Lord Chamberlain, and the Vice-Chamber|lain to bear the train of the Robes, and in this order to proceed to the Chappel, and the King to go into his Stall, and the other into their Stalls, and at the Offering time the King's Majesty to Offer, and the greatest man about the King to give the King his Offring, and then the two other to offer according to their Estates; when the King is in his Stall, and when all the Service is done, they to proceed in like order, as they came to the Chappel, to the place appointed for Dinner, and none to sit at the King's Board, but only the two Knights which be of the same Or|der of France; and after Dinner, the King's Majesty to put off his Robes, and to near such Apparel as shall please his Majesty. Note, the King's Majesty when he passeth by the French King's Stall, is to make but only a beck with his head.
Add hereunto, That King Edward the Sixth observed the Anniversary of St. Michael, after the same manner and order as Strangers were long before ob|liged to do that of St. George; and caused his Collect. E. W. G. Arms, surrounded with the Order of St. Michael to be set up in his Chappel at Hampton Court, each Micha|elmas-day after his acceptation of that Order, during his life.


The order and manner of furnishing the Chappel at the Queen's Palace of Westminster, against Thursday the 24. of January 1565. Anno. 8. Eliz. Reginae, that the Duke of Norfolk and Earl of Leicester re|ceived the Order of Saint Michael there.
ITem,MS. f. 24. b. the said Chappel, both before and behind the Stalls to the ground, was hanged with rich Arras, and the upper part from the Table of Administration to the Stalls, hanged with like Stuff, which said Table was richly garnished with Plate and Iewels as followeth. First, to the wall was set in a row five gilt Bsins, and afore them another row, and in the middle a gilt Cross between two gret gilt Cups covered, garnished with Stone, a Ship or Ark likewise garnished, a Fountain of Mo|ther of Pearl, and a pair of gilt Candlesticks; afore that another row, in the middle whereof was set a rich Bason and Ewer gilt railed over with Gold, between two great Mawdlyn Cups with Covers, two great Leywres, two Cruts, and a Pax all gilt, and over the said Table on the wall upon the Arras was fastned a fronte of Cloth of silver, embroidered with Angels of Gold, and before the said Table to the ground, a front of the same suit.
The Dean's Stall was garnished with Cushens, and a rich Cloth of Estate, whereon was set within a black Table, the Arms of the French King, within his own Order, under a Crown Imperial, the ground palee of 6. Blue, White and Orange Tawney, without any style.
Then on the same side over the 6. Stall on the Arras hanged a like Table, with the Arms within the Order, Crest and Supporters of the Deputy, Mounseur Remboil|liet (with a Cushen before him) the Table palee of six Ar. and Sa. the Arms, Sab. a Saulter Ar. the Crest a Lyon couchant Ar. collored Or, his supporters two Wood|men with Clubs in their hands the great end downward, and under his Style writ|ten, viz. Messier Iaques D'angennes Seigneur de Remboilliet Chivaler de L'ordre du Roy,  Capitaine des Cinquantes hommes des Armes de ses Ordonnances.
On the other side on the Arras over the eight Stall hanged a little Table palee of six Ar. and Gu. with the Arms within that Order of the Duke of Norfolk, under a Dukes Crown, with no Crest, nor Supporters, but his Style, De treshault, puissant  tresnoble Prince, Thomas Dac de Norfolk Conte Marishall D'angleterre, Seigneur de Mowbrey Segrave  de Brews, Chivaler de tresnoble Ordre de la Jarritier,  aussi du tresnoble Ordre de St. Michell.
On the third Stall beneath on the same side, hanged a like Table Palee of six, Or Az. with the Arms in that Order of the Earle of Leicester, under an Earls Crown, without Crest or Supporters, but his Style, Du tresnoble  puissant Seigneur Robert

Conte de Leicester, Baron de Denbeigh, Chivaler du tres-noble c.  Grand Escuyer de la Royne nostre Souveraigne.
On the ground before the Duke and Earls Stall, stood two Chairs with Cushens for them to sit on, if they pleased, till they took their Stalls. And about the Stalls on the South side was set a Chair, Carpet, and Cushen, where the Embassador Leger sate all the Ceremony time, And below afore the Deputy's Stall was set a Form, co|vered with a Carpet for Monsieur Doze alias St. Michell, to sit on; And above that on either side were Tables and Forms, for the Gentlemen and Children of the Chappel.


The receiving of the said Order of St. Michaell, Thursday the 24. of January, Anno 8. Reg. Elizab.
Fol. 25.ITem, about 10. of the Clock the said day, the Embassador Leger, with Moun|sieur Remboilliet the French King's Deputy, together with the other Lords and Gentlemen accompanied with certain English Gentlemen, came to the Court at the Queen's Palace of Westminster, where, at the Gate, they were met by the Earl of Warwick and others, and conveyed up to the Queen's great Closset, whither after a while came the Duke of Norfolk and Earl of Leicester; And for that the said Duke and Deputy, had not till then seen either other, they then embraced each other, and then communed a while; And then the said Deputy left the same Lords there, and he with Mounsieur Doze alias St. Michaell, Mr. Garter and others, went down through the Chappel into the Vestry, where he shifted him, into the Robes and Habit of the Order of St. Michaell as followeth.
First, Having on afore his Hose, Shoos, Girdle, and Scaberd of White Velvet, he there put on a Cote with Sleeves of Cloth of Silver, the edges laid with Gold Lace, and over that his Mantle of Cloth of Silver broad garded with Scallop shells, environed with Clowds and Rays of the Sun, and other Embroidery of Gold very richly, lined with White Taffeta, and on the right shoulder it was tyed, and turned up on the left shoulder, to put his Arm underneath, at, and over that on his right shoulder, lay his Hood of Crimson Velvet, spreading all over his back, the Tippet over his breast, the end put under the Hood, on the left shoulder, garded and em|broidered like the Mantle; And over th' oder lay the Collar of Gold, made with Knots and Scallop shells, whereat hanged the Picture of St. Michaell, garnished with Stones. And whiles the said Deputy was shifting him, the Duke and Earl came down into the Chappel, apparelled as followeth, And first, the Duke with his Shoes, Hose, Girdle, and Scabbard of White Velvet, his neather stockings of white Silk knit, his Cote with the Sleeves on of Cloth of Silver, the edges laid with Gold Lace, and in a short Gown of Russet Velvet, garded with the same, surred with Leopards, and faced with Lisards, the sleeves set with eighteen pair of Agglets of Gold, and a Cap of black Velvet with a Silver band; the Earl of Leicester likewise in all points apparelled, but that his Gown was Russet Satten, garded with Velvet, furred and faced as the other, the Sleeves set with thirty pair of Aglets of Gold, and in his Cap a White Feather, and so the Duke and Earl being come into the Chappel, stood beneath on the ground, before their Arms and Stalls, And then they there stay|ing, proceeded forth of the Vestry into the Chappel two Noblemen, named Moun|sieur Cleremont and Mounsieur de Luppe carrying the two Mantles and Hoods in their arms, after them Mounsieur Doze alias Saint Michaell King of Arms, carrying the two Collars lying on a Cushen upon his arms, without any Cote of Arms, but earing about his neck, hanging at a Riband, at his breast the Arms of France, within the Order of Gold, After him followed the Deputy Remboilliet, doing re|verence to his Majesty's Stall as he passed by, and there went up and stood with his back to the Communion Table, The Embassador then standing somewhat near him; Then St. Michaell went and brought the Duke and Earl to the Deputy, afore whom his Secretary read the Commission, whereby he had authority from the King his Master, to make those two Noblemen Knights of the Order of St. Michaell, which read out, on Cushens they two kneeled down, and the Deputy himself read unto them

their Oaths, which ended they stood up, and then Doze alias St. Michell took off their two Gowns, and they two again kneeled down, and the two Lords, Mounsi|eur Cleremont and Mounsieur de Lupe, presented the Mantles and Hoods to the Deputy, who put on the same. First that on the Duke, and then the other on the Earl himself, reading unto them the signification thereof, And then the said De|puty put on their Collers, likewise reading the signification thereof, which said Mantles, Hoods, Collers, and Cotes were sent them by the French King, and were in all points like to the Deputy's afore declared, and the Cotes were sent them to their Chambers afore they came, where they put them on. Then the Deputy with St. Michell before him, and the other two following proceeded down, and af|ter reverence done to the King's Stall, took theirs, the Deputy first, the Duke next, and the Earl last. Then the Prayers, as the Letany and Commemoration be|gan, and at the Offring time, the Deputy came forth of his Stall, and stood in the middle of the Chappel, below, before his Stall, and made his obeysance both to the Table, and his Masters Stall, and then proceeded with St. Michell before him, up to the Offring, making as he passed by a beck to either of his Companions (they sitting or standing still in their stalls) which Offring ended, he returned and took his Stall. Then the Duke of Norfolk came forth making obeysance to the French King's Stall and proceeded up with St. Michell before him, and Offered and re|turned to his Stall. And then the Earl of Leicester likewise offered. Then the Ser|vice being ended, with reverence to the King's Stall, they proceeded forth of the Chappel, first St. Michell, then the Earl, then the Duke, last the Deputy, till they came into the Counsel Chamber, where they dyned, all three sitting in three Chairs on one side of the Table, which Dinner ended, they went all three into the Privy Chamber to the Queen, and after a while came forth into the Counsel Chamber, where they put off their Cotes, Mantles, Hoods, and Collars, and put on their usual Apparel; And then the said Duke and Earl brought the De|puty to the Great Chamber Door, where they took their leave of him, and they re|turned into the Chamber of Presence again, and so ended this Ceremony.





CHAP. XIII. THE Installation OF A KNIGHT SUBJECT BY Proxie.

SECT. I. The original cause of making Proxies.
THere was no liberty given at the Institution of the Order, to Instal a Knight-Subject by his Proctor or Deputy; but on the contrary in the Founders Statutes, was inserted this express Prohibition, E. 3. Stat. Art. 24. That none of the Knights-Elect should be permitted to be Installed by Proxie, unless he were a Stranger.
The Law in this particular continued unaltered, till the Reign of King Hen|ry the Fifth, when Iohn Duke of Bedford, the Soveraign's Deputy for holding the Feast of St. George at Windesor, an. 7. H. 5. and other the Knights-Companions then present, took it into consideration, That where a Knight-Subject, Elected into the Order, was at that time employed beyond the Seas, in service of the So|veraign, and likely to continue there upon that Employment, it was concluded, that the said Duke should make an address to the Soveraign, by Letter under the Seal of the Order (he being at that time engaged in the War with France) wherein, for the reasons set down in the Letter (which we have inserted in the Num. XLIV. Appendix) he should petition him, to remove from the Statutes, all manner of scruple, and (in cases of like hazard and danger) to Ordain, Regist. Char|rac. f. 6. b. That Knights-Subjects might be permitted to receive the priviledge and favour of a compleat ad|mittance, and full possession of their Stalls and rights, by their Deputies or Pro|ctors, no less than Strangers; notwithstanding the clause in the Statutes to the contrary.
It likewise appears from that Letter, as also from the Lib. N. p. 59.  62. Black Book of the Order,

that Sir Iohn Grey, and the Lord Bourchier had been installed at the foresaid Feast by their several Proxies, which the Soveraign's Deputy permitted out of great tenderness to their persons, lest by an over punctual and too rigid an obser|vance of the Statutes in this point, the foresaid Knight, through the misfor|tunes and casualties of War, whereunto they were daily exposed; should be snatcht away by a sudden death, and so want the desired suffrages of those Mas|ses, ordained to be sung for a defunct Knights; as had been seen in the case of di|vers other, prevented thereof by over much delay.
Nevertheless, by that more ample and large Copy of the foresaid Letter, re|corded in the Registrum Chartaceum (which we think necessary also to add in the Num. XLV, Appendix) it appears, that the Soveraign, and Knights-Companions remaining at that time with him in France, had before (upon the Duke of Bedford's re|quest) signified their approbation of installation by Proxie; by the favour of which Certificate, and virtue of this consent (though as yet not formed into a De|cree) Sir Iohn Grey, and Sir Iohn Robessart were installed upon their Letters mis|sive, wherein they only named their Proctors. In this Letter it also appears, that the Lord Bourchier's Proctor (made so by a deprecatory Letter sent over to his De|puty from the Regist. Chart, fol. 6. b. Countess of Stafford) was only promised to be installed, in re|gard there was no express caution given in the Statutes, concerning the suffi|ciency of this sort of Proxie.
But to clear all doubts, which for the future might arise, it was among other things Decreed, an. 9. H. 5. Lib. N. p. 67. propesinem. That where any Elect-Knight was actually in the Soveraign's Wars, or otherwise employed abroad upon the Soveraign's affairs, he should possess and enjoy the priviledge of a Stranger in this particular, namely, to be admitted to his Stall by a legal Proxie; who should do and perform all things enjoined to the Proxie of a Stranger. Which Decree we find added to Art. 20. King Henry the Fifth's Statutes.
Hereupon, it was in a short time after enjoined the Elect-Knight (upon no|tice of his Election) to Regist Charac. f. 14. b. take care that his Proctor should be appointed to take possession of his Stall with all possible speed; to the end he might enjoy the rights and priviledges of a Founder; for such an obligation we find laid upon Regist Charac. f. 14. b. Sir Iohn Fastolf, who at the reception of the Garter, was in France, and there employed in the Soveraign's service.
But King Henry the Eighth, besides his confirmation of this Decree, for al|lowance of a Proxie in the foresaid two Cases, further enlarged it, to Art. 26. such as the Soveraign should either command or permit by License, to be installed by Proxie, which is to be understood of Knights-Elect within the Kingdom, no less than those beyond Sea. By virtue of which clause, the Earl of Dorset, being Lib. R. p. 28. sick, an. 1. Car. 1. obtained the Soveraign's License, to be Installed by Ibid. p. 29. videsis MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge gen. his Deputy Ibid. p. 29. videsis MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge gen. Sir Richard Young, who accordingly took possession of the Stall appointed for him.


SECT. II. Letters of Procuration.
WE noted before, out of the Fol. 6. . Registrum Chartaceum, that Sir Iohn Robes|sart, Elected into the Order by King Henry the Fifth, was Installed by virtue of his Letter missive, sent to (Sir Thomas Barr) his Proxie. But the same Register in another place, calls it a Ibid. fol. 5. sufficient Procuration under his Seal of Arms, enabling him to Ibid. do and perform in his name, all things which might appertain to the observance and Ceremony of his Installation.
The Copy of this Instrument we have not met with, but that other Letter missive which Sir Iohn Grey directed to Sir Iohn Lisle, to take the possession of his Stall, and by virtue of which he was Installed, is transferred to the

Num. XLVI. Appendix. Nor have we seen the before mentioned Deprecatory Letter, sent over from the Countess of Stafford, for the Installation of Hugh Stafford Lord Bourchier, but it seems to have been esteemed so sufficient and authentick, as to obtain for his substitute the title of Lib. N. p. 59.  Regist. Chartac. f. 6. b. Proctor.
This example became a President to the now Countess of Bristol, whose Lord having been Elected a Knight-Companion of this Order, by the present Soveraign, and being absent on an Embassy when the Grand Feast of St. George happily ce|lebrated, an. 12. Car. 2. was drawing on, she wrote a Letter to Sir Richard Fanshaw Knight and Baronet, to desire him Num. XLVII. to appear and act at that following Solemnity, in quality of her Lord's Proxie.
And because there grew some doubt from the Lord Bourchier's Case, of the sufficiency of such a Nomination, the request of the said Countess was thought requisite to be strengthened by the Soveraign's Authority and Num. XLVIII Nomination likewise, which being obtained was ratified under the Seal of the Order.
And doubtless in the case of a Knight-Subject, the Soveraign may if he please, nominate and appoint a Proxie for Installation, where the Elect-Knight hath not done it himself; for here all those considerations of grand respect, form of the Oath, c. always afforded to Strangers have no place; and this is evident from the Collect. A. V. W. Soveraign's Letters of Summons, to the Commissioners nominated for Installation of the Lord Collect. A. V. W. Grey, an. 4.  5. Ph.  M. who at that time was Prisoner in France; and whose Deputy, Collect. A. V. W. Sir Humfry Radcliff Knight is there|in mentioned to have been appointed by the Soveraign her self.
The first President of Letters of Procuration or Deputation, drawn into a solemn form, is that made by Sir William Philipp, whereby he (having obtained the Soveraign's License) impowers two Knights, namely Sir Andrew Butreley, and Sir Iohn Henington, or either of them (as their occasions would permit) to sup|ply his place, and take possession of that Stall which should be assigned him, in the Choire at Num. XLIX. Windesor.
This Procuration and the time of Sir William Philipp's Installation by virtue thereof, is entred in the Lib. N. p. 62. Black Book of the Order, under the eighth year of King Henry the Fifth, but certainly misplaced; for though the year of our Lord, or of the Soveraign's Reign be wanting in the date of the Instrument, yet is there added a note remarkable enough; to wit, that it was made while the Soveraign lay in Siege before Roan in France, which as our Chronicles report was begun the Fabian Chron. part 7. pag. 499. 13. of October an. 5. H. 5. and taken the 19. of Ianuary following, so that by this account, the Procuration was sealed the 11. of November, an. 5. H. 5. and ought to have been placed in the Annals under that year.
Besides this, the Registrum Chartaceum expresly saith, That Sir William Phi|lipp was Installed the Fol. 5. same day with Sir Iohn Robessart (and so it is also exprest in the Duke of Bedford's before mentioned Num. XLIV. Letter) which Solemnity is there entred as held on the Regist. Char|tac. loco cit. 17. of February, and though the year be not set down (and all the former part of this Register wanting) yet in the course thereof, it may be observed, that the following year is the 7. of H. 5. Add to all this, that the Black Book it self, under that seventh year, ranks both Pag. 58. vi|desis Regist. Chartac. f. 6. Sir Iohn Robessart, and Sir William Philipp, for Knights-Companions among the other Knights Installed before that year, and notes them to be then attending upon the Soveraign in Normandy; whence it may be collected, that Sir William Philipp was installed, if not in the 5. yet in the 6. year of King Henry the Fifth at the far|thest. And that this Procuration made by Sir William Philipp became a Presi|dent in that Age, appears from the Appendix, Num. L. Deputation given by Sir Iohn Fastolf to Sir Henry Inghouse, and Sir William Breton, under his Hand and Seal of Arms, which is Regist. Char|tac. fol. 14. b. little different from Sir William Philipp's Procuration, in Ibid. fol. 5. b. French, un|less in the alteration of the Persons Names.



SECT. III. Qualifications of a Proxie.
AS touching the Qualifications of a Proctor nominated by a Knight-Subject, they are the same with those wherewith the Proxie of a Stranger is to be endowed, and of which we shall discourse Cap. 16. anon: that permissive clause in the E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. Statutes affording the same favour to a Knight-Subject, as to Strangers, and is the ground whence he derives like Priviledges.
We shall only add here, that not any Deputy or Proxy for a Knight-Subject, hath at any time been admitted to be Installed for an Elect-Knight, under the degree of a Knight; it being thought fit (as in other essentials and circum|stantials, so especially and chiefly in this) that a Knight-Subject should exactly ob|serve the Rule, which the Statutes have imposed on a Stranger. And in this respect, the case is very observable, where Sir Lib. N. p. 59. videsis Regist. Chartac. fol. 6. William Lysle (though one of the Alms-Knights of Windesor, yet in Degree a Knight) was not refused but allowed Proctor to Sir Iohn Grey, an. 7. H. 5.
It appears by the Characters given to the Proctors nominated by Sir William Philipp, and Sir Iohn Fastolf, that the Qualifications required in a Proctor (viz. to be (1.) a sufficient Proctor, of (2.) unblamable Reputation, and at least (3.) a Knight) were to be found in them: for when the Soveraign was induced (by reason that the Employments of Sir William Philipp's in his service, detained him beyond Sea) to give him leave to nominate his Proctor, it may be observed, that this License was not granted, but under this Proviso, That his Procuration should be executed by a Regist. Char|tac. fol. 5. b.  Lib. N. p. 62. Knight at least in degree, ennobled with Arms, and of an honest and untainted reputation. And when the said Sir William did make choice of and depute his Proctors, they were Knights, and such and so nobly qua|lified, Lib. N. p. 62. That there was nothing wanting in them which belonged to true valiant Knights: and the like Character is bestowed upon those two Knights nominated by Sir Iohn Fastolf, to take the possession of his Stall; to wit, Regist. Char|tac. f. 14. b. That in them there could be found no defect of ought that should belong to magnanimous and couragious Knights.


SECT. IV. Preparations for Installation.
THE day for Installation of a Knight-Subject by Proxie, being by the Sove|raign appointed, there are to be provided for him, and got ready against the Solemnity, these things following.
First,1. Commissi|ons for Instal|lation. a Commission for Installation is to be drawn up, and by the Chancellor of the Order presented to the Soveraign for his Sign manual; to which is after affixt the great Seal of the Order. The substance of the ancient Commissions may be found in Appendix, Num. LL that directed to Sir Iohn Robessart, an. 5. H. 6. to accept of Sir Henry Inghouse, one of the two Knights which Sir Iohn Fastolf had constituted for his Proxie; himself being at that season employed in the Wars of France; the powers granted by the Soveraign to the said Sir Iohn Robessart were these.

1. Appendix, Num. L L To conduct Sir Henry Inghouse to Windesor Castle.
2. To put him in possession (as from the Soveraign) of the Stall assigned to his Principal.
3. To invest him with all the Benefits, Honors, Prerogatives, Franchises, and Liberties thereunto appertaining.
4. To receive his Mantle, Helm, and Sword; and set them up where the Earl of Westmerland's stood, in whose room he was Elected.
5. To ad thereunto all usual Solemnities.
6. Lastly, this Commission contained an Injuction to all the Knights-Com|panions, to suffer and permit the said Sir Iohn Fastolf, fully and peaceably to possess the said Stall, Places, Honors, Franchises, Prerogatives, and Li|berties, in the same manner as the Statutes import, without any contra|diction or scruple.

There is another Precedent almost as ancient in a Appendix Num. LII. Commission granted to the Earl of Essex, the Lords Berners, and Wenlock, for Installation of the Earl of Worcester, and other Elect-Knights by their Proxies, an. 2. E. 4. in regard they for the present were, and for some time would be, so far employed about the Soveraign's Person, and in his Service, that they could not receive a Personal Installation: but the Commissioners Authority in this is comprised in fewer par|ticulars than the former, namely to Appendix Num. LII. admit, receive, and establish with all con|venient speed, the Elect-Knights by their Proctors into their Stalls at Windesor, in the same manner, as if one, and all of them had been present in their own per|sons, any Ordinance or Statute to the contrary notwithstanding.
Of later times the Commissions granted upon such occasions, differ from those made for the Personal Installations of the Knights themselves, only be premising the cause of their Principals absence, and the Employment or Negotiation he is then ingaged in, and then authorising the Commissioners to admit the Proxie, into his Stall; a Precedent of which kind is added in the Num. LIII. Appendix to the former.
In the next place,2. Letters of notice to the Commisio|ners. where the Installation by Proxie is performed by two or more Commissioners; the Soveraign directs Letters to each of them, giving no|tice of the intended Solemnity, and requiring them to make their repair to his Castle of Windesor, by a certain day therein prefixt, to the end the Proxie may proceed, to take possession of his Principal's Stall. Of such a Letter see also a form in the Num. LIV. Appendix.
3. And for Re|moval of Stalls, c.And as there is, upon admission of an Elect-Knight, installed by Proxie, the same ground for removal of Stalls in the Choire, as for one who receives a Per|sonal Installation; and in like cases: So is it usual to issue out the like War|rants from the Soveraign to Garter, some time before the Solemnity, to remove the Atchievements and Plates, and place them in the order as his Warrant directs.
Anciently the Stall for the Elect-Knight was assigned in the body of the Com|mission, which issueth out for his Installation; as it appears in the before men|tioned Num. L. Commission for admitting Sir Henry Inghouse, Proctor to Sir Iohn Fastols, to whom the Stall which the Earl of Westmerland held, while living, was Num. L. there|by appointed for him.
4. Mantle of the Order.The rest of the particulars to be prepared against the day of Installation, are provided at the Knight's own charge; and they are first, his Mantle of the Order, which, according to the injunction of the E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. H. 5. Stat. Art. 20. H. 8. Stat. Art. 21. Statutes, the Proctor is obliged to bring along with him to Windesor, at the day appointed for Installation.
5. Atchieve|ments.Garter is also to be consulted with, as to the preparing the Elect-Knight's At|chievements; namely, his Helm, Crest, Mantlings, Sword, and Banner of Arms; and to bring these to Windesor, is likewise part of the duty assigned to the Pro|ctor by the Locis supra citat. Statutes.
6. Plate of Arms.Besides these Atchievements, the Proxie is to provide a Plate of Brass gilt, whereon is to be engraved the Arms, Crest, and Supporters, enamelled in their proper Colours, together with the Stile of the Elect-Knight: and this to be fixt upon the back of his Stall.
7. Velvet Cu|shen.A Velvet Cushen also for Garter to bear the Mantle on when the Proctor pro|ceeds to the Choire.
8. And Lodg|ing Scutche|ons.Lastly, A dozen or more of Lodging Scutcheons to set up at the Inns by the way, and other places in Windesor.



SECT. V. Proceeding to the Chapter-house.
THE next thing to be considered of, is the Proceeding to the Chapter-house, and therein chiefly the Proxie's place; for it will be needless here, to speak of his journey to Windesor Castle, his arival there, or ordering of this Pro|ceeding, in relation to those Degrees whereof it is composed; since what hath been already said touching these particulars, and other circumstances, having re|ference to the Personal Installation of an Elect-Knight, may be made applicable to a Proxie, or else such part of them as he shall judge most conducing to the honor of his Principal.
The place therefore belonging to the Proxie of a Knight-Subject in this Pro|ceeding, is that immediately after the Provincial Kings of Arms, because as yet he hath not taken possession of his Principal's Stall, which gives him a place in his return according to its dignity; and in this place did the Proctors of the Marquess (since Duke) of Newcastle, and Earl of Bristol, proceed (bare-headed) to the Chapter-house, an. 13. Car. 2.
And though this be the Proxie's usual place, in this Proceeding, yet Sir Henry Sidney, Proctor to the Earl of Warwick, an. 5. Eliz. (and 'tis the only instance we have met with) proceeded immediately before the Alms-Knights; the order of which Proceeding was as followeth.


First,MS. fol. penes W. D. N. f. 11. Gentlemen Attendants.
Knights.
Sir Henry Sidney Proctor.
Alms-Knights.
Verger.
Pursnivants.
Heralds.
Provincial Kings.
E. of Northumberland, a Knight-Elect.
Visc. Mountague Assistants.
Lord Loughborow Assistants.


Black-Rod.
Register.
Garter.

Duke of Norfolk Lord Lieutenant.

Lastly, the Proxie (as in the case of an Elect-Knight) passeth into the East Isle behind the high Altar, as soon as he ariveth within St. George's Chappel (while the Soveraign, or his Lieutenant, or Commissioners proceed into the Chap|ter-house) and there MS. in Offic. Armor. [H. 2.] fol. 8. b. reposeth himself, till he be sent for in; for so did the fore|said Proctors to the said Marquess of Newcastle, and Earl of Bristol. But if the Proxy pass not in the Proceeding, he then goes privately to this place before the Proceeding sets forward.


SECT. VI. Transactions in it.
AFter the Chapter is opened, 1. Reading the Commission. the first thing done, is for MS. in Bibl. Matson. Garter to present the Commission or Commissions, which he carried in the Proceeding thither,

aswel that for MS. penes W. D. N. f. 11. Lieutenancy (in case a Lieutenant then held the Feast) as of Collect R C. Cl. f. 32. vi|desis MS. f. 20. Installation (for admitting a Proxie) the order of which, and by whom read, is noted before in the Sect. 5. precedent Chapter.
2. Receiving the Proxie.The Letters of Procuration or Deputation are in the next place read, after which, the Proxie is sent for into the Chapter-house by Garter, who conducts him to the door, and there the Commissioners (or Ex ed. MS. penes W. D. N. loco cit. vide e|tiam Collect. R. C. Cl. fol praed. Assistants or Knights-Compa|nions) receive him: But an. 5. Eliz. Sir Henry Sidney exhibited his MS. penes W. D. N. loco ante cit. Deputation after he was called in: Or sometimes the Proxie produceth his Deputation before the Proceeding pass to the Chapter-house, for so did Ibid. f. 17. b. Sir George Howard, Deputy to the Earl of Bedford, an. 6. Eliz. and in such case, there is no need of admit|ting the Proxie into the Chapter-house, but that he may rest without, till the So|veraign (his Lieutenant, or Commissioners) are past into the Choire, and he sent for in thither; at which the Mantle was wont to be laid upon his right arm, at the Chapter-house door, by the Knights-Companions appointed to in|troduce him.
3. Delivery of the Mantle.Heretofore, so soon as the Proxie was admitted into the Chapter-house, and the Letters of Procuration read, the Mantle of his Principal was usually laid up|on his E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. right arm by the Soveraign's Lieutenant (or Commissioners) and being so laid, part of it was also Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 32. spread upon the Proxies shoulders, the Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 32. Scutcheon of St. George lying uppermost, and the Cordons laid fair to be seen; and in this manner he bore it in the Proceeding to the Stall of his Principal, where he h it till E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. H. 8. Stat. Art. 21. Service was ended. But now, the present Soveraign hath directed the Man|tle to be born upon the left arm.
But an. 5. Eliz. the Earl of Warwick's Proctor had the Mantle born before him into the Choire by MS. penes W. D. N. f. 11. b. Garter, in the same manner as is used to Knights Personally Installed, and not delivered him, till he had MS. penes W. D. N. f. 11. b. taken the Oath; and at the deli|very thereof the MS. penes W. D. N. f. 11. b. words of Admonition were pronounced by the Register of the Order. So was it observed to the Proxies of the Duke of Newcastle, and Earl of Bristol, an. 13. Car. 2.


SECT. VII. Proceeding to the Choire.
THE Proxie proceeds from the Chapter-house door, H. 8. Stat. Art. 21. vide MS. penes W. D. N. f. 11. b.  MS. f. 20.  Lib. R. p. 19. between the Sove|raign's Commissioners (Assistants, or Knights-Companions): Concerning the order of this Proceeding, so much is spoken Chap. 12. Sect. 6. before, that we shall need to add but one Example, and that is an. 6. Eliz.


MS. f. 20. Verger.
Alms-Knights.
Officers of Arms.
Officers of the Order.


Lord Hunsdon.
Proctor to the Earl of Bedford.
Lord Clynton.




SECT. VIII. Ceremonies performed there.
Taking the .THE Proceeding having entred the Choire the Commissioners (Knights-Assistants, or Knights-Companions) conduct the Proxie into the MS. fol. 20. lower

Stalls directly under the Stall designed for his Principal, where the Ibid. p. 20. b. Register of the Order reads the words of the Oath, while the Proxie (MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 17 b. laying his hand upon the Book) MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 17 b. repeats after him, and in confirmation thereof MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 17 b. kisseth the Book; and this Oath his Lib. N. p. 62. sub sinem. Deputation impowers him to take, in the Ibid. name and behalf of his Principal.
The form of the Proctor's Oath hath no difference from the Oath which an Elect-Knight himself takes; the substance of the ancient Oath is Chap. 12. Sect. 7. already noted down; and that taken of later times may be seen in the Num. LV. Appendix. Neverthe|less some variation and inlargement (though the same in effect with the ancient Oath) do we observe to be in that Form, which Sir Num. LVI. Thomas Barr (Proctor to Sir Iohn Robessart) took, viz. Reg. Chartac. fol. 5. Faithfully to keep and observe all the Articles of the Statutes whatsoever, in all things appertaining thereunto, according to the form and efficacy of the said Statutes, and to the utmost of his power.
The Oath being taken in this solemn manner,2. Giving pos|session of the Stall. the Proctor is led up into the Stall of his Principal, where both the Knights who conducted him into the Choire, first take the Mantle and lay it on his left (though formerly on his right) arm, next laying their hands upon him, in the E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. M. 8. Stat. Art. 21. Name of his Lord and Master (from whom he received his Dputation) set him down therein: and so the Ceremony of Installation being fully finished, the Service of the Church begins.
If the Installation be performed in the morning,Offring at the Altar. then there is an Offring of Gold and Silver; at which time the Proxie in his turn comes down from his Principal's Stall, and stands before it, and when the Soveraign hath offered (or the Lieutenant for him, and for himself, or otherwise the Commissioners)as also the rest of the Knights-Companions present, in their due order, then the Proxie's MS. in Offic. Armor. [H. 2.] fol. 8. b. turn coming (being joined with the Knight sitting in the opposite Stall to that of his Principal, if he be present at this Solemnity, and having two Officers of Arms before them) he proceedeth to the high Altar, and there offereth both Gold and Silver; and afterwards returns and takes his Stall in the same order as the Knights-Companions do. In this manner an. 5. Eliz. the MS. penes W. D. N. f. 12. b. Earl of Warwick's Proxie, joining himself with the Earl of Northumberland (installed at the same time) jointly proceeded to the Offring, with Richmond and Lancaster Heralds before them. The like did the Proctor to the MS. fol. 20. b. Earl of Bedford, and offered together with the Lord Hunsdon, an. 6. Eliz.
As soon as the Ceremony of the Offring is finished, the Service of the Church proceeds, which being ended, the Proceeding returns in the same order it came to the MS. fol. 21. Chapter-house, except that now the Proxie takes his place, according to the dignity of the Stall, of which he lately took possession for his Principal: But in regard the Statutes do expresly declare, E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. H. 8. Stat. Art. 21. That after the Proxie hath been admitted to the Stall of his Principal, he shall neither wear the Mantle, nor have any Voice in Chapter, nor presume to enter there in the absence of him that sent him; therefore hath it been the common practice to take off the Mantle from his arm, at the Chapter-house door, in his return from the Choire, so that at this place the bearing thereof hath usually terminated, having for the most part been delivered to the MS. praed. loco cit. Verger of the Chappel (though sometimes to the Ex cod. MS. penes W. D. N. f. 11. b. Sexton, at other times to Ibid. f. 13. b. Garter, so also to the Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 33. Black-Rod) who hath taken it from off the Proxie's arm, and carried it into the Chapter-house; this done, the Proctor re|tires privately out of the Proceeding to his Lodgings.
Nevertheless it appears (but by what indulgence is not recorded) that though Garter took from Sir Henry Sidney, an. 5. Eliz. the Mantle at the Chapter-house door, on the Evening as he returned from taking possession of his Principal's Stall, yet the next morning he MS. pen. W. D. N. f. 12. rode in the Proceeding to the Chappel (the celebration of St. George's Feast continuing) with the Mantle on his right arm, on the left hand of the Earl of Northumberland (the place of his Principal) and, having entred the Choire, took his Principal's Stall; afterwards he bore the Mantle in the Lib. C. p. 45. grand Procession, at the Offring of Money, and during divine Service; and from the Chappel proceeded in the foresaid place up to the Castle to Dinner.
In the Afternoon of the said Feast-day he again Ex eod. MS. penes W. D. N. f. 13. rode on horse-back in the Proceeding to the Chapter-house door, (but Ex eod. MS. penes W. D. N. f. 13. there the Mantle was taken from

him and laid within upon the Table, whilst he retired into the East Isle of the Chappel) and at the rising of the Chapter was it again delivered to him, whence he proceeded in his Principal's place to the second Vespers.
The next morning after the Lieutenant and his Assistants had ended the Chap|ter, the Ex eod. MS. penes W. D. N. f. 13. Mantle was again laid on his arm, and in that manner he pass'd into the Choire, where he entred the Stall of his Principal, and afterwards Ex eod. MS. penes W. D. N. f. 13. Offred in the same order he did on the Feast day; and when the morning Service was finished, the Lieutenant and Assistants returned to the Chapter-house door, where they put off their Mantles, and at the same place the Sexton of the Colledge re|ceived the Mantle from him.


SECT. IX. The Grand Dinner.
AT Dinner the Proxie sits with the Lieutenant (or Commissioners) and takes the place where his Principal should sit if he were present; and this was so observed at the Installation of the Earl of Warwick, an. 5. Eliz. MS. penes W. D. N. f. 12. b. for the Sove|raign's Lieutenant sate on the left hand of the Cloth of State, his two Assistants, the Earl of Northumberland (newly installed) and the said Earl of Warwick's MS. penes W. D. N. f. 12. b. Proxie sate on the same side.
The Stile of the Knight, who is installed by Proxie, is proclaimed in French or English, at the usual time, and in his due place, together with the other Stiles that then ought to be proclaimed, as we find it observed an. 25. H. 8. at the Installations of the Earls of Lib. N. p. 264. Beaumont and Newblanke by their Proctors (for they were Knights-Subjects, though not to the Soveraign, and therefore not improper to be made use of, for an instance in this case) in the order following.

MS. in Offic. Armor. [L. 1] fol. 46.Du noble  puissant Seigneur le Compte d' Essex,  de Enseigneur de Bour|chir,  de Loueyn, Lieutenant,  Depute de la Feste Saincte George, Che|valer, Frere  Compaignon de la tres-noble Ordre de la Jartier.
Du tres-noble  puissant Seigneur la Conte de Beaumont, Seigneur de Mont|morency, premier Baron, grand Maistre  Mareschall de Fraunce, Baron de Montberon,  fere  tertenois Seigner de Lysleadam, de Compiegne, de Chantelly  de Escouen, Gouverneur  Lieutenant General pour le Roy tres|cristien au Paris de Longuedoe, Chevaler frere  Compaignon de la tres-noble Ordre de la Jartier.
Du tres-noble puissant Seigneur le Conte de
Neublance, Seigneur de Beron, Baron d' Aspremont, Buransay, Beaumont, Paygin, Mirebeau,  de Fon|teyne Franccedil; ois, Admirall de France, Gouverneur  Lieutenant Generall pour le Roy tres-cristien, en la Duch de Bourgoigne, Chevalier, Frere  Compaignon de la tres-noble Ordre de la Jartier.

And when the forementioned Earl of Warwick was installed by Proxie, the order was thus.

MS. penes W. D. N. . 12.Du tres-hault puissant,  tres-noble Prince, Thomas Duc de Norffolk, Conte Marshall d' Angleterre, Seigneur Mowbray, Segrave,  de Brews, Chivalier du tres-noble Ordre de la Jartier,  Lieutenant de ceste noble Feste de Seint George.
Du tres-noble  puissant Seigneur Thomas Conte de Northumberland,  Baron de Percye, Chivalier de tres-noble Ordre de la Jartier.
Du tres-noble,  puissant Seigneur Ambrose Conte de Warwick, Baron de Lisle, Chivalier, c. Maistre de L'artillerie de la Royne nostre Soveraine,  Lieutenant pour sa Majestie, au pais de Normandie,  Defendeur de la Ville Franois de grace.

To conclude, the Proctor is to take care that the Atchievements and Plate of his Principal be set up in the Chappel of St. George, so soon as the Installation is compleated, for he is obliged to Lib. N. p. 62. videsis Regist. Chartac. f. 5. b.  f. 14. b. offer and present them to that end, according to custom, which doth further appear, not only out of the ancient Letters of Procuration, but also by Commissions for Installation, which appoint, Regist. Char|tac. f. 15. That the Soveraign's Deputy should receive from the Proctor his Principal's Helm and Sword (for we find no mention of the Banner till afterwards) and place them over his Stall.



CHAP. XIV. THE Signification of Election TO Strangers.

SECT. I. Within what time, and in what manner Certificate is made of their Election.
FOrasmuch as Strangers Elect are for the most part Emperors, Kings, or Soveraign Princes; the necessity of whose affairs, obliged them to abide in their own Dominions, and seldom or rarely permitted them, to receive a Personal Installation in the Colledge of the Order; there|fore several Priviledges  thought fit, by the wisdom of the Foun|der of this most Noble Order, to  and established in their favour: as principally the giving them hon  of their Elections, allowing con|venient

time of consideration for Acceptance, affording to them Investiture in their own Countries, and permitting their Installations to be performed at Winde|sor by Substitutes, or Deputies.
It was therefore by the Statutes of the Institution Ordained, E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. H. 5. Stat. Art. 20. That when any such were chosen into the Order, they should be certified of their Elections by the Soveraign; and besides, that at his charge, the E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. H. 5. Stat. Art. 20. Garter should be sent over to them, with the Mantle and Statutes of the Order, sealed with the Common Seal. And this to be done with all convenient speed, so E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. H. 5. Stat. Art. 20. that they might have notice thereof at least within four moneths, from the time of Election, to the end they might advise and determine with themselves (from consideration had of the tenor of the Sta|tutes) whether they would receive, or refuse, the honor of this most Noble Order.
In pursuance of these directions, it became customary for the Soveraign, toge|ther with his Letters to the Elect Stranger, giving signification of his Election, to send (and that by way of solemn Embassy) the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, as also a Book of the Statutes; and in case the Election were accepted, then the Elect Stranger might receive Investiture, before the return of the persons by whom the Habit was sent.
And this is manifest from the direction given, upon the Election of Edward King of Portugal (N. Rittershus. in Tab. Reg. Portugal. edit. Tubing. an. 1658. Son of King Iohn and of the Lady Philippa, Daughter to Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster) at the Feast of St. George celebrated at Windesor the 8. day of May an. 13. H. 6. to wit, Lib. N. pag. 91. That because the Election then but new|ly transacted, was not known to the said King, it seemed good to the Chapter, Lib. N. pag. 91. that he should be speedily certified thereof: And that Garter King of Arms should be sent over to him to signifie his Election; and upon his acceptation thereof to present him with the Garter and Habit of the Order, as also with the Book of Sta|tutes; which he was likewise appointed to carry over with him.
And it may be presumed, that a Certificate of Election was sent to the Duke of Vrbin, within the time limited by the Statutes; since it appears, that (being Elected the Lib. N. p. 136. 18. of August an. 14. E. 4.) all things were fitted for his Installation against the following St. George's Feast, at which he was Installed. And upon the Election of the King of Portugal, an. 22. E. 4. the Register observes, that no|tice was snt to him of his Election, Ibid. p. 149. within the appointed time.
The purport of which Letters certifying a Stranger's Election, may be under|stood and known from Appendix, Num. LVII. that which King Edward the Sixth sent to the French King Henry the Second, whereby (briefly) for his eminent Nobleness and Vir|tues, and to augment and improve the brotherly amity and fair correspondency between them, He had in Chapter, with the consent of the Knights-Companions, Chosen and Elected him into the number of the Society of the Garter, and therefore thought good to acquaint him therewith; desiring also the said King to give him and the Society the honor of consenting to and accepting of the Election; forasmuch as he should thereby perform that which would be very ac|ceptable and grateful to him, as he should more fully understand by the Am|bassadors who were preparing for their journey, to Invest him with the Habit.
The right of bearing these Letters signifying Election, and returning the Stranger's answer, belongs to Garter; being confirmed to him by the Cap. 4. Consti|tutions appertaining to his Office.
We see before, that the Certificate of Election was ordained to be dispatcht within four months, from the time of Election. Nevertheless to afford the Sove|raign more liberty, where the nature of the Affair required it; King Henry the Eighth added this necessary Clause to the foresaid Article. That where the Sove|raign had any great or high impediment, He H. 8. Stat. Art. 21. should defer certifying the Election, till a more opportune or convenient time.
But in this particular we observe, that like liberty had been taken, in times preceeding, though no provision by Statute was made for it before; as namely, by King Henry the Sixth, in the case of Frederick the Third, Eperor of Ger|many, who having been Elected an. Lib. N. p. 117. 35. of the said King, had not Letters sent him to signifie his Election until the  pag. . following year. It likewise appears, that Letters to the  pag. . same effect were then also dispatcht to the King of Aragon,

the Duke of Brunswick, and King of Poland, who had been Elected Ibid. p. 105. eight years before.
And yet we find it recorded, that the Ibid. p. 114. Habit and Ensigns of the Order were sent by special Ambassadors to all three, an. 34. H. 6. viz. two years before; but perhaps this ought to be understood of their being but then designed and order|ed to be sent, and upon second thoughts might be stopped, or if they were sent, might miscarry by some accident; for if they had arrived at these Princes Courts, it would have been needless to send other Letters to give notice of their Election, Ibid. p. 118. two years after. But to clear this doubt, we after find a Ib. p. 119. second mention of sending the Habit and Ensigns of the Order to the King of Poland, an. 37. H. 6. by which it is sufficiently apparent, that the first Embassy took no effect.
In the foresaid Memorial entred in the Pag. 114. Black-Book of the Order, and placed under the 34. year of King Henry the Sixth, touching the King of Aragon, King of Poland, and Duke of Brunswick; we suppose the King of Aragon is mistaken for the King of Portugal, Elected an. 25. H. 6. Since the Le Roy de Portugale est sluz  ad e Jatir,  le Mantel en|voiz par Fe|tiplas, f. 32. b. Registrum Chartaceum calls him King of Portugal, and both authorities agree in sending over Mr. Feti|plae with the Garter and Mantle, though the Black-Book doth not distinguish (as doth the Le Roy de Portugale est sluz  ad e Jatir,  le Mantel en|voiz par Fe|tiplas, f. 32. b. other) to which he was sent.
It may much rather be presumed that Mr. Fetiplace was sent on this Legation to the King of Portugal (not Aragon) since Cambd. Brit. in Aureb. Beatrix the natural Daughter of Iohn King of Portu|l was his Mother, and This Gentleman was Progenitor to the Family of Fetiplace, late of Bsse slgh in Berkshire, of Swinbroke in the Country of Oxford, and many other Families of note of the same Name, now residing in those Counties. he by this relation, and being in those times a MS. in Offic. Amor. [C. 18] f. 35. Courtier in King Henry the Sixth's Court, might the sooner obtain the honor of this Employment: And there is in the Registrum Chartaceum another particular (co-relative with the former) yet more clear and full than the Black-Book; for it tells us that Mr. Le Roy le Poleyne est Estuz,  ad le Jarretier  se Mantel envoyez par New|port. f. 32. b. Newport was at the An. 34. H. 6. same time sent in the Legation with the Garter and Mantle to the King of Poland.
But to return; we have not found that King Henry the Eighth, or any of his Successors, Soveraign's of the Order, have made much use of that liberty (grant|ed by the foresaid Article of his Statutes) for deferring the Significatory Letters of Election beyond the time appointed by the Statutes of Institution. And that it may be the better observed, how soon notice of Election hath been given to Strangers, we will insert all the instances in this kind, that have come to our knowledge.
It is recorded, that the French King Francis the First was Elected Lib. N. p. 257. Oct. 21. an. 19. H. 8. and albeit we find not the exact time, when the Soveraign's Letter for giving notice of his Election was sent him; yet must that complement be most certainly dispatcht within the time limited by the ancient Statutes, since we observe he was Installed within three months after, viz. the Ex Autgr. in Bibl. Cttn. 25. of Ianuary following.
When Iames the Fifth King of Scotland was Elected [Ian. Lib. N. pag. 267. 20. an. 26. . 8.] the Lord William Howard was Lib. N. pag. 267. forthwith sent to inform him of his lection. Henry the Second of France (before mentioned) having been Elected the Ibid. p. 305. 24. of April, an. 5. E. 6. had Letters of signification sent him in May following.
Emanuel Duke of Savoy was chosen a Knight-Companion Lib. C. pag. 14. 6. Aug. an. 1  2. Ph.  M. and the same day it was Decreed, Lib. C. pag. 14. That Letters should be sent unto him with the illustrious Garter, and other Ensigns of the Order: But hereby is to be understood, the Soveraign's Credential Letters sent to accompany the Ha|bit of the Order (the Commission for delivery whereof bears teste the 17. of Octo|ber following) not the Letters signifying his Election; for it appears clearly from the said Credentials, that the Soveraign had not only before that time given him notice of his Election, but that the Duke had returned a cheerful and ready ac|ceptance of the honor.
The Election of Charles the Ninth of France, passed the Lib. . p. 4. 24. of April, an. 6. Eliz and in Collect A. V. W. May ensuing the Lord Collect. A. V. W. Hunsdon carried him the Habit of the

Order, which he received at MS. penes W. le N. Cl. fol. 16. b. Lyons the 24. of Iune following; and the French King Henry the Fourth, and Iames the Sixth King of Scotland (afterwards So|veraign of this most Noble Order) were both Elected together, the Lib. C. p. 117. 24. of April an. 32. Eliz. to the Collect. A. V. W. vide|sis Hist. And. du Chesne pag. 114. former of these, the Certificate of Election was sent by Sir Edward Stafford Knight, and to the Collect. A. V. W. vide|sis Hist. And. du Chesne pag. 114. later, by the Earl of Worcester.
Lastly, Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, Elected the Lib. C. p 150. 14. of Iune, an. 1. Iac. R. Maurice Prince of Orange, chosen the Ibid. p. 177. 19. of December, an. 10. Iac. R. Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, and Henry Prince of Orange, both Elected the Lib. R. p. 35. 24. of April, an. 3. Car. 1. as also Charles Prince Palatine of the Rhyne cho|sen a Knight-Companion the Ibid. p. 80. 18. of April, an. 9. Car. 1. had Letters sent to signifie their Election within a few days after they were Elected. And at such times as the present Soveraign made Election of any Stranger, whilst he remained abroad; care was also taken to send his Letters, to acquaint them with their Election, Collect. E. W. G. im|mediately after the Ceremony of Election had past.


SECT. II. Of Notice given of an Election, before sending the Habit.
HEre it is to be observed, with how much more caution than the former, the Statutes made by King Henry the Eighth do Ordain, to Art. 21. send Letters that signifie Election, and the Book of Statutes only at the first; but not the Gar|ter and Mantle, till a return be made, whether the Stranger-Elect (after consul|tation had with the Statutes) will receive the Order or not. And Art. 21. after the Certificate of Acceptance returned to the Soveraign, then, but not before is it there also Decreed, to send a solemn Embassy with the whole Habit, George, and Collar. And consonant to these directions in the Statutes hath the Practice sometimes been: As for instance, in the cases of the French King Henry the Se|cond, an. 5. E. 6. and Emanuel Duke of Savoy, an. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar. both re|membred a little before; as also in that of Erhard. Cellius in suo Equ. Aur. Anglo. Wir|temb. p. 107.  108. Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, to whom Queen Elizabeth sent Letters signifying his Election, shortly after she had chosen him into the Society of the Order, to which the Duke returned thanks and acceptation, by two Ambassadors, Benjamin a Buwinkhausen of Walmeroet one of his privy Councel, and Cristopher ab Haugwitz Master of his Horse: who received a promise from the Soveraign, that the sending him the Erhard. Cellius in suo Equ. Aur. Anglo. Wir|temb. p. 107.  108. whole Habit of the Order should not be long deferr'd, howbeit the same was not sent during her life.


SECT. III. Notice of Election sent with the Habit.
WHen the Soveraign hath been well assured beforehand, that the Elect-Stranger would not refuse the Honor; upon such confidence, the same Embassy (as anciently before the adding this Clause) dispatcht both Ceremo|nies. The Soveraign's Letter certifying Election being first presented, together with the Book of Statutes, to peruse and consider of; and if (upon considera|tion thereof) the Stranger declared his acceptance, then within few days af|ter, the whole Habit of the Order was with due Solemnity delivered.
And thus do we find it directed, shortly after the Election of Iames the Fifth King of Scotland; the Lord William Howard (sent on that Embassy) his Instru|ctions as to this point, being as followeth.
Appendix, Num. CII. That he should within five or six days next after he had been with the said King of Scots, for his first Embassade and resort to Court there, and in most reverend fashion deliver unto the King of Scots, the Letter Missive of Certification of his Election into the noble Order of the Garter, from the Soveraign of the Order, with due commendation from his Highness.
The Letter read, and the said King consenting to the Reception of the said Order, then incontinent the Book of Statutes to be delivered unto him, and a day appointed to have his consentment on the Articles of the said Statutes.
In like manner were the Letters certifying Election, and the Commission for presenting the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, dispatcht together to Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, an. 1. Iac. R. and sent by the Earl of Rutland who went hence Collect. A. V. W. within a fortnight after the said King had been Elected. As also to Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, and Henry Prince of Orange, within two months; their Election falling on the Lib. R. p. 35. 24. of April, an. 3. Car. 1. and the date of the Commission for delivering the Order being on the Collect. Tho. Rowe Eq. Aur. nup. Ord. Canc. f. 207. 24. of Iune following.
The manner and order of the delivery of these Letters signifying Election, when the Habit is sent therewith, is thus.
Autogrpenes W. lo N. Cl. First the Ambassador and Officer of Arms, having notice given them of the first Audience, do present themselves to the Stranger-Prince, in the accustomed manner of Ambassadors; and deliver the Soveraign's Letters Missive, with all due reverence. The Ambassador therewithall signifying (after some short ge|neral Complement from the Soveraign) how his Master and the honorable So|ciety of the Garter, in respect of his renowned prowess, valour, virtues, c. and for to establish and augment the amity which is betwixt them, hath Elect|ed him into the most renowned Order of St. George; and that the Soveraigns do never Elect any Stranger, but such as they do most highly honor, and therefore desires that it may be accepted as a true testimony thereof: to which end the Soveraign hath sent him over, and his Herald there present, to perform the Ceremonies due thereunto.
But of late, when through the Soveraign's multitude of Affairs (in particular the late Soveraign while engaged in the Wars) or suddenness of the occasion, they have had no convenience for the present, to send a special Commission of Legation, with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order to any Stranger: They there|fore thought fit, at such time as they sent their Letters signifying Election, to Commissionate their Agent, residing in that Princes Court, and Garter Princi|pal King of Arms, to deliver part (but the two chief and Appendix, Num. CV. most peculiar) of the Ensigns of this most illustrious Order, namely the Garter and George, pendent at a Blue Ribband, to the Elect-Stranger; deferring the solemn Legation till a further and more convenient time.
The first Precedent we have met with in this kind, was an. 10 Iac. R. when Du Chesne Hist. p. 1138. Sir Ralph Winwood, and William Seagar Esq Garter, (afterwards Knighted) were Commissionated to deliver only at the present the Garter and George to Maurice Prince of Orange, the Appendix, Num. LXXII. rest of the Habit being intended to be presented af|terwards in their due time. And this was so done, within five days after his Ele|ction; that Ceremony being dispatcht on the Lib. C. p. 117. 19. of December in the foresaid year, and the Soveraign's Letter's of notice, and the Commission, both bearing date the Ioh. Olers in Genealg. Com. Nassvia, p. 89. Videsis Conti|nuat. Thuani. p. 331. 24. of the same month.
In like manner were the Garter and George only, sent over to Charles Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, and presented to him by William Boswell (then) Esq the Soveraign's Agent in Holland, and Iohn Philpot Esq Somerset Herald, an. 9. Car. 1. So the late Soveraign, by reason of the many disturbances occasioned by the unhappy War with the Long Parliament, could not conveniently send over to William Prince of Orange, and Bernard de Foix Duke of Fspernon, other Ensigns of the Order, than the George and Garter.
And lastly, during the present Soveraign's aboad in Foreign parts, it was the

general practice (in regard the whole Habit, could not with conveniency be provided, nor the Ceremonies of Investiture fully performed) to present the Elect-Knight in confirmation of his Election (whether he were a Stranger, or Subject) with the Garter, George, Ribband, and sometimes a Saint George's Cross, irradiated within a Garter, to be fixt on the left shoulder of their Cloaks or up|per Garments, of which we shall speak more largely in the following Sect. 3. Chapter.


SECT. IV. Certificate of Acceptation.
AFter that the Soveraign's Letter signifying Election, hath been delivered by the Ambassador, and the Elect-Stranger doth readily accept the Order, and thereupon is desirous to have it confirmed to him; he is obliged by the Sta|tutes, to return to the Soveraign a H. 8. Stat. Art. 21. Certificate of such his acceptance, and desire of ratification.
And we observe, that before this additional Clause made by King Henry the Eighth, this ceremonious course had been of ancient time practised, and both expected from, and observed by the King of Denmark; who having been Rot. perga|men. penes Sim. Archer Eq. Aur. nup. defunct. Elected an. 6. H. 5. was an. 8. of the same King, taken notice of, for Lib. N. p. 61. not re|turning (before that time) an answer whether he would accept of the honor of the Order, or not? And it appears, that before the next St. George's Feast in the following year, Ibid. f. 64. he sent over to the Soveraign his ready acceptance, both of the honor of his Election, as also of the Ensigns of the Order; and thereupon Ibid. f. 64. directions were then given for his Installation by his Proxie the Lord Fitz-Hugh.
But for an instance (after the said additional Clause) we have one remarka|ble enough, in the preamble of the Soveraign's Appendix, Num. LVIII. Credential Letters to the Duke of Savoy, an. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar. sent together with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order; in which it appears, Appendix, Num. LVIII. that the Soveraign having given him notice of his Election into this most Noble Order, he had returned back his cheerful and ready Acceptance of, and singular satisfaction in the said choice; and therefore cordially wisht that it might attain its due effect.
In succeeding times it was thought necessary (in case where the whole Habit of the Order was sent over to a Stranger, together with the Soveraign's Letters, signifying his Election) to make a provisional Decree (which pass'd the 18. of April an. 13. Car. 1.) Lib. R. p. 120. That Garter, and all others (whom it pleased the Soveraign jointly to commissionate with him) should be most punctually careful, that they de|livered not the Ensigns of the Order into the hands of any such Prince, till they were fully satisfied by his Letters Patent of his kind and grateful acceptance thereof, Sir Tho. Rows Iournal. p. 11. or in case of refusal to forbear their presentation.
And that care was taken for the due observation of this Decree (even in such case where only the Garter and George were sent) appears from the Instructions of the Ex Autogr. penes Iac. Palmer Eq. Aur. nup. hujus O. Cancel. 4. of March, an. 19. Car. 1. sent to Sir William Boswell Knight, he being appointed by the then Soveraign to present those two principal Ensigns of the Order, to William Prince of Orange, the said Soveraign's Son in Law; where among other things he is expresly commanded, Ex Autogr. penes Iac. Palmer Eq. Aur. nup. hujus O. Cancel. to take a Testimonial from the said Prince, of his kind acceptation thereof, before he should deliver those Ensigns of honor to him.
The like Ex Autogr. penes Iac. Palmer Eq. Aur. nup. hujus O. Cancel. Clause (for demanding of a Certificate of willing and grateful Ac|ceptance of the Order) we also find to have been inserted in those Instructions, under the same date, for the delivery of the Garter and George to Bernard Duke of ernon.



SECT. V. Of an Election not accepted of.
THat there hath been a non-acceptation of this honor, by the person Elect|ed, appears in that single case of Philip the Second Duke of Burgundy; who having been Elected by King Henry the Fifth, then in France into the Stall of the Lib. N. p. 77. Lord Clifford, (slain at the Siege of Ib. p. 69. Meux in Brie) had not (an. Ibid. p. 75. 1. H. 6.) sent his answer whether he would have his Election confirmed. It was there|fore concluded on, at the Feast of St. George held at Windesor, in the foresaid year, by Humfry Duke of Gloucester (then Deputy to the Soveraign) having therein the unanimous consent of the Knights-Companions present, to send Ibid. Let|ters to the said Duke Elect, Ibid. by which he might be entreated to give his Reso|lution, whether he would accept of the Election or not.
It seems the Duke of Burgundy returned no answer to this Letter, and there|fore at the next years Feast, it came again to be considered of, by the Duke of Gloucester (the Soveraign's Deputy for that Feast also) and the Knights-Com|panions present, and upon further debate it was thought fit, Ibid. p. 77. that there should be those persons sent over to him with the Nomination, who should desire to receive his final answer.
And then it appears, that the Duke of Burgundy, well considering the Sta|tutes of the Order, and reflecting on the Ibid. Quarrels between the Duke of Glou|cester, and the Duke of Brabant his Uncle, made a most plaucible excuse, re|fusing the Election, least Ibid. he should be forced, either dishonorably to violate the pious Constitutions of the Order, or the obligations of Alliance.
The substance of this Excuse, was afterwards represented to the Soveraign's said Deputy, and Knights-Companions, in a Chapter held at Windesor, an. 2. H. 6. Ibid. who considering the reason and manner thereof, the long voidance of the Stall, and the strictness of the Statutes in this case, vacated the former Election, and proceeded to a new one, which brought Ibid. Iohn Lord Talbot, into the room and Stall of the said Lord Clifford.
This is the only instance of any Stranger, who after Election refused his ac|ceptance of the Order. On the contrary, how desirous and earnestly solicitous some others (even of the highest rank) have been of admittance into this illu|strious Society, may appear by these few Examples.
Alphonsus King of Naples, and Duke of Calabria, did with Heylins Hist. of St. George, part 3. Ch. 3. Sect. 6. great importunity solicit his Election into this Order, and was accordingly chosen, an. 7. H. 7.
The Black-Book of the Order, mentioning the Election and Installation of Philip King of Castile, saith, that Lib. N. p 183. he not only assented to what was offered, namely the honor of admittance into the Order; but with much gladness and infinite thanks accepted thereof. A little before, we are informed, how Ib. p. 178. gratefully the King of Denmark, an. 20. H. 7. accepted of his Election. And in the me|morial of the Soveraign's sending his Ambassadors, with the Ensigns of the Order to the French King, Francis the First, it is noted, Ib. p. 257. that he received them with such a Regist. Char|tac. f. 66. cheerfulness of mind, as the Affair required.
Some few years before this King was Elected, Ferdinand Brother to the Emperor Charles the Fifth was chosen into the Order, of whom it is said, Eq. Aur. An|glo-Wirtemb. lib. 1. p. 28. That he took it for a very high honor, to be made a Collegue of this most Noble Society; and that he Bakers Chron. Edit. 1665. p. 291. received the Order at Norimberg in Germany to his great contentment. Maximilian his Son was presented with the Habit of the Or|der, by Thomas Earl of Sussex;MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 110. who giving the Soveraign an account by Let|ter of his reception thereof; affirms, that he received the Honor gladly, and with manifest satisfaction. Such is also the expression of Frederick the Second

King of Denmark, in his Letters of Procuration to the Lord Willoughby, Appendix, Num. LXVII. That he received the Order with as much gratitude, as if it had been presented to him by the Soveraign her self.
But that which Erhardus Celius reporteth of Eq. Aur. Anglo-Wirtemberg. l. 3. p. 82. Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, is beyond all; who being in England, and seeing the Eq. Aur. Anglo-Wirtemberg. l. 3. p. 82. magnificence of the Castle and Chappel of Windesor, was induced by the sight of the illustrious Arms and Ensigns of Honor of so many great Princes and famous Personages of this most Noble Order, to wish himself one of the renowned Society.
Being afterwards Elected, he exprest his acknowledgments of the Honor done him, not only by a solemn Embassy to Queen Elizabeth, but also by the Ib. l. 5.6.  7. great Preparations he made, the vast Expences he was at, and his extraordi|nary munificence in Rewards, at his Investiture with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order; which indeed were such grand testimonies of his glad acceptation of this additional flower of Honor, as nothing could more fully evidence it to the World. To these we may add the Ex relatione Edw. Nicholas Eq. Aur. re-iterated sollicitations made to the present Soveraign, on the behalf of Frederick Guillaume Marquess of Bran|denburgh, and his great impatience till his Election was past, though not easily nor suddenly obtained.
In fine, how acceptable this Honor hath been to several other Kings and Prin|ces, and what esteem and value they have set upon it, may be further seen, in their several Certificates, sent back to the Soveraign of this most Noble Order, after their Investitures with the Habit and Ensigns thereof.




CHAP. XV. THE Investiture of Strangers WITH THE HABIT and ENSIGNS Of the ORDER.

SECT. I. The Time for sending the Habit and Ensigns unlimited.
ALbeit the Statutes of the Order do appoint and prefix a time, within which the Soveraign's Letters giving notice to a Stranger of his Election, ought to be sent unto him, as before is shewed; yet as to the sending a solemn Embassy, with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, they do not limit a certain time, but leave that wholly to the Soveraign's pleasure; wherein his conveniency, and other Interests, as also those of the Elect Stranger, are to be consulted and considered.
But nevertheless, the Statutes of Institution appoint and direct, that this Legation shall be dispatcht Art. 20. with convenient speed; which must needs be interpreted with such latitude, as may refer both to the Soveraign's conveniency of send|ing, and the Stranger's capacity of receiving.
And therefore we find it six years after the Election of the Kings of Aragon and Poland, and the Duke of Brunswick, e're we meet with the first notice of the Soveraign's determination of sending over the Habit of the Order to them: For they having been Elected the Lib. N. p. 104. 4. of August, an. 28. H. 6. the preparations for the intended Legation were not made until the Ibid. 15. 34. year of the same King. And doubtless some cause, within the limits of that conveniency (allowed to

the Soveraign by the foresaid Article of the Statutes) or the accident of mis|carriage might fall out, particularly in reference to the King of Poland, (if not of the other) because Ibid. p. 119. three years after the former Order for Legation had past, we find new directions issued for sending the Ensigns of the Order to him.
But in King Henry the Eighth's body of Statutes, this Clause of sending the Legation with convenient expedition, is wholly omitted, and the Soveraign is now unlimitted as to the time: by which liberty it hath come to pass, that the Habit and Ensigns have been sent over, sometimes soon after the Stranger's Ele|ction, at other times not till some years after, and at all times when the Sove|raign hath thought fit and convenient.
Thus was it four years after Frederick the Second King of Denmark had been Lib. C. p. 77. Elected, before Peregrine Lord Willoughby of Ersby, together with Autogr. penes Rob. Com. Ailesbury. Sir Gilbert Dethick Garter, and Robert Glover Somerset Herald (by Order of Chap|ter Lib. C. p. 87. 24. Apr. an. 24. Eliz.) were sent over into Denmark, to present him with the Habit of the Order.
Maximilian the Emperor was Elected, the Ibid. p. 52. 24. of April, an. 8. Eliz. but it was above a year after re the Commission issued out to the Earl of Sussex, (viz. 20. May, an. 9. Eliz.) for carrying the Ensigns of the Order over to im.
It was seven years after the Election of the French King Henry the Third, be|fore the Collect. W. le. N. Cl. Warrant issued out to provide his Robes, and almost two years longer ere the Lib. C. p. 97. Earl of Derby went over with them: in all, about nine years and something above eight months.
And in another instance of a French King, namely Henry the Fourth, we find it six years and a half from the time of his Election, to his reception of the Ha|bit and Ensigns of the Order, which Solemnity fell on the Collect. W. le N. Cl. 10. of October, an. 38. Eliz..
Lastly, we observe that it was five years and a half, after the Election of Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, before the Embassy with the Ornaments of the Order, were sent unto him: for we find he was Lib. C. p. 134. videsis Collect. R. C. Cl. p. 11.  Eq. Aur. Anglo-Wir|temb. p. 107. Elected at St. George's Feast, an. 39. Eliz. and the Commission of Legation to the Lord Spencer, and Sir William Dethick bears Teste at Woodstock, the Num. LXXI. vide du Chesne Hist. p. 1138. 18. of Sept. an. 1. Iac. R.


SECT. II. Preparations made for the Legation.
IN reference to this solemn Embassie, there are several things to be provided before the Ambassadors or Commissioners take their journey; as first (1.) Cre|dential Letters, (2.) Commission of Legation, (3.) Warrants for the Habit and En|signs of the Order, and (4.) other Necessaries.
1. Credential Letters.The Credential Letters are (as to particulars) drawn sutable to the present occasion, by the Chancellor of the Order, and directed to the Stranger-Elect; but the substance (in general) is Appendix, Numb. LVIII. LIX. LX. LXI. That the Soveraign having elected him into the So|ciety of the Order, hath sent his Ambassadors with full power to present the Habit, and perform the Ceremonies in such case due and accustomed, as if himself were present. And further, to desire him, Appendix, Numb. LVIII. LIX. LX. LXI. to give credit to all that his Ambassadors shall say or perform in his behalf, in reference to their Commission, as he would do to himself.
These Letters pass under the Sign manual of the Soveraign, and Lib. R. p. 120. Signet of the Order; but it is observable, that those sent to Emmanuel Duke of Savoy were subscribed both by Appendix, Num. LVIII. King Philip and Queen Mary.
The Commission of Legation is likewise to be prepared by the Chancellor o the Order,2. Commission of Ln. fairly ingrossed in Velom, and sealed with the Lib. R. p. 119.  120. Great Seal of the Order; the substance of which (for the most part) hath been as followeth.
Appendix, Num. LXII. LXIII. c. First, the merits and worthiness of the Elect-Stranger to deserve the honor of Election, and the reasons inducing the Soveraign to confer the same upon him: are elegantly set forth in the Preamble.
Secondly, the persons nominated for this honorable employment, are ordain|ed, authorized, and deputed (and therein styled) Ambassadors, Procurators, and special Messengers; and so are they acknowledged to be, by the Strangers-Elect in their Certificates of the Receipt of the Habit.
Thirdly, their power, authority, and special command, is to address themselves to the Stranger-Elect, and to present and deliver him from the Soveraign, the Garter, Mantle, and other the Ensigns of the Order, with due and accustomed Ceremonies and Solemnities: where note, that if there were four or five join|ed in a Commission (as it hapned sometimes heretofore) then any five, four, three, or two were of the Quorum, whereof the Principal in the Embassy was always one.
Fourthly, they were impowered to require from the Stranger-Elect his Oath, according to the form and manner prescribed in the Statutes, but this clause we only find inserted in the Commissions of Legation, to Charles Duke of Burguny an. 9. E. 4. and Ferdinand Arch-Duke of Austria, an. 15. H. 8. and omitted in all Commissions since that time.
And lastly, to perform, accomplish, and dispatch those things, which they should judge necessary on this occasion; in like manner as if the Soveraign should or were obliged to doe, if he were present in his own person. And this lati|tude was thought convenient, to allow the Ambassadors, in case any matter in Ceremony, or other Circumstances should be thought necessary or expedient to use (not repugnant to the Statutes of the Order) which their Instructions had not sufficiently provided for.
As touching the first of these particulars, we have spoken to it Chap. 9. Sect. 13. already, but the second particular, relating to the persons nominated in the Commission, to perform this service, we conceive most proper to handle here.
The first Embassy upon this occasion, Of Persons no|minated in the Commission. recorded in the Black-Book of the Order. is that to Edward King of Portugal, an. 13. H. 6. to whom, Lib. N. p. 91. for the dignity of the Affair, Garter was thought sit by the Chapter to be sent alone with the Habt of the Order: And hence is the original of Garter's claim to this Employment.
Nevertheless, in succeeding times, as the Order grew up into esteem, both at home and abroad; some one of the Knights-Companions was made choice of by the Soveraign to be the Principal in these Legations; as were Galliard Sieur de Duras, sent to Charles Duke of Burgundy, an. 9. E. 4. Ibid. p. 25. Arthur Plrtaenet Viscount Lysle, to the French King Francis the First, an. 19. H. 8. William Marquess of Northampton, to the French King Henry the Second an. 5. E. 6. Edward Lord Clyn|ton and Say, to Emanuel Duke of Savoy, an. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar. Henry Lord Hunsdon, to Charles the Ninth French King, an. 6. Eliz. Thomas Earl of Sussex, to Maximilian the Emperor, an. 9. Eliz. Henry Earl of Derby to the French King Henry the Third, an. 27. Eliz. And Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury to Henry the Fourth, the French King, an. 38. Eliz..
Sometimes other Noblemen, and persons of great quality (though not Knights-Companions of the Order yet) correspondent to the Degree of the Stranger-Elect, or to the esteem the present Interest begat with the Soveraign, were em|ployed chief in these Embassies; among whom Collect A. V. W. Sir Charles Somerset (created af|ter Earl of Worcester) was sent to the Emperor Maximilian, an. 6. H. 7. Henry Lord Morley to Don Ferdinand Prince of Spain, Arch-Duke of Austria, an. 15. H. 8. The Lib. N. p. 67. Lord William Howard, Brother to Thomas Duke of Norfolk, to Iames the Fifth King of Scotland, an. 26. H. 8. The MS. quarto penes Arthur. Cm. Anglesey. p. 133. b. Lord Willoughby of Fr to Frederick the Third King of Denmark. Roger Earl of Rutland to Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, an. 1. Iac. R. The Lord Spencer of Wormleighton to Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, the same year. Sir Ralph Winwood to

Maurice Prince of Orange, an. 10 Iac. R. Sir Iacobs Spene of Wormston, to Gu|stavus Adolphus King of Sweden, an. 3. Car. 1. Dudley Viscount Doncaster, to Henry Prince of Orange, the same year. And Sir William Boswell, to Charles Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, an. 9. Car. 1.
In Embassies of this nature, it was heretofore usual, to join some persons of rank and quality, or Office neer the Soveraign, in the Commission; and such were Sir Ibid. pag. 133. b. Iohn Scott, Controller of the Soveraign's House, and Sir Thomas Vaughan, Treasurer of his Chamber, both joined in Commission with Galliard Sieur de Duras. Sir William Hussey with the Lord Morley; and Sir Ibid. pag. 133. b. Nicholas Ca|rew, and Sir Anthony Brown, with Viscount Lysle.
To these persons, the Soveraign thought fit sometimes to add a Doctor of the Civil Law, or an Ecclesiastical person having dignity, and such as had the Lan|guage of the Country whither they were sent; not only the better to make an|swer to such questions, as the Stranger-Elect might start, upon his perusal of the Statutes, but also to inform him touching the Institution of the Order, or other Historical passages, relating to the Founder, the preceding or present Knights-Companions, or honor of the Garter: all which (if judiciously and accurately rendred) might add reputation to the Order, and beget in the Stranger-Elect the better esteem of it.
Besides, an Ecclesiastical person was in those times thought fittest to Lib. N. p. 309 sub finem. admi|nister the Oath, and to Ibid. p. 310. pronounce the words of Signification, at the time of In|vestiture with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order.
And for these Reasons was Appendix. Num. LXII. Iohn Russell Doctor of the Civil Law, and Arch|deacon of Berkshire, joined in Commission with the aforesaid Galliard Sieur de Duras; and Ibid. Num. LXIII. Edward Lee Doctor in Divinity, Arch-deacon of Colchester, and the Soveraign's Almoner, sent over with the Lord Morley: In like manner was Lib. N. p. 257  Regist. Chart. f. 66. Iohn Tailour, Arch-deacon of Buckingham, and Vicechancel|lier D' angle|terre, so called. in the Certifi|cate of Fran|cis the First his Receipt of the Habit. Vice-chancellor, joined with Arthur Plantagenet Viscount Lysle; and Doctor Collect. A. V. W. Goodrick Bishop of Ely with the Mar|quess of Northampton.
But of later times, the Soveraign's Ambassador, resident with the Stranger-Elect, hath supplied this place; as did Collect. A. V. W. Sir Thomas Smith in the Legation sent over to the French King Charles the Ninth; and Sir Collect. W. le N. Cl. Edward Stafford in that to the French King Henry the Third; and Collect. W. le N. Cl. Sir Anthony Mildmay, when the Earl of Shrewsbury was sent upon the like Legation to the French King Henry the Fourth.
Garter joined in the Lega|tion.Besides the before mentioned persons, Garter Principal King of Arms, was al|ways joined in these Commissions of Legation, not only to keep on foot his right to the employment, but to manage the ceremonious part of this Solemnity: and if we shall be thought over numerous in Instances to justifie this particular, let our Reader excuse it, since it is to make good the Priviledge of an Office, and maintain the interest of an ancient right.
This reason (we presume) will also excuse our repetition here, of the anci|ent President when Lib. N. p. 91. Garter carried over the Habit of the Order, to Edward King of Portugal, an. 13. H. 6. to which we shall subjoin the Embassies to Charles Duke of Burgundy, where Sir Collect. A. V. W. Iohn Writh Garter, was joined in the Commission with Galliard Sieur de Duras, and that to Collect. A. V. W. Guido Vbaldus Duke of Vrbyn, an. 22. H. 7.
Sir Collect. A. V. W. Thomas Wriothesley was also joined with Sir Charles Somerset, in the Lega|tion to the Emperor Maximilian; with the Append. Num. LXII. Lord Morley sent to Ferdinand Arch-Duke of Austria, and with Ex. Collect. praed. Arthur Viscount Lysle, to the French King Francis the First.
Lib. N. p. 267. Sir Christopher Barker, Garter, was also sent with the Habit of the Order into Scotland (immediately after the Lord William Howard) who jointly presented the same to King Iames the Fifth.
Sir Gilbert Dethick likewise was joined in the Commission with the Marquess of Northampton, in the Embassy to the French King Henry the Second; also with the Lord Clynton in that Emanuel Duke of Savoy; with the Lord Hunsdon in that Legation to Charles the Ninth, with the Earl of Sussex, in that to the Empe|ror Maximilian, and with Peregrine Lord Willoughby, in that to Frederick the Se|cond King of Denmark.
Afterwards Sir William Dethick (his Son and Successor in the Office of Ga|ter) was in like manner joined in Commission with the Earl of Shrewsbury, sent to Henry the Fourth French King, and with Robert Lord Spencer to Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg.
Lastly, Collect. E. W. G. Sir William Segar, when the Habit of the Order was sent to Henry Prince of Orange, was MS. in Offic. Arm. [L. 18.] circa medium. joined in Commission with Viscount Carleton, for the presentation thereof.
And it is here further to be noted, that at such times as any other of the Of|ficers of Arms were employed in this Affair (as hath sometimes hapned, when Garter could not undertake the Voyage in person) such Officer (recommended by him to, but approved of by the Soveraign) was sent to execute his Office, ne|vertheless, under a particular reservation of his Rights.
And therefore the Embassy to Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, falling out neer to the Coronation of King Iames (in reference to the Collect. W. le N. Cl. preparations for which grand Solemnity, Garter could not be spared) Collect. W. le N. Cl. William Segar Esq then Norroy King of Arms, was joined in Commission with the Earl of Rutland.
When Henry St. George Esq Richmond Herald, was joined with Sir Iames Spens Knight, and Peter Young Esq in the Commission of Legation to a Gustvus Adopus King of Sweden, he went See before fol. 303 Sir Ed. Walkers Pet. for the rights of his Office. Deputy to Sir William Sgr, Garter, and was Colect. E. W. G. accountable to him for the Rewards he did receive. Nor was Ih Pl Esq Somerset Herald any otherwise sent, than Deputy to Gatr, though joined in Commission with William Boswell Esq for delivery of the Garter and George to Charles Prince Palatine of the Rhyne. an. 9. Car. 1.
In like manner, when the Embassy was less solemn, and only part of the En|signs of the Order sent, Garter hath been jointly employed with the other Commissioners: for so was William Segar Esq Garter, with Sir Ralph Winwood, for presenting the Garter and George to Maurice Prince of Orange, an. 10. Ic. R.
But beside the ancient right, the usage and prescription on Garter's side (as is before laid down) we find it declared by a Decree in Chapter (pass'd the 18. of April, an. 13. Car. 1.) Lib. R. p. 120. That the carrying of the Ensigns of the Order to Stranger-Princes, doth properly belong to Garter.
Besides those persons joined in the Commission of Legation,Heralds atten|dant in the Legation. there hath been oft times appointed either Collect. W. le N. Cl. Norroy King of Arms, or some one of the Heralds to go in the quality of an Attendant on this Service, not only for the Collect. W. le N. Cl. honor of the S|veraign, but of the Stranger that is to receive the Habit; in regard the Collect W. le N. Cl. Cere|monies of Investiture with the whole Habit, require the presence and assistance of two Officers of Arms; concerning which we have met with these Presidents.
MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p. 106.Lancaster Herald attended the Embassy to Charles the Ninth French King. Chester Herald, and Rouge Dragon Pursuivant at Arms, waited on the Embassy, to the French King Henry the Third. A Herald also attended the Embassy to Emanuel Duke of Savoy. York Herald attended that to Maximilian the Emperor: And Somerset Herald to the French King Henry the Fourth.
And whereas there went only Norroy to Christian the Fourth King of Den|mark; it was because no more of the Officers of Arms could be then spared, from their necessary attendance on the Soveraign's Coronation then at hand. So in the Embassy to Maurice Prince of Orange, one Herald sufficed, Collect W. le N. Cl. because the Garter and George only (not the whole Habit of the Order) were sent unto him, and consequently there was then but little service to be done at such an Investiture.
Concerning other Companions and Attendants in these Legations, they are both for Quality and Number such and so many, as the Chief in the Legation thinks sufficient, for the honor of the Soveraign, and the reputation of the Embassy: and in what Equipage some of these Ambassadors have been attended heretofore, may be seen from the following Lists.
Ex cod. MS. in Bibl. Cotton. [sub. ffigie Ilit] C. 9.The Names of the Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen, that accompanied the Marquess of Northampton in his Legation, with the Habit of the Order to the French King Henry the Second, 15. May an. 5. E. 6.

The Earls of Worcester.
Rutland.
Ormond.
Viscounts Fitzwalter.
Lysle.
Lords Bourgoune.
Bray.
Evers.
Mr. Throgmorton.
Mr. Sidney, both of the Soveraign's
Privy Chamber.
Sir William Cobham.
Sir Iohn Cutts.
Sir Iohn Perrott.
Sir Anthony Guydot.
Sir Gilbert Dethick.
Mr. Fitz Williams.
Mr. Carre.
Mr. Knolles.
Mr. Edw. Warney.
Mr. Fr. Warney.
Mr. Young.
Mr. William Thomas Secretary to the Lords Commissioners.
Mr.Nicholas Alexander.
Mr. Lucas Frugard.
Chester Herald at Arms.
Rougdragon Pursuivant at Arms
The whole number of Noblemen and Gentlemen, with all their Trains, was 260.

MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 118.The Names of the Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen, who accompanied the Earl of Sussex in his Legation with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, to Maximilian the Emperor, an. 9. Eliz.

The Lord North, Baron of Kyrtling.
Sir Egremond Radcliff, the Ambassa|dors Brother.
Sir Thomas Mildmay.
Sir Gilbert Dethick, Garter
Sir Henry Cobham Two of the Sove|raign's band of Pensioners.
Sir Edmund Powell Two of the Sove|raign's band of Pensioners.
William Dethick Rouge Cross Pursui|vant at Arms.
William Weston, one of the Queens Servants.


Gentlemen attending on the Ambassador.
Iohn Valpe Doctor of Physick.
Anthony Overton Prothonotary.
William Chancellor, Chaplain.
George Frevill,
Robert Butler.
William Mesten.
Henry Mildmay.
Thomas Higham.
Peter Gough.
Arthur Hevingham.
Albert Philipps.


Servants to the Ambassador.
Henry Eritage.
Iames Bradshaw.
William Hamlett.
Thomas Gest.
Simon Smith.
Thomas Barber.


Servants to the Lord North.
Arnold Segrell
Leonard Dickes:


Servants to Sir Tho. Mildmay.
Iohn Strange.
Iames


Servants to Sir Gilbert Dethick.
Charles Poirett.
Iohn Rudde.
Iohn Child.
Iohn Fletcher.


Servant to Sir Henry Cobham.
Hans


Servant to Sir Edmund Powell.
Charles

The Names of the Emperor's Gentlemen,MS. penes  O. T. f. 154. that waited upon the Lord Ambas|sador the Earl of Sussex, in Vienna 1567.

Casper van Mynkonitz, Sewer.
Seymfred van Alderston, Carver.
Marquess Spiller, Cupbearer.
William van Pellustrans Heralds of Arms.
Hans Poyntsott Heralds of Arms.
Nicholas Radode, Comptroller of the House.
George Swikle, Clerk of the Kitchin.
Item 10. Archers.
Item 10. Holbardiers
George Weaver, Master Cook.
In the Kitchin 10 persons.
In the Cellar 5.
In the Larder 5.
In the Confectionary 5.
In the Chaundry 2.
In the Wardrobe 3.
In the Scullery 3.
And one Porter.
In all 62 persons.

The Names of the Noblemen,Ibid. f. 32. Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, who gave their attendance on the Earl of Derby, sent Ambassador with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, to the French King Henry the Third, 20 Ian. an. 27. Eliz.

The Lord Sands.
The Lord Windsor.
Mr. Scroop, Son and Heir to the Lord Scroop.
Mr. Windsore, Son and Heir apparent to the Lord Windsore.
Sir Richard Shirborne Knight, Treasurer
Sir Randolph Brereton, Knight.
Mr. Clarencieux, King of Arms.
Mr. Anthony Cook, Heir to Sir An|thony Cook
Mr. Gerard, Son and Heir to Sir Thomas Gerard.
Mr. Fleetwood.
Mr. Newdygate.
Mr. Stallange.
Mr. Somerset Herald of Arms.
Mr. Crompton.
Mr. Smith.
Mr. Denton.
Mr. Milles Secretary.
Mr. Thomas Arderne, Steward.
Mr. Fox, Comptroller.
Mr. Newton, Gentleman Huisher.
Mr. Philipps, Chaplain.
Mr. Alexander, Gentleman of the Horse.
Mr. Moorcrost, Physitian.


The Earls waiting Gentlemen.
Mr. Dawney, Son and Heir to Sir Iohn Dawney.
Mr. Iames Legh, Son and Heir to Sir Pierce a Legh.
Mr. Warenne.
Mr. Thomas Shirborne.
Mr. Stanley.
Mr. Charles Doyley.
Mr. Chevalier Matchett.
Mr. Richard Starkey.
Mr. Brereton.
Mr. Thomas Hamner,
Mr. Richard Lloyd.
Mr. Salisbury.
Mr. Richard Bussy.
Mr. Iohn Downes.
Mr. Francis Starkey.
Mr. Baptist.
Mr. Thomas Randolph.
Mr. Tusser.
Mr. Anthony Chambers.
Mr. Nicholas Forton.
Mr. Gervase Rosell.
Thomas Burscogh Clerks of the Kitchin.
Roger Iollibrand Clerks of the Kitchin.

In the third place,3. Warrants for the Habit. there is to be prepared for this Legation, Warrants for the Habit and Ensigns of the Order; and these are also to be drawn up by the Chancellor of the Order, who is to attend the Soveraign for his Sign manual thereunto.
One Warrant is to be the Master of the Soveraign's Great Wadrobe, to deliver to Garter King of Arms, the Appendix, Numb. LXXVI. LXXVII. LXXVIII.  LXXIX. Mantle, with a Scutcheon of St. George within a Garter, embroidered on the left shoulder, and Tassels thereunto be|longing, as also the Appendix, Numb. LXXVI. LXXVII. LXXVIII.  LXXIX. Surcoat and Hood.
There is also another Warrant drawn up, for the delivery of the Ensigns of the Order to Garter; namely Ibid. Num. LXXX. LXXXI. LXXXII  LXXXIII. the rich Garter, the Great Collar of the Order, with a George appendant, and another smaller George hanging in a Blue Ribband: together with Cases for them, lined with Purple Velvet, and gilt on the outside.
And sometimes these Ensigns have been delivered out of the Iewel-house to the Herald at Arms, joined in the Legation in Garters's stead, as where those sent to Charles King of Sweden, an. 20. Car. 2. But those provided for Iohn George Duke of Saxony to Sir Thomas Higgons, the principal in the Legation to him; for which they gave their Ibid. Num. LXXXIV.  LXXXV. several Receipts.
The Soveraign's Warrant for the delivery of those Ensigns sent to Maximilian the Emperor, was directed to the Lord Treasurer of England, for which Garter gave his Ibid. Num. LXXX. Receipt. But for those sent to the French King Henry the Fourth, the Warrant was directed to the Master of the Iewel-house: and out of this Of|fice have all the Ensigns of the Order, before mentioned, been since delivered.
There are several other Necessaries to be provided,4. Other Ne|cessaries. which may pass as ap|purtenances to the former, and are sometimes inserted into the Soveraign's War|rants for the Habit of the Order, and at other times issue forth by particular Warrants; namely,
A Appendix, Numb. LXXXVII. amp; LXXXVIII. Black Velvet Cap, with white Feathers and a Heron Sprig.
A Appendix, Numb. LXXXVII. amp; LXXXVIII. Girdle and Hangers of the same coloured Velvet with the Surcoat.
A yard of Purple Velvet hath been usually allowed out of the Great Ward|robe, for covering the Book of Statutes which the Soveraign sends to the Elect-Stranger; and for the Velom, Writing, and Binding the said Book, there is a Fee paid by the Soveraign to the Register of the Order, which generally hath been proportioned according to the Degree of the Stranger, for this Officer had allowed him for the Book sent 


l.
s.
d.


Collect. W. le N. Cl.To the French King, Henry the Fourth
5
0
0


To Iohn Casimire Count Palatine
4
0
0


To the Duke of Holstein, an. 3. Iac.
3
6
8


To the King of Sweden, an. 3. Car. 1.
3
0
0


That Book of Statutes sent to the French King Henry the Third, was fairly bound in Append. Num. LXXVIII. Crimson Velvet, and edged with Gold Lace: That to the French King Henry the Fourth was MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p. 104. painted with Arms, wrought with Goldsmiths work, bound in Blue Velvet, with Laces of Gold and Silk. But to be more particular, we will insert a Transcript of the Bill of Charges for the Book of the Statutes, provided for and sent to Iames the Fifth King of Scotland, an. 26. H. 8.



s.
d.


MS. vet. penes G. O. Y. f. 1.First, For Vellym
5
0


Item, For illumyning the Arms and Letters
10
0


Item, For writing
20
0


Item, For Binding and Gilding
2
8


Item, For half a yard of Purple Velvet
7
0


Item, For half a yard of Crimson Sattin
7
0


Item, For the Purple Silk for the Laces
0
4


Item, For the white and green Silk for the Seal
1
0


Item, For red Silk for the Strings and garnishing of the Book
1
0


Item, For an Ounce and a half of Venice Gold
5
2


Item, For shaping, making of the Bag, and garnishing
3
4


Item, For the Red Sarcenet for the lining of the Bag
1
4


Item, For a Box
0
8


1
4
6


This Book of Statutes ought to be Sealed, with the E 3 Stat. Art. 20 H. 5. Stat. Art. 20 H. 8. Stat. Art. 21. Common Seal of the Order; which not only the Statutes of Institution, but all the other succeeding Bodies of Statutes do appoint: Besides, at a Chapter held at Whitehall, 18. Apr. an. 13. Car. 1. this Law was confirmed, and thereupon it was again Decreed. Lib. R. p. 120 That the Book of Statutes sent to any Stranger-Prince should be sealed with the Great Seal of the Order, affixed to a Label of Blue Silk and Gold.
There is also to be provided a large Purple Velvet Cushen, to carry the Robes on, when they are to be presented; this is put likewise into the Soveraign's Warrant, and provided by the Master of the Great Wardrobe; and it usually contains Collect. A. V. W. one yard and a quarter in length, being adorned Ex Lib. Warr. par|ticular in Offic. mag. Gardich. a. an. 1593. ad an. 1603. pag. 85. with Fringe, Cauls. and Tassels of Gold and Purple Silk, and within it a Ex Lib. Warr. par|ticular in Offic. mag. Gardich. a. an. 1593. ad an. 1603. pag. 85. Pillow of Fustian filled with Down.
There were two Velvet Cushens prepared for the Service of the Duke of Wir|temberg's Investiture, an. 1. Iac. viz. MS. fol. penes G O Y p. 193. one of Purple for the Soveraign's State, and another of Crimson for the Dukes: So also were there carried over the same year, for the Service of Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, Ibid. p. 299. two Purple Cushens garnished with Fringe, Buttons, Cauls, and Tassels. Two Majesty Scutcheons are likewise to be provided, painted in Oyl, and gild|ed with fine Gold; the one whereof to have the Arms of the Soveraign sur|rounded with a Garter, under an Imperial Crown; the other of the Stranger's Arms, within a Garter also, and such a Crown as belongs to his Dignity. Both these are to be put in Frames, painted, and gilt, with their several Stiles fairly written underneath the Arms, and set upon the back of the Soveraign's Stall, under the State, as also on the back of the Stall of the Stranger-Elect. But there were Collect. W. le N. Cl. three Majesty Scutcheons sent over in the Legation to Henry Prince of Orange, in regard that at his Investiture Frederick Prince Elector Palatine was present.
And in case the chief person in the Legation be a Knight of the Order, then is he to have a like Scutcheon of his Append. Num. LXXVIII. own Arms to set over his Stall also: for so had Henry Earl of Derby provided for him at the Soveraign's charge, when he was sent with the Habit to the French King Henry the Third.
The remaining Necessaries are such as relate to the Transportation of the Ha|bit of the Order, and what appertains to them, to wit;

Ibid. Num. LXXVI LXXXVII. LXXXVIII. One pair of fine Holland Sheets, to fold the Habit in.
Two Sweet Bags of Taffaty, to lay amongst them.
Two Trunks, to put the said parcels in.
One Sumpter Saddle.

All which are to be provided at the Soveraign's Ex ed. MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 97 b. charge, and is also his gift to the Elect-Prince.
What further Warrants are to be obtained from the Soveraign,5. Warrants for allowances to Garter and the Herald. relate to Gar|ter, and such other Officer of Arms as is appointed to attend the Legation; as first, a Warrant whereby the Soveraign ascertains an allowance for their Dyet and Re|ward, during their Journey, and till their return; and upon which most com|monly, for greater certainty of the payment, the Soveraign's Privy Seal is obtained.
The allowance to Garter in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, was 10 s. a day for his dyet, and 10 s. a day the Soveraign's Reward, in all 20 s. per diem.
Appendix. Numb. LXXXIX. Thus much we find to have been allowed Sir Gilbert Dethick Garter, in the Embassy to the French King Henry the Second, and appointed to Appendix. Numb. LXXXIX. begin the 28. of April, an. 5. E. 6.
The like Ib. Num. XC. sum per diem was allowed him in the Legation to Maximilian the Emperor, and to Ib. Num. XC. begin seven days before his arrival at the Sea side: In this service MS fol. pene G. O. Y. p. 159. 250 days being spent, his allowance came to 250 l.
In the Voyage to Frederick the Second King of Denmark, the said Sir Gilbert Dethick, had the Appendix, Num. XCI. same allowance given him, which Appendix, Num. XCI. began the 29. of Iune an. 24. Eliz. (being the tenth day before his embarking) and ended the 2. day of October following.
And when Clarenceux was sent Collect. W. le N. Cl. in the place of Garter (that Office being void by the death of the said Sir Gilbert Dethick) with the Earl of Derby, to the French King Henry the Third, the like sum of Appendix, Num. XCII. 20 s. per diem was also allowed

him, to begin from the 17. of Ian. an. 27. Eliz. though the said Earl went not till the Appendix, Num. XCII. 26. of the same month, and returned not till the 16. of March following.
We further find, that the very MS. in Bibl. Hatton. fol. 227 b.  MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p 61. same allowance was also setled upon Sir Wil|liam Dethick Garter, when the Habit of the Order was sent to the French King Henry the Fourth, which Journey began the MS. in Bibl. Hatton. fol. 227 b.  MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p 61. 11. of September, an. 40. Eliz. and lasted till the 7. of November ensuing, in all 60. days. As also in his Voyage to the Duke of Wirtemberg, which began the Ex eod. MS. penes G. O. Y. p. 60. 6. of September, an. 1. Iac. R. and ended with his return to Hampton-Court, on Christmas Eve following, and amounted to 109 l. But an. 10. Iac. upon the carriage of the Habit over to Prince Maurice of Nassau, the allowance to Sir William Segar, Garter, was en|creased to Appendix, Num. XCIII. 30 s. a day: so much also was after allowed to the same Sir Wil|liam Segar, when the Habit of the Order was sent over to Henry Prince of Orange an. 3. Car. 1. viz.Ibid. Num. XCIV. 15 s. per diem, for his Dyet, and the same sum per diem by way of Reward.
Of this daily allowance Garter hath usually obtained an advance beforehand, for his better support by the way: For instance, he had an advance of Ibid. Num. XC. two months pay for his Voyage towards Vienna, and when he accompanied the Lord Hunsdon into France, he had an advance also of MS. fol. pe|nes G. O. Y. p. 106. 40 l. In like manner when Cla|renceux went in the Legation to the French King Henry the Third, he received a Appendix, Num. XCII. hundred Marks beforehand.
When any of the Heralds were sent in Garter's place, the same allowances were made them, as if Garter had gone in person; for we find the sum of Ibid. Num. XCV. 30 s. a day allowed to Henry St. George Esq Richmond Herald sent with the Earl of Carlisle to Charles King of Sweden, whither he began his Journey the 5. of Fe|bruary, an. 21. Car. 2. As also to Num. XCVI. Tho. St. George Esq Somerset Herald, sent with Sir Tho. Higgons to the Duke of Saxony, upon the like Employment, the 27. of February following.
As concerning the allowance to such Officer of Arms, not joined in, but ap|pointed to attend any of these Legations, it was as followeth.
If he were a Herald, his allowance was the moyety of what was given to Gar|ter; to wit, heretofore 5 s. per diem for his Dyet, and the like sum for the Sove|raign's Reward, in toto 10 s. per diem. And if a Pursuivant at Arms was sent on this Employment, his allowance was half as much per diem as an Herald had.
Agreeable hereunto was the allowance given to Ibid. Num. LXXXIX. Chester Herald, and Ibid. Num. LXXXIX. Rouge Dragon Pursuivants in the Embassy to the French King Henry the Second, an. 5. E. 6. and Ibid. Num. LXXXIX. there called the old Rate. So also to Somerset Herald, in the Voyage Ibid. Num. XCI. to Frederick the Second King of Denmark, and to the same Herald when he attended the Legation to the French King Ibid. Num. XCII. Henry the Third, and likewise in that Embassy to MS. in Bibl. Hatton. fol. 227. b.  MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p. 65. Henry the Fourth of France.
Moreover the Herald or Pursuivant had also a proportionable part of their daily allowances advanced beforehand, to fit them for their Journey, like as Garter had; as in the foresaid Legation to Henry the Third, Somerset Herald an advance of an Append. Num. XCII. hundred Nobles.
Over and above the before mentioned allowances to Garter, for Diet and the Soveraign's Reward; he hath also an allowance for Ibid. Num. XC. Postage, both outward and homeward, of himself and his Servants, and Transportation of the Habit of the Order, and other things necessary for the Voyage: and of this, because there can be no estimate made beforehand, whereby to ascertain any allowance for the same, it hath been usual to insert a Clause in the Soveraign's Warrants, including the al|lowances for these things, to be such as Ibid. Num. XC. Garter (upon his return) should in a Bill of particulars, subscribed with his hand, signifie to the Treasurer and Cham|berlains of the Exchequer to have been disbursed by him.
The Warrant to furnish Garter or the Herald with Ibid. Num. XCVII.  XCVIII. Post-horses from place to place, is commonly had from the Lords of the Privy Council, or Secretary of State: as likewise for convenient Ibid. Num. XCVII.  XCVIII. Shipping, for the Transportation of him|self, Servants, Trunks, and other necessaries, when he passeth over Sea, either before or after the Lord Ambassador, and is not provided for in his Ship.



SECT. III. The Ceremonies of Investiture.
THE Ceremonies observed at a Stranger Prince's Receipt of the whole Ha|bit and Ensigns of the Order, are highly solemn, whether we consider the manner of Investiture performed by the Soveraign's Ambassadors, or the Fe|stivity and Triumphs added by the new Invested Stranger; and therefore that nothing may hinder a full prospect into the state and magnificence of both, we shall handle the same at large; and give such instances thereof, as may illustrate so great a Solemnity.
First then,1. First Audi|ence. the Commissioners joined in the Legation (after their arrival at the Elect-Stranger's Court, and receiving notice of their first Audience) are to pre|sent themselves in the Collect. W. le N. Cl. accustomed manner of Ambassadors, Garter or his De|puty going in breast with the chief in the Legation, if there be only himself joined in the Commission with the Lord Ambassador: and in that Collect. W. le N. Cl. place is it re|membred, that William Segar Esq Norroy King of Arms (sent in the place of Gar|ter) did proceed with the Earl of Rutland, at their first audience before Chri|stian the Fourth King of Denmark.
Being arrived neer the Elect-Stranger, they present the Letters Appendix, Num. CII. certifying Election, or their Credential Letters from the Soveraign; and after some short ge|neral Complement delivered from the Soveraign of the Order, by the chief Am|bassador in the Legation, he further makes known how that the Soveraign and Knights-Companions of the most Noble Order of the Garter, have elected him into that most renowned Society, for the reasons which are commonly laid down in the Preamble of their Commission, and which he ought then to repeat; further acquainting him, that the Soveraign doth never Elect any Stranger in|to the said Society, but such as he doth most highly honor and respect; and therefore desires him, that he would accept of it, as a true testimony thereof; to which end he adds, that the Soveraign hath sent him over, together with Garter Principal King of Arms (or his Deputy) to perform the Ceremony of Investiture. And this is the substance of his address for the general represen|tation of his Affair.
But more particularly in this first speech, he is to prosecute the method and order laid down in his Instructions, concerning which we have some light from those given to the Earl of Shrewsbury upon his Embassy, with the whole Habit of the Order to the French King Henry the Fourth, which were as followeth.
Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.First, you shall let the King understand, that the King who was first Insti|tutor of this Order, did principally dedicate the same to Noble persons, remark|able for extraordinary valour and command in martial Affairs; and as both We and Our Predecessors have usually bestowed it upon personages of highest Estate and dearest unto Us, so both these respects concurring in this Election of him (as that Prince whose preservation we have ever held most dear, and who liking personal valour and experience hath gotten to himself the greate reputation by the same, that ever any Prince hath done in Europe) we have had no small desire long ere this time, to possess him of this further pledge of our perfect amity, being one of the greatest signs of honor, wherewith we can honor any Prince; and therefore do desire him to make no other judg|ment of the protraction of the same hitherto, but that his own uncertainties of residence, in regard of the continual actions of War, wherein he is daily engaged, hath given us cause to think, it would have come unseasonably un|to him; when now that the Treaties and other Circumstances seem more fit|ting, we assure our self, that it shall be received with that sure measure of good will and kindness, wherewith we offer it; and as we take our self

honored by such and so choice a Companion, so can no Prince go before Vs in Our true and perfect obligation, to the rights of all happiness in all his Fortunes.
After the formality of this first address is over, and that the Stranger hath by his answer accepted of the Election, and consented to the reception of the Order; then doth the Ambassador, immediately MS. in Offic. Arm. [L. 1.] fol. 47. vide etim Appen|dix, Num. II. deliver to him the Book of Statutes (that so he may peruse them before he assume the Habit) and desires his consideration thereupon: Next, both the Commissioners in the Legation present him with the George and Ribband, and put it about his Neck, for so did Collect. E. W G. Sir Iames Spens and Mr. Henry St. George, Richmond Herald, to Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden the 21. of September, an. 3. Car. 1. and in the last place, the Am|bassador moves him to be pleased to name both a fit time and place, for his consent to the Articles of the Statutes, and the reception of the Habit; which being appointed (after some further Complements) the Ambassadors depart for that time.
In the interim,2. Preparati|ons for the In|vestiture. before the day of Investiture, time is usually set apart for Con|ference between the Soveraign's Ambassadors, and some of the Elect-Princes Coun|cil, touching the ordering of the Ceremonies at this great Solemnity, and word|ing the Oath to be by him taken, before he is invested (in case any Exceptions shall be made to the general Oath of the Order, or that the form thereof hath not been fully agreed upon beforehand) in relation to which we shall particu|larly discourse in the following Sect. 11. Chapter.
MS. in Bibl. Cton. [sub effig. Iulii C. 9.] Garter is likewise to consider, what places in the Elect-Princes Court (fittest to perform the Ceremonies in) are to be made ready, and in what manner; as also to instruct his Officers, what duties and services are on their part to be undertaken.
If the great Hall, or other large Room, be appointed for the place of Investi|ture, there ought to be prepared a Table, with a rich Carpet, whereon the Habit and Ensigns of the Order are to be laid, during the reading of the Soveraign's Commission of Legation; with another Table for the Stranger, who receives the Order, and a third for the Soveraign's Ambassadors.
In the Church or Chappel into which the invested Stranger is to proceed, to hear Divine Service, is to be erected a Stall (under a Ibidem. Cloth of State) on the right hand entrance of the Choire, for the Soveraign of the Order, within which is to be fixed the Majesty-Scutcheon of the Soveraign's Arms, mentioned among e preparations made for the Legation.
Also another Stall placed at that distance from the Soveraign's Stall, and on the same side of the Choire, as is the Stall designed for the Elect-Stranger, in the Choire at Windesor; over which a State is likewise to be set, and within the Stall sixt the other Majesty-Scutcheon of his own Arms, brought likewise over by Garter or his Deputy.
And lastly, a third Stall for the Lord Ambassador, who (if he be a Knight-Companion of the Order) hath in like manner a Scutcheon of his own Arms with|in a Garter, set over it; for so had the MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 239. Marquess of Northampton, at the Inve|stiture of the French King Henry the Second, an. 5. E. 6. and the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Earl of Derby at that of Henry the Third, and the Constable of France (being a Knight-Com|panion of the Garter) attending at the former of these two Investitures, in his whole Habit, had also a Ex eod. MS. penes cund. G. O. Y. lc. cit. Scutcheon of his Arms, placed over the Stall provided for him.
And we are further to note, that underneath all these Scutcheons of Arms, the Stiles and Titles (fairly written) of the Soveraign and each Knight-Companion are to be affixed.
But where there hath followed no solemn Proceeding to Church after Inve|stiture, the Soveraign's Scutcheon of Arms with his Titles have been set up at the upper end of the Room where the Investiture was performed, so also the Stran|ger-Knights at due distance: for so was it done at the Investiture of Collect. E. W. G. Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, which he received in his Tent at the Leaguer neer Darshaw in Prussia the 23. of September, an. 3. Car. 1. and likewise at the Inve|stiture of Collect. E. W. G. Iohn George Duke of Saxony, the 13. of April, an. 22. Car. 2.
Besides the before mentioned Preparations, the Church or Chappel into which the new Invested Stranger proceeds, is to be richly adorned: This, for instance, we find done at the Investiture of Henry the Third, the French King, the Church of Augustine Friers in Paris, being hung with rich Arras, and all the Choire and Stalls with Cloth of Gold: and how the Church of St. Vlrick at Studtgard was adorned at the reception of the Habit by Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg will appear by and by.
The day whereon the Solemnity of Investiture is to be celebrated,3. The order of Investiture. the Elect-Stranger sends his Coach, and some persons of Quality to accompany the Sove|raign's Ambassadors to his Court. At the Investiture of Henry Prince of Orange, Vide Guli|elmi Segar Suprem Rela|tionem, inter Collect. W. le N. Cl. Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, sate with Viscount Charleton in one Boot of the Prince's Coach, and Sir Vide Guli|elmi Segar Suprem Rela|tionem, inter Collect. W. le N. Cl. William Segar in the other; who arriving at the Court, were met by the said Prince, at the foot of the Stairs, and conducted thence into his great Chamber.
After such time as the Elect-Stranger and the Soveraign's Ambassadors have a while retired, the Stranger hath usually first entred the Room, appointed for the Ceremony, and stood under his own State, expecting the coming in of the Am|bassadors, and notice thereof being given them (they reposing themselves in a Room neer unto it) forthwith proceeded in manner following.
Servants to the Lord Ambassador, two and two.
The Herald in his Coat of the Soveraign's Arms, bearing the Mantle, Surcoat, Hood, and Cap on his arms, and if there be a Pursuivant attending the Em|bassy, he (wearing his Coat) proceeds before him, bearing part of the said Habit.
Garter, vested in his MS. in Bibl. Cotton. [sub effigii Iui] C. 9. rich Coat of the Soveraign's Arms also (but at the Inve|stiture of the Duke of Wirtemberg he wore his Robe of Crimson Sattin, so did Clarenceux at the Investiture of the French King Henry the Third, and lastly Richmond and Somerset at the Investiture of Charles King of Sweden, and the Prince Elector of Saxony) bearing on a Cushen the Garter, the Collar of the Order, with the great George, the Book of Statutes, and the Commission of Legation.
Lastly, the Lord Ambassador, or chief in the Embassy, who, if he be a Knight-Companion, proceedeth in his compleat Habit.
If there happen to be any other Knight-Companion present at this high So|lemnity, he also wears his whole Habit of the Order, as did Ex praes. Re|latione. Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, at the Investiture of Henry Prince of Orange, an. 3. Car. 1. the like did the MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 239. Constable of France, when the French King Henry the Second received the whole Habit at Castlebriand the 21. of Iune, an. 5. E. 6. The said Constable also paired in the Proceeding with the Soveraign's Ambassador, into the said Kings Privy Chamber, the place appointed for performing this Ceremony.
In this Proceeding up to the Soveraign's State, they all make three Reve|rences, and drawing neer thereunto, the Ambassador's Servants fall of on either side, for the Herald to pass up to the Table set before the Soveraign's State, where being arrived (with a single Reverence) he lays down the Robes thereupon.
Then Garter draws neer the Table also, and with a like Reverence towards the Soveraign's State, deposites there the Ensigns of the Order.
The Lord Ambassador follows and makes his Reverence towards the Soveraign's State, and after turning to the Stranger-Elect, and doing him Reverence, he (or some other fit person thereto appointed) delivers himself in a short, but grave and learned, Oration; In which he not only Lib. N. p. 309. sets forth the praises of the most illustrious Order, and of the King the Soveraign thereof (his Majesties hearty affection and good will appearing in this Action) but also the virtues, the me|morable and praise worthy Actions of the Elect-Stranger, to whom the Habit and Ensigns of the Order are sent: neither are his Ancestors (if happily any of them have attained and enjoyed the honor, reputation, and dignity of this Order) to be pass'd over in silence; whereby his heart (already sufficiently of it self breathing impatience and desire) may be so much the more inflamed with an earnestness to obtain the honor and favour of this so great a dignity.
He adds beside, that the Soveraign having well weighed these and the like things in his mind, and maturely advised thereof with his Knights-Compa|nions;

they were perswaded and well satisfied in themselves to nominate and chuse him before others, to the end that he might both himself be honor|ed by the choice of such a person, and also thereby give an encrease and addi|tion of Lustre to those renowned actions and virtues, which already were a chief ornament unto him.
Lastly, he points towards the Ensigns of the Order, which he declares to have been sent by the Soveraign, out of great love and singular affection to dignifie him therewith, as to a person unto whom he wisht as well and hono|rably as to any other Prince whatsoever: and withall intreats him kindly to accept of, and wear them in remembrance of the Soveraign and his Order.
This,Ibid. or the like Oration being ended, the Ambassadors present their Com|mission of Legation to the hands of the Elect-Stranger, who delivers it to his Se|cretary, and he publickly reads it.
At the before mentioned Investiture of the French King Henry the Second, the MS. in Bibl. Cotton. [sub Effig. Iulii C. 9.] Bishop of Ely, one of the Commissioners in the Legation, made the Speech, to which the Cardinal of Loraine returned answer, in the said Kings behalf, with all thankful acknowledgments of the honor of the Order.
And when Henry the Third of France received the Habit of the Order, Collect. W. le N. Cl. Sir Edward Stafford, the Soveraign's Leiger Ambassador, performed this service.
After the Commission is read, Garter presents the Oath, fairly written, which is administred to the Elect-Stranger, where if any exceptions were before made and admitted, they must be here rehearsed; as we find it directed in the Appendix, Num. CII. In|structions given for the Investiture of Iames the Fifth King of Scotland.
But the Oath was not taken by the French King Henry the Third, till after his Investiture, and in the Augustine Fryers Church in Paris; which being before pre|pared and written on Parchment in Letters of Gold; the said King there Lib. C. p. 97. sign|ed it, by the subscription of his name [Henry] and then delivered it to his Se|cretary, to have his Privy Seal put to it. So also was the Duke of Wirtemberg, an. 1. Iac. Exhard Cel|lius Eq. Aur. Anglo-Wittemb. p. 134.  135. first Invested in his great Hall at Studtgard, and then proceeded to the great Church, Ibid. 153. where he took the Oath.
The Lib. N. p. 310. Ceremony of the Oath being finished, Garter takes from off the Cushen the Garter, and having kiss'd it, presents it to the Lord Ambassador, who kneel|ing down, puts it with all Reverence about the Stranger's left leg, being assisted by Garter, and therewithall Collect. W. le N. Cl. Garter pronounceth these words of Signification.
Lib. N. p. 31Ad laudem at honorem Omnipotentis Dei, intemeratae Matris ejus,  Sancti Georgii Martyris; cinge Tibiam tuam hoc insigni Subligaculo, circum|ferens in augmentum honoris tui,  in signum ac memoriam illustrissimi Or|dinis, nusquam oblivioni daturus, aut omissurus, quod eo moneris; ut valeas, inquam,  velis in justo bello, quod solm inibis, stare firmitr, agere fortitr,  feliiter omnino vincere.
This being said, Garter next takes the Surcoat, and delivers it with the Ce|remony of a Kiss to the Lord Ambassador, who (after the Elect-Stranger hath put off his Cloak, or upper Garment and Sword) puts it upon him in this man|ner: First the Collect. W. le. N. Cl. Lord Ambassador begins at the Stranger's right arm, and Garter (or the Leiger Ambassador if present) assists at the left shoulder. The Stranger being thus vested with the Surcoat, both the Lord Ambassador and Garter gird his Sword about him, with a Velvet Girdle of the same colour, at the doing whereof Garter saith these words.
Lib. N. p. 310.Capito vestem hanc purpuream, ad incrementum honoris,  in signaculum Ordinis accepti: qu munitus non vereberis pro fide Christi, libertate Ecclesiae, pro jure,  oppressorum at indigentium necessaria tuitione, sanguinm etiam fundere, nedum fortitr ac strenu dimicare.
After this, Garter takes up the Mantle and Hood, which having in like man|ner kissed, he delivers to the Lord Ambassador, who invests the Stranger there|with,

and lays the Hood upon his MS. in Offic. Arm. [L. 1. f. 47.] videsis MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 239. right shoulder (the Train being given into the hands of some noble Personage, to be born up) Garter also pronouncing these words.
Lib. N. lco cit.Accipe Clamidem hanc Coelici coloris, in Signum Clarissimi hujus Ordinis,  in augmentum etiam honoris tui, rubeo Clypeo Dominicae Crucis, uti cernis, insignitam: ut cujus virtute semper ac vigore protectus per Hostes tutus abeas, eos ubi superare valeas,  pro clarissimis deni ritis, post egregiam hanc hujus temporis militiam, ad aeterna ver triumphalia gaudia pertingas.
And in the last place, Garter takes up the Collar, and with a Kiss also, presents it to the Lord Ambassador, who placeth it about the Stranger's shoulders, at which part of the Investiture Garter uttereth these words.
Ibid. 311. Torquem hunc in Collo deferes, ad augmentum honoris,  in signum quo clarissimi Ordinis  te suscepti, cum imagine sanctissimi Martyris,  Christi Militis Georgii: cujus praesidio suffultus, Mundi hujus tm prospera qum ad|versa sic pertranscas, ut animae pariter ac corporis hostibus hic strenue devictis, non temporariae modo Militiae gloriam, sed  perennis victoriae palmam de|ni recipere valeas. Amen.
As soon as this Ceremony of Investiture is finished, the Lord Ambassador con|gratulateth the new invested Stranger in the Soveraign's name, and in the name of all the Knights-Companions; and then delivers to him his Velvet Cap, adorned with White Plumes, and next the Book of Statutes.
By the Instructions drawn up for the Investiture of Appendix, Num. CI.  CII. Iulianus de Medicis, and Appendix, Num. CI.  CII. Iames the Fifth King of Scotland (though the form of the words of Admonition and Signification, are therein more briefly coucht) it may be observ'd, that this was the ancient series and order of Investiture, and was performed MS. in Of|fic. Arm. [L. 1.] fol. 47. videsis MS. pe|nes G. O. Y. p. 156. in the case of the Em|peror Maximi|lian, and fol. 239. in that of the French King Henry the Second. all together, and MS. in Of|fic. Arm. [L. 1.] fol. 47. videsis MS. pe|nes G. O. Y. p. 156. in the case of the Em|peror Maximi|lian, and fol. 239. in that of the French King Henry the Second. before the Stranger proceeded to the Church.
The Stranger being thus Invested, stayeth a while in the Room, where he received this honor, and either discourseth with the Ambassador, or else is en|tertained by him, with some short congratulatory Oration: which Comple|ment being ended, he goeth to the Church in a solemn manner, having the Train of his Mantle carried up.

The Proceeding to the Chappel, after the Investiture of the French King Henry the Second.


MS. in Bibl. Coton. [sub. effig. Iuli] C. 9. vide MS. penes G. O. Y. p. 239. Gentlemen of France and England.
Noblemen of France and England.
Knights of the Order of St. Michael in their Collars.
Commissioners of England, where Sir Iohn Mason placed himself with Monsieur de Omable, above the other Commissioners, be|cause he was the Soveraign's Ambassador Resident.
Chester Herald, in the Soveraign's Coat of Arms.
Marquess of Northampton, and Constable of France.
Serjents at Arms.
Garter in the Soveraign's Coat of Arms.


The French King in the Habit of the Order of the Garter.
Cardinal of Chattillion.
The Cardinal of Loraine.

His Train born by the Duke of Longueville, as great Chamberlain of France.

At the entrance into the Church, all in the Procession make three Reverences, the first towards the high Altar, the next towards the Soveraign's Stall, and the third towards the new-invested Stranger's Stall.
The Lord Ambassador proceedeth towards the Seat assigned for him, and stands

before it till the Stranger hath ascended his Stall, and after that (making his Reverences as before) he takes his; then Garter, making the like Reverences, sits down on a Chair, placed for him before the Soveraign's Stall.
But the Herald at Arms ought to be often neer the Stranger, or else the Lord Ambassador, to inform them of the order of the Ceremony, if there be occasion; because Garter is obliged to attend the Soveraign's Royal Stall.
After a solemn Anthem sung, Garter passeth into the middle of the Choire, and by a Reverence, first to the Invested Stranger, and next to the Lord Ambassador, gives them the Signal for descending.
They being both come down, Garter passeth up before the Stranger to the high Altar, where he makes his Offring of Gold and Silver, being accompanied with the Lord Ambassador, the Herald laying the Cushen whereon he kneels while he offers.
But in case a Knight-Companion of the Order be sent on this Legation, then he proceeds first up to the Altar, preceded by Garter, and offers for the Sove|raign, which done, he returns to his own Stall: Next the Invested Stranger pro|ceeds up (preceded as before) and offers, and returns back to his own Stall; af|terwards the foresaid Knight-Companion proceeds up again, and at this time offers for himself: and in this MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 156. order was the Offring made, when the Empe|ror Maximilian was Invested at Vienna, the 4. of Ianuary, an. 10. Eliz.
At the Investiture of the French King Henry the Second, there was a solemn Mass sung, and at the Offring time Ibidem. fol. 239. Garter proceeded before the King, to the Altar, and Monsieur: Dangennes the Duke of Vendosme's Brother, presented to the King his Offring; and when he was returned to his Stall, the Ibidem. fol. 239. Constable of France proceeded up with Garter before him, and offered; and in like manner after him the Ibidem. fol. 239. Marquess of Northampton, with Garter also before him, made his Offring and returned to his Stall.
The new-invested Stranger having offered, returns to his Stall, and the Lord Ambassador, with three Reverences takes his Seat, the Organs or other Musick, playing all the while.
As soon as the solemn Service is finished, the Stranger descends again from his Stall, and with the Proceeding before him, returns in the same order he came, to the Room where he received his Investiture.
And it is observable that the Emperor Maximilian, out of compliance with the Protestant Religion, caused on the day of his Investiture, all Ibid. f. 110. Prayers to Saints, Incensing, and other matters and Ceremonies, not used by the Church of England, to be wholly omitted at the service in his Chappel.
At these great Solemnities, the invested Strangers have heretofore held most magnificent Feasts, but they of late are not so much in use: And when Dinner was ready they proceeded thither in their whole Habit, which they Ex Autogr. in Bibl. Hatton. wore all Dinner while.
At the Investiture of Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, an. 1. Iac. the Soveraign's Stiles and Titles of honor were proclaimed thrice (Collect. W. le N. Cl. before they sat down to Dinner) and the said Kings twice: But when Collect. W. le N. Cl. Maurice and MS. in Of|fic. Arm. [L. 18.] circa medium. Henry Princes of Orange received Investiture, the Stiles were proclaimed immediately after they were Invested, and in the same Room, that Ceremony being perform|ed to both in an MS. in Of|fic. Arm. [L. 18.] circa medium. Afternoon.
We have had the perusal of a fair Vellom Penes Iob. Vincent gen. Manuscript, wherein there is ve|ry curiously limned the order and manner of Maximilian the First (King of the Romans) his sitting at Dinner, on the day of his Investiture with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, together with Sir Charles Somerset and Sir Thomas Wriothe|sley, sent on the Embassy to present him therewith. As also the order observed of sitting at Dinner by Don Ferdinand Prince of Spain, Arch-Duke of Austria, on the like solemn occasions; the Lord Morley and Sir William Hussey sitting on his right hand, and Doctor Lee the said Sir Thomas Wriothesley on his left, these four being joined in the Commission of Legation to him; which two Draughts for Antiquity's sake, we have copied thence, and thought good here to exhibit.

The Manner of sitting at Dinner of Maximilian king of the Romans, on the day of his Investiture.


The Manner of sitting at Dinner of Ferdinand Prince of Spanie, on the day of his Investiture.


At the Feast made on the like occasion by the French King Henry the Second, he MS penes G. O. Y. f. 239. admitted to his Table, (beside the Marquess of Northampton, the principal person in the Legation) the before mentioned Constable of France; and all three sat in their full Robes of the Garter, which they MS penes G. O. Y. f. 239. put not off till after Dinner: The MS penes G. O. Y. f. 239. Cardinal of Loraine, fate also at the Kings Table, but it was on the other side.
When the Investiture hath been performed in the Afternoon, then was the grand Dinner turned into a Supper; and thus it fell out at the Investiture of Ibid. f. 1. Maxi|milian the Emperor, and two of the French Kings, namely MS. fol. 19. Charles the Ninth, and Collect. W. le N. Cl. Henry the Third, as also of Genealog. Com assovia, p. . Maurice Prince of Orange.
But when Henry Prince of Orange received the Ensigns of the Order, there was no Feast at all, but purposely omitted, to prevent the difference which might have been occasioned, by MS. in Of|fic. Armor. [L 18.] the precedency and place between Ambass|dors, drinking of Healths, and other Complements. Only the next day, the said Prince invited MS. in Of|fic. Armor. [L 18.] Garter to Dinner, who sate on the same side with him, yet at a MS. in Of|fic. Armor. [L 18.] convenient distance, and on the other side of the Table were placed, MS. in Of|fic. Armor. [L 18.] Count Lodowick of Nassau, and Collonel Bogg a Scotchman.
Thus have we briefly touched at the most material particulars, relating to the Investiture of Strangers; of which Solemnity, and the honor they derived from it, some have thought fit to transmit the memory to Posterity, by Medls, with Inscriptions relating thereto. Such were those of Gold and Silver, which Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg caused to be made, Erhard Cel|lius Eq. Aur. AngloWirtemb. l. 7. p. 184. having on one side his Ef|figies, and on the other the Arms of Studtgard (his chief City) and over them the imperial Eagle crowned; some of which were preserved, and others di|sperst abroad, for a perpetual commemoration of that solemn act of his Investi|ture, with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order. So also those made by Charles King of Sweden at his Investiture, emblematically pointing out the happy con|cord setled between the Crowns, both of this and that Kingdom, being copied out and here inserted.


What is wanting in the course of the Solemnity on the day of Investiture, may be supplied from the large account we shall give of the Ceremonies on the Eve and Feast-day of St. George, from whence many things may be transferr'd to their use, who shall be employed abroad upon the Like Legations.
Yet for their sakes, whose curiosity will like a more particular account of the Solemnities in Foreign parts, we have thought fit to insert here the Re|lations of some eminent Investitures, wherein several passages may seem re|markable enough, while drawn together in a continued Narrative, but per|haps would not appear so, if taken asunder; nor indeed can divers minute things (in some kind worthy of knowledge) be precisely referr'd to those few heads we have chosen to discourse of, without too much straining.



A Relation of the manner of investing the French King Henry the Third, with the Habit and Ensigns of the most Noble Order of the Garter, An. Dom. 1585.
Collect. W. le N. Cl.HEnry Earl of Derby, appointed by her Majesty, Ambassador to Henry the Third French King, and to invest him with the Order of the Garter, took his leave of the Queen's Majesty at Greenwiche the 20. of January, an. 27. Eliz. and with him, such Gentlemen as were present, were admitted to kiss her Highness hand; Mr. Cook, Clarenceux, appointed to attend in that Voyage, in place of Gar|ter, whose room was void, and Robert Glover, Somerset Herald, likewise appoint|ed to that Iourney.
On the 26. of January, the Earl, with his Train, passed from London to Graves|end, where taking Post-Horses they rid to Sittingborne, and from thence to Do|ver, where they embarqued, and landed at Callis, on the first of February; on the third of February the Earl with his whole Train went from Callis to Boloigne to Bed, where they were very well entertained; On the fourth of February they rid to Monstreuil, on the fifth to Abbevil, where they were met with 150 shot of Hacque|busiers: On the sixth they took their Iourney to Amyens, being by Monsieur Creve|coeur, accompanied with 100 Gentlemen, and best Citizens, met half a Mile without the Town; that night the said Crevecoeur presented the Earl, with great store of ve|ry large and good Fresh-water Fish, and the Town with Wine of divers sorts, and the day following, being Sunday, the said Crevecoeur invited the Earl to Dinner, which Dinner was highly commended; after Dinner the Earl with his Train went to Breteuil to Bed, the next night to Cleremont, where they stayed Tuesday, and Wednesday, the tenth of February he went to Luserche; on the eleventh to St. Den|nis, where by the way he was met by Sir Edward Stafford, her Majesties Ambassa|dor, resident with the French King, who brought with him divers Gentlemen of En|gland, to the number of thirty horse, and so accompanied him to St. Dennis, where they kept Company all the day following, being Friday.
On Saturday his honor made his Entry into Paris, about two or three of the Clock at Afternoon, there being of the Lord Ambassadors Train more than two hundred horse, and mid-way between St. Dennis and Paris there met with them (sent from the King) the Duke of Montpensier, a Prince of the blood; the Lords Chauigny, le Chapelle, Comte de Lude, de Pienne, de Malicorne, de la Mothefelon, who had sometimes been Ambassador Leiger in England, D'estree, d'Abin, de Fontaines de Cornusson, the Marquess of Curton, the Comte de Grignan, all Councellors to the Council, and Knights of the Holy Ghost, the Duke of Iremo|nille, the Counts of Brisac, de Creance, Sancerre, and of Lazure, with a great number of Lords and Barons, Gentlemen of the Chamber; these did accompany the Earl of Derby, unto Hostell de Longuevill, sometime called the Hostell of Anjou, there was his Lordship with the other Lords and Gentlemen lodged, where was three Tables very sumptuously furnished for them, all of the Kings cost; the one Table in the great Chamber, for the Lords and Gentlemen, Servants to her Majesty; the other in the Hall, for the Earl of Derby's Gentlemen; and a third in a Gallery beneath, for Gentlemens Servants, besides livery into every Chamber, both of Wax, Wood, Wine, and such like, in as great plenty as could be desired.
On Sunday, the said Earl, betwixt the hours of two and three in the Afternoon, went from his Lodging by a Postern, through the Garden, accompanied with the said Lords de la Mothefelon, de Curton, and Grignan, together with others, and and found the Captains of the Regiment of the Kings Guard, making two ranks on ei|ther side of the streets, beginning from the Postern to the Louvre Gate, who welcom|ed im in the Kings behalf; without the Gate of the said Louvre he was received by the Lieutenant of the great Provost of France, and his Archers; at the Louvre Gate by the Sire de Montigny, Captain thereof to his Majesty, and his Archers; which Archers, together with those of the great Provost, made two ranks from the said

Gate of the Louvre to the foot of the Stairs, from which foot his Lordship was re|ceived by the Sire de Pardillon, the French Lieutenant of the Switzers, of the Kings Guard, which from the foot of the said Stairs to the door of the Hall, made two ranks for his Lordships passage; at the entrance of the Hall his Lordship was re|ceived by the Sire de Chasteau Viaux, Knight of the Holy Ghost, and Captain of Archers of the Kings Guard, who likewise from the said door unto the door of the Antichamber, made two ranks; from the door of the Antichamber his Lordship was received by Sire de Combault, Knight of the Holy Ghost, Chief Master de Hostell to his Majesty, and by his Gentlemen Waiters, and there in the said Antichamber all the said Earl of Derby's Officers and Gentlemen, wearing Liveries, were ap|pointed to stay; and the Queens Servants that proceeded next went still forward; at the Entry of the Chamber of Estate, his Lordship was received by the Sire de Lenon|court, Knight of the Holy Ghost, chief Escuier of the Kings scurie, and the other Escuiers of the Escuire, together with the Lieutenant of the hundred Gentlemen of his Majesty, who made two ranks from that Chamber door to the Chamber of Audi|ence, every of them having Halberts in their hands; at the Entrance of the Anti|chamber his Lordship was received by the Duke Joyeuse, accompanied with the Gen|tlemen of the Kings Chamber Ordinary, who made two ranks from that Chamber door, to the door of the Chamber Royal, into the said Chamber Royal.
First entred all the Gentlemen, the Queen's Majesty's Servants, the Lords that had received and accompanied the said Earl, and Lords, and the said Duke de Joy|euse, accompanied the said Earl of Derby unto the Bars, that stood about the hault|pce or mounting floor in the said Chamber, where the King stood at his Beds fet, accompanied with the said Barriers on his right hand, with the Cardinals of Bour|bon, Vandosme, and Joyeuse, and on the left hand with the Lords, the Princes of Conty, the Comte de Soissons, and D. Montpensier, Princes of the Blood, the Dukes of Nevers, Delboeufe, de la Joinuille, de Retz, Monsieur le Chancellour Sier de Villequier, du Bouchage, de la Valette, d'Antragues, de la Chappelle aux Urfius, Chavigny, la Vivone, Comte de Mauleurier, Clermont, Denitragues, de l'Archant, and other Knights of the Holy Ghost, and Councellors of the states in great number.
The said Earl with the Lord Ambassador Ordinary of England, only entred the said halt-space within the Barriers unto his Majesty, of whom they were received with great curtesie, and as amiable countenance as could be; and the Earl delivered the Queen's Majesty's Letters unto the King, with great reverene, and then making rehearsal of that he had in charge to say, the said Ambassador presented unto the King the Lord Sands and Windsore, and other the English Knights and Gentle|men, which all one after another mounted upon the halt-pace, kissed their hands, and did reverence unto the King. Then the Earl took his leave, and was conducted by all the Lords and Captains unto the place where they had first received him.
After, he went to salute the Queen Mother, and at the entrance into her Cham|ber he was received by Monsieur de Lansac, Knight of the Holy Ghost, and Knight of Honor unto the said Queen, whom he found accompanied with her Neece, the Princes of Loraine standing at her Beds head, the Princes of Conde and the Dutchess of Nevers standing at the Beds feet, the Dutchess of Duzez and of Retz, and other Ladies and Gentlewomen in gret number; from thence his Lord|ship was conveyed to the Queen Regents Chamber, and at the entrance whereof he was received by the Comte de Fiesque, Knight of the Holy Ghost, and her Knight of Honor, finding her accompanied with the Dutchess of Montpensier, and Joyeuse who stood at her Beds feet, the Lady of Royden her Lady of Honor, and other La|dies and Gentlewomen in great number, and then returned to the aoresaid Hostell de Longueville.
On Monday the 15, of February, the King by Moueur de Mothefelon, told the Lord Ambassador his mind, touching the receipt of the Order, that he intended to receive it on Thursday following, in the Afternoon at the Augustine Friars, which was done accordingly, the 18, day of February, an. 27. Eliz.
About two of the Clock in the Afternoon, the Earl and Leiger Ambassador, and all the other Gentlemen of their Train, in Coaches, were conducted from the house of

Longueville, where the Earl of Derby was lodged, unto the house of Monsieur de Mantuliet, Provost of Paris, where the Earl did put on his Robes of the Garter, and Clarenceux then representing the place of Garter, did put on his Mantle, and made ready the Kings Robes. The King also with a great number of his Nobility came from the Louvre to the same house of Mantuliet, for whom there was provided two Chambers, in the inner Chamber over the Chimney was set up a cloth of Estate, and on the left hand thereof a board covered with a rich Carpet; against the end of which board the King did stand in a short Gown of rich Taffata, having on either hand of him some sixteen of the greatest of his Nobility, the rest abode in the outward Cham|ber (for so was the Kings pleasure) that there might be the more room, and freer ac|cess for the Earl, and the English Noblemen and Gentlemen; all things being put in good order, the King sent the Earl word by Monsieur Lamothe, Fluelon, and Mon|sieur de Rhoades, Master of the Ceremonies that he stayed for him.
Whereupon thirty of the English Gentlemen, accompanied with as many French Gen|tlemen, proceeded two and two together up the Stairs before the Earl, towards the King, then marched Somerset Herald in his rich Coat of Arms, bearing on his Arms the Kings Kittle, Mantle, and Hood; after him went Clarenceux in a Robe of Crimson Sattin, having on his arms a fair large Cushen of Purple Velvet, and there|on the Collar of the Order of the Garter, and the little Chain with the George. After Clarenceux went the Earl in his Robes, and the Ambassador Resident: And being thus come before the King, Somerset (after due reverence) laid the Robe he bare upon the Table, that the King leaned unto, so also did Clarenceux the Cushen, with the Iewels thereon. The Earl also being entred, and having made his due re|verence, Clarenceux delivered him his Commission, who giving the same reverently to the King, he forthwith gave it to his secretary Pinart to be read, according to the form: Though at that time it was not read at all.
That done, Clarenceux delivered unto the Ambassador the Garter, who gave it unto the King, who also kissing the same kneeling, did put it about the Kings left leg, the Ambassador pronouncing these words following.
See before p. 402.Ad laudem at honorem Omnipotentis Dei, c.
That being done, Clarenceux killing the Kirtle of Crimson Velvet gave it to the Ambassador, who also delivered it to the Earl, and he to the King, putting the same on with a Crimson Velvet Girdle, whereunto was put a gilt Rapier; which Girdle and Rapier was formerly provided by a Gentleman of the Kings Chamber, at the doing whereof the Ambassador pronounced these words following.
Pag. 403.Capito Vestem hanc purpuream, c.
The Kirtle being put on, Clarenceux delivered the Mantle of Purple Velvet, and the Hood of Crimson Velvet, which the Earl put upon the King also with the assi|stance of the Ambassador, that pronounced these words following.
Ibid.Accipe Clamidem hanc Coelici coloris, c.
Lastly, Clarenceux kissing the Collar of Gold, gave the same also to be put about the Kings neck, which was done by the Earl, the Ambassador using these words following.
Ibid.Torquem hunc in Collo deferes, c.
After the King was thus invested with all the Habilements of the Order as afore|said, the Earl delivered unto him, first the Book of Statutes of the said Order fair|ly bound in Crimson Velvet, and Gold Lace; which Book the King gave to the Duke of Joyeuse, to carry after him to the Church; and lastly, the small Chain with the George, which was by the Earl delivered to the King, which also was delivered by him to the Duke of Joyeuse.
These Duties thus performed, the King standing invested with his Robes, and the arl likewise by him, the Ambassador for and in the name of the Earl (for want of the Language) used a Speech to this effect.
Sir, we rejoice greatly, to see your Majesty now invested into this honorable Society and Order of the Garter, desiring of God, that long and most happily you may wear and use the same to his Glory, and the advancement of your own greatness, equal with all your Predecessors, being right well assured (for so hath her Majesty commanded my Lord to say unto you) that if her Highness, and the residue of the Knights of this Order, certainly had understood of the day and time of this your Majesties reception of the same, both she, and all they would not have failed, in their Robes, to celebrate this day, in token of the honor and pro|sperous success they wish unto your Royal Person.
When the King had thus received the Order, and was invested as aforesaid, he proceeded to the Church of the Augustines; some 15 or 20, score off to Evensong, be|ing about 4 of the Clock, the way being all railed in with Timber, and gravelled with fine Sand, and guarded on each side with the Kings several Guards, that the Train might not be troubled in proceeding.
The body of the Church was hanged with rich Arras, and all the Choire of the same Church and Stalls with Cloth of Gold. At the entry of the Choire was erect|ed two Cloths of State, one for the Queens Majesty, and that was over the Stall on the right hand of the same Choire, and the other for the French King, and that was over the Stall, next unto the Queens Majesty, on the left hand; with|in these two States royal were affixed the Arms of these two Princes, viz. over the Queens Stall the Arms of England and France quarterly, and over the Kings Stall the Arms of France, both within the Garter, and set in Frames of Wood richly gilt. The Earls Stall was about eleven Stalls beneath her Majesties, and on the same side, whereon was also affixed the Earls Arms within the Garter, and his Stile fairly written under them; directly before the Queens Cloth of State was placed a Form, covered all with Cloth of Gold, for Mr. Clarenceux to sit upon, during the time of Evensong.
At the right side of the Altar within the same Choice was made a place of bords Saffoldwise, two yards high from the Ground, covered with rich Carpets, and hanged with Cloth of Gold, whereon was placed the Queen Mother, and Queen Regnant with other Ladies and great Princes, and directly on the other side against them was another place made and erected, whereon stood the Popes Nun|tio, with the Cardinals, and all the Ambassadors that then were in Paris.
All things being thus put in Order at the Church, and all persons placed therein according to their Degrees, the King proceeded thither in this sort fol|lowing.

First, Trumpets and Drums.
Then thirty English Gentlemen, accompanied by the Kings especial order and care, with thirty French Gentlemen, of equal or better degree.
Then the Lord Windesor, with a French Lord.
Then the Lord Sands, so also accompanied.
Then Serjeants at Arms with their Maces.
Then Somerset Herald at Arms.
Then Clarenceux.
Then the Ambassador Leiger Sir Edward Stafford.
And then the Earl of Darby Chief Commissioner.
After him followed the King, his Train being born by a Brother of the Duke of Joyeuse, being a Gentleman of the Kings Privy Chamber.
And after the King came the Princes of the Blood Royal.
Then Dukes, Marquesss, Earls, and other Noblemen.

Note, That the King had especially ordered, that for her Majesties special Honor, none should that day proceed before him, but English and such French as were ordered to go with them, and his own Nobility to wait behind him.
Note also that all personages of the Order of the Holy Spirit, went next to the King in their Cloaks of the Order, and Collars of Gold about their necks of the same Order, the person of the King was guarded all the way, by a number of Gentlemen Pensioners, with their Pool-axes in their hands.
In this order, the King with his Train entred the Church, and in the entring in of the Choire, Somerset Herald in his rich Coat of Arms made his three Reverences, the first towards the Altar, as it was formerly agreed upon before by the Lord Am|bassadors. Secondly, towards the Queens Stall. Thirdly, towards the Kings Stall.
And after him, Clarenceux entring the same Choire did the like. Then the Am|bassador Leiger, then the Earl; which done, the said Earl went before his own Stall, and there stayed till the King had taken his Stall Royal, and then the Earl making his Reverence as before went up into his Stall.
After him the Ambassador Leiger did the like, and went into the Stall next beneath the Earl, towards the High Altar; Then Clarenceux having made the like Reverence, sat him down on his Form placed as aforesaid, directly against the Queen's Stall, where he remained till the Choire began to sing Magnificat.
At which time he stepped forward into the midst of the Choire, and there making his three Reverences, as aforesaid, turned himself to the Earl and Leiger Ambassador, then the Ambassador came forth of his Stall, and making his three Reverences, followed Clarenceux over the Choire towards the King, and there stayed afore the Kings Stall, until Clarenceux returned and fetched the Earl un|to him, who making his three Reverences, came also with Clarenceux before the King, to the right side of his Stall, where standing, Clarenceux delivered the Oath, fairly written in Parchment and Letters of Gold, which by the Earl was laid before the King to be Signed, the Ambassador Leiger being ready to have read it (but that the King said it needed not, because he was privy to it be|fore) who taking it in his hands, received of his Secretary Pinart a Pen with Ink, and therewith did subscribe his Name, only by the Name of Henry, which done, he gave the same unto the said Secretary, to have the Privy Seal put thereto, which was done accordingly, and the next day delivered to Clarenceux.
After the King had thus taken his Oath, as aforesaid, the Earl and the Ambassador with Clarenceux before them, returned back to their Stalls, not omitting three Reverences, and there remained till the end of Evensong, at which time the King standing up in his Stall, being ready to depart, all the other Strangers Ambassadors, presented themselves before him, with words of special Congratulation, to whom he gave several thanks and answers, and so de|parting out of the Church, in the same order as he came thither, he returned again to the House of Mantuliet, where in the same Chamber as he had put the Robes on, he put them off, and after some speeches with the Earl, and Ambassador some Quarter of an Hour or thereabouts, he departed with his No|bility over the Water to the Louvre, leaving the Earl and Ambassador, and all their Trains, to return in their Coaches through Paris to the House of Lon|gueville.
The same night, the Earl with the Lord Ambassador, and all the English Gen|tlemen that were the Queens Servants, did sup at the Court, the Earl and the Am|bassador at the lower end of the Kings Table, at which Board did also sit with the King the two Queens, and six or seven other great Ladies, among whom the Lady Sheffield was one, and at another Table in the same Chamber did sit divers great Ladies all along one side, and over against them the Lord Sands, the Lord Winde|sor, and the other English Gentlemen. Supper being ended, and the place ordained for dancing, the King took his Wife by the hand, and danced with her; the like did divers other great Lords and Ladies of France, and lastly, three English Gen|tlemen; I omit the description of the Masque, and other ngular Musick both costly and curious, whereby the Evening was spent till three of the Clock the next morning.
On the 28. of February, the Ambassador with his Train took their leave, at whose return from the Court to his Lodging, he was presented that night with a rich Cupboard of Plate, worth 1200 l. at the least, and unto Mr. Clarenceux

was given a Chain of Gold worth 120 l. and better, of 236 links; to Master Somer|set a Chain of 150 links, worth 100 Marks; and to Thomas Milles a Chain of the same value.
On Thursday next, the Earl with his Train set forward homeward, from Paris unto St. Dennis, and so were lodged all the way in the same Lodgings that before they had been received in, and arrived prosperously in England, from Boloigne to Dover, the 12. of March, and on the Tuesday following were brought to the Queen' Majesty's presence at Greenwich, who graciously welcomed them home.


A Relation of that pompous Solemnity, celebrated at the Duke of Wirtemberg's Investiture with the Habit and Ensigns of the most Noble Order of the Garter, an. I. Iac. R. extracted out of Erhar|dus Cellius his Eques Auratus Anglo-Wirtembergicus.
RObert Lord Spencer of Wormleiton, and Sir Gilbert Dethick Knight, Gar|ter Principal King of Arms, were joined in Commission, bearing Teste at Woodstock, the 18, day of September, an. I. Jac. R. to present and invest Frede|rick Duke of Wirtemberg and Teck, with the Habit, and Ensigns of the most No|ble Order of the Garter.
They began their Iourney in the beginning of October, an. 1603, and came to the City of Studtgard the second of November following.
Vpon their arrival,Lib. 4. p. 12. they presented their Credential Letters, which being red the said Duke began to treat the Ambassadors with the highest respect imaginable, and to put all things into a readiness for his solemn reception of the Ornaments of th Order. To which end, he sent for his three Sons, with their Tutors, from the Ca of Tubing, where they followed their Studies, to be present at this Solemnity; like|wise he ordered the Vice-President and twelve Assistants of his Ducal Conistory, an all the principal and most noble Persons of his Court to be present.
Moreover, he appointed an English Lord, and the Lord Benjamin Buwingkshausin, one of his Privy Council, to be the principal Contrivers, Directors, and Managers of all things that should belong to the setting forth of this Solemnity; for the perfor|mance of which, two places were especially allotted, prepared, and adorned, namely the great Church of Studtguard where the Investiture was to be conferr'd,Pag. 13. and the great Hall of the Castle called from hence Hypocaustrum Equestre, whence the Pro|ceeding was to begin, and pss toward the Church.
At the entrance of the Choire were four stately Stalls erected with their Canopie, Footstools, and ascents on each side, and covered with Velvet; the first Stall was assigned to the Soveraign of the Order, on the back side whereof his Majesties Arms and Stile were engraven,Pag. 12 besides his Stile written underneath in French thus.
Du tres-hault, tres-puissant,  tres-excellent Prince Iaques, par la grace de Dieu Roy d' Angleterre, d' Escosse, France, d' Irelande, Defenseur de la Foy, c. Souveraigne du tres-noble Ordre de la Iartier.
The second Stall was placed on the right hand next to the Soveraign's, in like manner adorned and assigned to the Principal Ambassador the Lord Spencer, who in conferring the Order was to represent the Soveraign's person.
The third Stall was on the left hand next to the second, assigned to Sir William Dethick, Garter, Principal King of Arms.
The fourth Stall was also on the left hand over against the Soveraign's Throne, after the same manner made and adorned, assigned to the Elect Duke: and on the back side thereof his own Arms and Stile also engraven, besides his Stile likewise underwritten in French thus.
Du tres-hault,Pag. 125 puissant  tres-noble Prince, Frederick par la grace de Dieu, Duke de Wirtemberg Teck, Comte de Montbeliardt, Seigneur de Haydenhemb, c. Chevalier du tres noble Ordre de la Iartier.
There were also on the right and left hand of the Stall, Benches or Seats continu|ed on either side as far as the Altar; these Seats were all covered with red Cloth, and also the stone Pavement, from the steps of the Vestry unto the Stall of the Elect-Duke, and so from the middle of the Vestry unto the Altar, in the form of a Cross. The Altar was covered with red Silk hanging down to the ground, in the middle of which three gilt Basons were set upright; the first for the Soveraign, the second for his Ambassador, and the third for the Elect-Duke.
Pag. 126.The Hall of the Castle was magnificently set out with rich Hangings, and other costly Furniture. Towards the East and South were placed five stately long Tables covered with Velvet, as also the Seats and Benches about them; the middlemost of these Ta|bles was called the Soveraign's Table, in honor of the King of England, though ab|sent; over the Soveraign's Chair was set a stately Canopy of Silk, and on the back side of the Seat towards the middle thereof, were fixt his Majesty's Arms with his Stile underwritten, after the same manner as on his Stall in the Church.
Pag. 127.At the right hand of the Soveraign's Table were two other Tables, the one for the Lord Ambassador Spencer, the other for Sir William Dethick Garter, both co|vered in like manner with Silk, and adorned with Canopies, and their Arms.
On the left hand of the Soveraign's Table were likewise two other Tables, one for the new invested Duke, covered and adorned with his Arms, and a Canopy in the same manner as in the Church; the other for the Duke's Wife and Children, who were ten in number of either Sex.
Besides those that were particularly warned to be present at this Feast (which was cheerfully performed by them) there came divers of their own accord, from all parts of the Dukedom, drawn by the fame of a Feast and Solemnity, the like whereof had not been in those parts within mans memory.
Pag. 128.The day appointed for this Solemnity, namely, the 6. of November, an. Dom. 1603, being come, the Peers, Nobles, and Councellors of the Duke of Wirtemberg, according to Summons, appeared at the Castle of Studtguardt, attending the Dukes coming forth.
Lib. 5. p. 130.And at length be proceeded out of his Bedchamber, most splendidly clad, in very rich and sumptuous Habit; there going before him, first the Nobles of his Dukedom, the great Master of his Court, the Marshal, the great Master of his Hall, the Tutors and Attendants of the Dukes five Sons, then the five young Princes themselves, going next immediately before their Father, who thus illustriously attended entred into the said Hall, and placed himself between the Soveraign's Table and his own, expecting the coming of the Soveraign's Ambassadors.
The Elect-Duke was most sumptuously habited from Head to Foot, his Hose were Ash-colour and seamless, his Breeches, Doublet, and Sleeves were of Silk prickt, slasht, and fringed, there shining all along through the Cutwork the gilt Plate upon which it was wrought; his Sleeves were wrought after the manner of a long Pretext or Se|nators Robe, with the finest sort of Linen, embroidered with Needlework Blue, upon his Wrists were Bracelets of costly Gems, upon his Fingers Gold Rings, most exqui|sitely wrought and inlaid with Rubies, Diamonds, Saphirs, Emeraulds, and other such like precious Stones, casting forth a radiant mixture of divers colours; the Collar of his Doublet was in like manner of the finest and softest Linen, and of a Blue Ame|thist colour, and wrought all about with oylet holes, his Cap was of Silk ending in a Cone at the top, and girt about with a Hat-band of Gold and precious Stones, espe|cially Pearls of a very large size, and also a Circle of white Plumes erected up towards the top, and bending a little downward at the end. His Shoes were likewise of Silk adorned with Roses,Pag. 131. artificially wrought with Precious Stones, Gold, and Pearls, a cross his middle he had a Belt very skilfully wrought, and adorned with a Sword appendant to it on the left side, and a Dagger (inserted into the Belt) the Hilt and Handle whereof were all wrought about and enamelled with Gold and Precious stones, his Cloak was of black Silk, bordered about with several orders or rows of
Not broad Gold Fringe.
long after, the Lord Ambassador Spencer, from another part towards the South, came forth out of his Chamber, through a little Stone Gallery, into the Hall where the Duke was. There went before him Sir Gilbert Dethick, Garter, clad

in a long Crimson Mantle reaching down to his heels, lined within with White Silk, and carrying in both hands a Cushen of Crimson Velvet, upon which were laid the Robes and Ornaments of the Order, as the Gold Collar of the Order, with the George hanging at it,Pag. 13. the Blue Garter and the other Vesiments and Ensigns belong|ing thereunto; and making thrice a low Reverence, first to the Soveraign's Table, and next to his Highness the Duke as he drew neer; he gently laid down the Cushen with the aforementioned Ornaments upon the Soveraign's Table; in the mean time the Lord Ambassador Spencer representing the person of the Soveraign, bowing him|self to the illustrious Elect-Duke placed himself at his right hand, whom his High|ness courteously received, as also Garter King of Arms, taking them by the hand. After which the Lord Buwingkshausen made an Oration in the Dutch Tongue, wherein he briefly toucht upon all the Circumstances of the occasion of this solemn meeting, which were more at large contained in the Commission of Legation and the Soveraigns Letters, which after a low obeysance were delivered by the Lord Am|bassador into the Dukes hands, who presently gave them to his principal Secretary and Councellor the Lord John Stattler, standing neer him, to read them publickly in that solemn assembly.
Before the Letters of Legation were read,Pag. 134 in the attentive hearing of the whole As|sembly, Garter made a short speech also in French, to the illustrious Elect Duke, wherein he declared the will and pleasure of is most serene Master the Soveraign of the Order; which speech being ended, and the Commission read, they proceeded to the Investiture.
Garter first devesied the Duke of his Cloak, Sword, and Dagger, which ac|cording to the custom of the Order, he reserved to himself as his own Fees; but presently in the room thereof he invested him with a Surcoat of Crimson Velvet lined with White Taffaty, which he girded close to his Waste with a silken Girdle, by which there hung a Fauchion or shorter kind of Sword,Pag. 135. made plain after the anci|ent fashion: Over his Surcoat he put on the Mantle of the Order, which reached down to his heels, with a long Train behind, and buttoned before at the top; it was of Velvet, and of a mixt colour, Purple with Violet, and lined within with White Tafsaty, as also faced with the same, and very neatly fringed, and made after the ancient fashion used at the Institution of the Order, over the left shoulder whereof hung the Tippet or Hood.
The Duke splendidly clad with the aforesaid Vestments of the Order, proceeded from the Hall through the four square Court of the Castle, and over the large Bridge to the Church of St. Ulrick, to receive the rest of the Ensigns of the Order, there sounding all the time of his Procession several Trumpets, and other Musitians, placed on high in the Stone Gallery of the Castle.
As to the order of the Proceeding,Pag. 143. it was in this manner, First went two Trumpe|ters belonging to the Troops of Horse, whose Trumpets were adorned with silk Ban|ners, painted with the Arms of Wirtemberg in their proper colours, and after them ten other Trumpeters in the same equipage: Next a Flute-player and a Drummer, the military Musick belonging to the Foot. These fourteen Musitians were clad in Silk intermixt White and Red, at equal intervals, and Caps of black Velvet on their heads. After these rode the Captain of the Life-Guard, habited in the same colour, but more richly, and with a gilt Truncheon in his hand, then the Troop of the Life-Guard, habited in like manner as before is specified, and carrying Poll|axes. Next, after a little interval, went the Lord Marshal Baron Princenstein, car|rying in his hand a Silver Wand; then came all three together, Anwill the great Master of the Hall,Pag. 144. Hugwizt the great Master of the Horse, and Daxperg Captain of the Horse-Guard. After them rode the Knights in a long Train, and then the Sove|raign's Ambassador's Retinue of Knights and Gentlemen, very splendidly accou|tred and adorned; next the chief Peers and Nobles of the Dukedom, together with the principal Courtiers and chief Officers of the Duke's houshold, after whom rode the Duke's five Sons, in the richest and most splendid equipage that could be ima|gined; at a little distance from them came very nobly attended and also accoutred, Garter, King of Arms, carrying before him with both hands, the Cushen upon which lay the Ensigns of the foresaid Order; namely the Great Collar of the Order, with

the Image of St. George, in a riding posture, hanging at it, also the Garter wrought with Gold and Pecious Stones. He carried moreover the Book of the Sta|tutes of the Order. Next after Garter, came jointly together the Lord Am|bassador Spencer,Pag. 145. richly glistering with Gold and Precious Stones, and with him the illustrious Duke of Wirtemberg himself, so personable, and withall so magni|ficently attired, that he attracted the admiration of all upon him; some think|ing his Habit to be Turkish, some Hungaric, some Imperial, others Electoral, others Pontifical: The Train of his Mantle was held, and carried after by Count Lodowick Leostein.
Pag. 148.The last part of the Procession consisted of the grand Councellors and Senators of Wirtemberg, as namely, the Lord Eberard, Lord of Limpurg, hereditary Cup|bearer of the sacred Roman Empire, Great Master of the Court of Wirtemberg, James Reenhard Doctor of Law, Assistant at the Imperial Chamber, and Chancellor, besides many other Councellors and Noblemen.
Pag. 150.Thus nobly and magnificently attended, the Duke entred into the Church, where in the midst of the Body thereof, he and the Lord Ambassador Spencer, walking up|on Red Cloth, spread for that purpose; they first made obeysance, according as the manner is in England, to the Soveraign's Royal Stall, all the rest of the Company doing the like as they past by; then the Lord Ambassador went to his own Stall, placed at the right hand next after the Soveraign's, and seated himself therein, Gar|ter also placed himself in his, and lastly the Duke possessed his Stall on the left hand: As soon as they were seated thus in the Church, a loud volley was discharg|ed by 300 Musketiers.
Pag. 151.The concourse of People at this Solemnity was very great, but to repress the Croud from rushing in with too much violence, there were placed at the entrance both of the Church and the Castle, on the one side a row of Musketiers, and on the other a row of Halberdiers.
Pag. 152.The Soveraign's Ambassadors and the Duke being thus seated, each in their Stalls, the Peers and Nobles that attended took their places also, the English Nobles and Gentlemen on the right hand of the Lord Ambassador Spencer, those of Wir|temberg on the left hand of their Duke; and in the first place on the foremost Seats, covered with red Cloth, sate the Dukes five Sons, vested in ducal habits. Then be|gan a threefold sacred Musick, first the Organ played to certain Anthems, next the Children of the School sung certain Psalms in Dutch, lastly the principal Musitians of the Court sung in Consort: and during the Musick the Investiture of the Duke went forward.
For the Lord Ambassador Spencer and Garter rising from their Seats, went upon the red Woollen Cloth towards the Duke, and making a low obeysance to him with great honor and respect, they addressed their speech to him in a certain form of words, commonly used upon that occasion, and presented unto him the Ensigns and Ornaments of the Order.
Pag. 153.First they delivered into his hands the Book of the Statutes, which he again de|livered unto his chief Secretary the Lord John Stattler, who stood ready at the Duke's side, according to his place, to receive it; and who thereupon delivered to the Ambassadors,Pag. 162. from the Duke an Oath, to keep and observe faithfully all the Statutes and Articles of the Order. After that, the Garter was tied upon his Highness left leg, a little beneath the Knee; Then they put the Collar about his neck.
Pag. 163.All these things being performed, the Lord Ambassador Spencer, and Garter, con|gratulated the Duke with much respect, and a while held discourse with him; and then after a low obeysance made to the Soveraign's Stall, they returned towards their several Seats.
Lib. 6. p. 164.Then the Musick ceasing, that most eminent Divine John Magirus Councellor to the new invested Duke, and President of Studtguardt, made a most learned and elegant Sermon, wherein he discourst of the friendship and discord of Princes, and shewed how excellent a thing the mutual concord amity and benevolence of Princes was, how much it was to be esteemed by their Subjects, and what great benefits and conveniences arose from thence.
Sermon ended,Pag. 180. the Musick was again renewed, which consisted of the Voices of two Youths clad in White Garments, with Wings like Angels, and standing oppoite one to another; so after a Tenor, an Altus, and a Base was sung, the Organ and other instrumental Musick, together with vocal, went together in .
After,Pag. 183. according to the Custom at the Anniversary Feast of St. George t Winde|sor, the new invested Duke rising from his seat, and thrice as he passed by making Reverence to the Soveraign's Stall, went upon the Red Cloth (Garter going bore) immediately to the Altar, (his Train being held up by Count Leostene, and his Sword carried after him by his Esquire of honor) where when he was come, the Re|verend Divine Faelix Bidembachin, Chaplain to his Highness, set a gilt Bason upon the middle of the Altar, into which the Duke put 50 Duckets, which he took out of a little red silk Purse, giving charge to his said Chaplain to distribute them to the Poor; which done he betook himself again to his Stall, saluting the Soveraign's in passing by as before.
The Solemnities in the Church being finished,Pag. 184. this illustrious company returned to the great Hall in the Castle, in the same order and pomp as they proceeded thence, the Trumpets sounding, and the Guns going off.
After several congratulations from the Lord Ambassador Spencer,Pag. 185. and Garter, and many other noble Personages, to the new invested Duke, in the said Hall, they parted and went to their several Chambers till Dinner was ready.
Dinner time being come,Lib. 7. p. 190. the Duke and Lord Ambassador Spencer, with all their Train, went into the great Hall to Dine; where the preparation and order of the Feast, was after the manner of St. George's Feas in England; the Soveraign's Table was served with all manner of varieties, as if he had been there present himself, the Carver and Sewers and all other Officers attending and serving on the Knee.
Also Water was presented by three that carried the Bason,Pag. 193. Ewer, and Towel, with the same obeysance as is used in England, to the Soveraign, being present. Water also was presented to the Duke after the custom of Wirtemberg, the like to the Lord Ambassador Spencer and Garter, to the Dutchess and the Duke's Children.
Then each ones proper place was assigned by certain Officers appointed for that purpose.Pag. 194.
At the four ends of the Soveraign's Table were placed Tasters; he that was at the North side received the Dishes from the Sewers, and delivered them to him that stood opposite on the South side, who standing on the right side of the Soveraign's Chair, tasted of the meat cut off it, and put it upon a Plate that was laid as for the Soveraign, and after a while changed the Plate, giving it to him that stood at the West Side, and did the like with the rest of the Viands.
The fourth Taster stood at the East side of the Table,Pag. 196. and his Office was to taste and administer the Soveraign's Wine; reaching it over to the Southern Taster, that stood by the Soveraign's Chair, in like manner as the meat was served.
Likewise the Duke,Pag. 212. the Lord Ambassador Spencer, and Garter, had their see|ral Tables as hath been said before, and sate under their several Canopies, and at another Table sate the Dutchess and her ten Children.
After exceeding plenty,Pag. 213. state, and variety of Dishes, there were served all man|ner of Curiosities in Paste, as the Figures and shapes of several kinds of Beasts and Birds, as also the Statutes of Hercules, Minerva, Mercury, and other fa|mous persons. All Dinner time and a pretty while after, the English and the Wir|temberg Musick sitting opposite to one another,Pag. 230. these on the Dukes side, the other at the Soveraign's and Lord Ambassadors side; sung and plaid alternately to one another.
After Dinner certain Balls were danced in a long Gallery of the Castle,Pag. 233. towards the Paradise of Studtguardt.
This Festivity lasted that night and the next day,Pag. 245. and afterwards the English Guests were conducted to see some of the principal places of the Dukedom; as Walte|buch, the Vniversity of Tubing, c. where they were entertained with Comedies, Musick and other delights,Pag. 259. and at their return to Studtguardt, were presented with

very magnificent gifts; and being to return for England were accompanied by the Duke as far as Asperg,Pag. 260. where with great demonstration and expressions of amity and affection on both sides, solemn leave was taken.


A Relation of the order observed when Maurice Prince of Orange was Invested, an. II. Iac. R.
Iohan. Olers in Genealog. Co|mit. Nassovia pag. 90On the 4. of February, an. 1613. the Citizens of the Hague met in Arms, toge|ther with the Troops of Prince Maurice, of Prince Henry his Brother and the Earl of Chastilion; the Citizens, kept Guard in the outermost Court, where also seve|ral pieces of Ordinance were placed, and the three aforementioned Troops in the in|nermost Court. From the Palace to the Shambles were Pitch Barels placed, as also at the Soveraign's Ambassadors Lodgings.
At 3 a Clock in the Afternoon the States of the United Provinces assembled in the usual place, where other person of great quality were admitted as Spectators. The first that came thither was Refuge the French Kings Ambassador, who took his Seat at the upper end of the Table; not long after came Prince Maurice, conducted by the Soveraign's Ambassador, and those deputed by the States; before them went 12 Trumpets sounding, and after several Noblemen and Persons of Honor two and two, the Guards attending on each side. After these went Garter Principal King of Arms, vested with his Coat of Arms, embroidered with the Arms of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, and carrying in his hand a Purse of Green Silk, where|in were the Garter and George; next him went Prince Maurice, and after him his Brother Henry, the Prince of Portugal, and others of his kindred, as the Earls of Nassau and Lippia; then several of the Nobility, and many others of great quality.
Then Prince Maurice taking his place where these Solemnities were performed, sat at the upper end of the Table, at the left hand of the French Kings, Ambassador, but Sir Ralph Winwood the Soveraign's Ambassador, took his place in the middle over against the President of the States, and began a short Oration in French to this effect.
My Lords, from those things which I have in the Convention declared, by the command of the King my Master, you have sufficiently understood his pur|pose, of conferring the Order of the Garter upon Prince Maurice, as also the causes, wherewith he thought himself moved to do it; and whereas it hath been decreed, by the common suffrages of the Knights-Campanions of the Order, that he should be joined in Companionship with the Elector Palatine, it seemed good to the Soveraign, to command me to present him with the Ensigns of this Order, and hath confirmed this his command by the testimony of his Commission, under the Great Seal of England, which Commission I here deliver unto you, and pray it may be read.
Hereupon he delivered the Commission to the President, from whose hand the Se|cretary then taking it, read it aloud; which having finished, the Soveraign's Am|bassador continued his discourse.
Both the honor of this Order, and ancient Custom require, that it be sent out of England to Stranger Princes, by persons of honor peculiarly deputed to this Employment, and who are themselves Knights-Companions of the Order, or at least deserve to be so: but because that the Ceremonies there used, seem not so well to agree with the Discipline of your Church, and that the conditions thereof are not altogether consistent with the state of your Common-wealth, it hath pleased the Soveraign of the Order, for the avoiding all scandal, to confer this Order without any pomp, or external magnificence. We have therefore made choice of this place, in compliance with your pleasure, as the most com|modious for the performance of our duty, in that we might present it in the presence of your Lordships, who, as being the Supream Lords of this State, will not think much to be Eye-witnesses of that honor, which the King of Great Britain your best Friend and Allie, offers to the chief General of your Armies, and Governour of your Provinces, as also to your whole State in general,

whereof each of you are a part. Nor could his Majesty have given greater te|stimonies, either of his affection towards the happy State of your Common|wealth, or of the joy which he hath conceived, for that he sees your Affairs, after so many troubles and storms, brought to a Haven of rest and quiet, or like|wise of his most entire good will; wishing that that League of Friendship which is contracted between his Kingdoms and your Provinces, may be perpetual and inviolable. Now therefore, desiring first your good leave, we shall convert our Address to Prince Maurice.
At this instant, Garter King of Arms opened the Silk Purse, and took out the Gar|ter, set with rich Diamonds, and laid it on the Table, and then the Ambassador addrest himself to Prince Maurice in the following manner.
To you my Lord, we offer in the name of the King my Master, the Order of the Garter, which we may say without boasting or flattery, is the most anci|ent and most illustrious Order of all Europe, which in all times hath been kept inviolable, without any spot or blemish, wherewith all the greatest Emperors and Monarchs suing to be graced and adorned, have esteemed the greatest part of their felicity, that they could obtain it; his Majesty judgeth the greatness of your Family, which he acknowledgeth to be most illustrious, worthy of this Honor, your piety also and zeal to promote the Reformed Religion, likewise your warlike virtues, which the God of Hosts hath blest with so many Victo|ries, but especially those high merits, whereby you have obliged these United Provinces, and by consequence his Realms, and so thereby the whole Christian World, his Majesty being altogether of opinion, that the quiet of Christendom consisteth much in the happy state of these Provinces, and that the condition of these Provinces what ever it be, and that of those Realms have a mutual depen|dence one upon the other: This is the motive and sole cause that hath induced his Majesty to confer upon you an Honor, the greatest his Kingdoms can bestow, of which behold these the Marks and Ensigns [and with these words produced the Garter] which your Excellency is to receive from us, according, to the com|mands of our King, and those altogether free from any Ceremonies, except such wherein you shall voluntarily and willingly consent to be engaged.
This Speech being ended, Prince Maurice in brief gave thanks for the Honor of|fer'd him, and then forthwith the Ambassador and Garter having made due obey|sance, tyed on the Garter about his Leg; next Garter took out of the forementioned Purse, the Golden Medal, whereon was the Effigies of St. George, with the sub|dued Dragon under his feet, this Medal hanging upon a Blue Ribband, Garter put about the Princes Neck, after which he unfolded a Parchment, wherein were con|tained the Titles of Prince Maurice in French, which he read aloud.
The high, mighty, and excellent Prince, Maurice Prince of Orange Earl of Nassau, Catzenelleboge, Viand, Dietz, Meurs, Linge, Marquess of Vere and Flushing, Baron of Grave, the Territory of Kuyke, Lece, and Nyervaert, Governour and Captain General of Gelderland, Holland, Zealand, Vtrecht, West-Friesland, Zutphen, and Overyssell, Admiral General of the United Provin|ces, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
Assoon as he had made an end of reading these Titles, presently all the Trumpets sounded, and the Troops in order shot off their Pistols, which Volly was seconded by the Trained-Bands, after which the great Guns were discharged.
These things being thus performed, and silence made, Sir John Oldenbarnevelt Lord of Tempel, making an Oration in the name of the States General, reckoned up in brief, the Leagues contracted heretofore at several times, between the Pro|vinces and the Kingdom of Great Britain, and thereupon rendred humble thanks to the King for the continuance of them, specially for that by this action he went about to manifest the same to all men; for as much as that so remarkable Honor, which his Majesty was conferring on those Provinces in the person of Prince Mau|rice, their Governour and Commander both in War and Peace, was an honor used to be shewn but only to the very choicest of his Friends; but most principally of

all for that he was pleased to confer this honor on Prince Maurice, without en|joining any strict obligation upon the receipt of the Order. Next he gave thanks to the Ambassadors, for the diligence they had employed in this affair; and lastly, directing his speech to Prince Maurice, he in the name of the States General, congratulated his new honor, assuring him on their behalf, that they conceived ve|ry great joy and satisfaction, and wisht him a very long and a happy enjoyment thereof, to the glory of God, and the enlargement of his Family, and the conser|vation of the publick liberty of the United Provinces, in which thing, as hitherto they had done, so for the time to come, they would for ever afford him their best and most faithful assistance.
As soon as he had finished his Speech John Utenbogard Minister of the Hague, as he had been ordered, standing at the end of the Table, made a very admirable and learned Sermon, wherein he most devoutly praised God, for what had hapned, imploring him to bless Prince Maurice, in his new obtained honor, and to endue him with his Grace.
The Sermon ended, the Trumpets sounded, the Muskets also, and great Guns were again discharged: Then Prince Maurice (accompanied by the Ambassadors and other Noble Persons) returned in the same order as he came, and then again the third time Vollies of great and small shot were discharged; after which the Soldiers and Trained-Bands went every one to their own homes and quarters. At Evening the pitcht Barels were set on fire, and Bonfires kindled; a magnificent entertainment also was given by Prince Maurice to the Ambassadors, Princes and great Persons above men|tioned, at which, while Healths were drunk to the King of France and Great Bri|tain, all the Guns were again discharged.


A Remonstrance made by Sir William Segar, Knight, Garter Prin|cipal King of Arms, joined in Commission with the right hono|rable the Lord Carleton, Ambassador to the high and mighty Prince, Henry Prince of Orange, for presenting him with the Noble Order of the Garter, 1627.
MS. in Offic. Armor. [L. 18. circa medium.]WE took our journey from Whitehall, on a Thursday to Gravesend, being theof April, Anno Domini 1627. and lodged there that night. On Friday morning we embarqued in two Merchants ships of London, in the one went the Lord Ambassador Carleton, Secretary of State of the Kings Majesty King Charles, accompanied with the young Lord Dormer, and divers other Gentlemen, his Fol|lowers and Servants; my self embarqued in the other Merchants Ship, with my two Sons, Mr. Henry Lennard, my three Servants, Trunks, and other Provisions.
We set sail about 9 of the Clock, and sailed all that day and night following, and arrived on Saturday at Delf Haven in Holland, about 6 of the Clock in the Evening; where being landed we could have no lodging in the Town, all was taken up for the Lodging of the Lord Ambassador, and his Train, and I forced to hire two Waggons for the transport of me and mine, our Trunks and baggage to the Town of Delf, whither we came about eleven of the Clock that night, and lodged at the Sign of the Golden Fleece.
The next day being Monday, the Ambassador coming by water to Delf was enter|tained and feasted at the English House by the English Merchants, and that Afternoon was conveyed by Water, in the Princes Barge to the Hague; and by the way was met with, by his Excellency, and divers of the States, who complemented his welcome.
My self followed his Lordship by Waggon and had my Lodging and Diet provided in the Chastelins House in the Hague, where I was well entertained and accom|modated. The day following being Tuesday, my self with my two Sons, an Mr. Len|nard, went to kiss his Excellencies hands, who very kindly entertained me, and re|membred he had seen me there before, upon the like occassion, with his Brother Maurice Prince of Orange; so after our humble salutations we departed.
It was about nine or ten days before we could be resolved, whether the Order

should be accepted of or not; for the French Ambassador there resident, opposed it by all means possible that he could, alledging it stood not with the French King his Masters honor, considering the League between him, the Prince, and States, that his Enemy the King of Great Britain, should be so much favored and honored by the Prince, as to have the Order of the Garter by him received, the King of Great Bri|tain having entered his Dominions in hostile manner, surprised the Isle of Ree; slain his People, and endeavoured to relieve Rochell, which he held Rebels to him; all which by the wisdom of the Lord Ambassador Carleton, was so discreetly answered, and so far prevailed, that a day was appointed for the reception of the Order, which was to be done on the Sunday following, in the Afternoon, and was performed as followeth.
The Prince of Orange his Regiment of Shot and Pikes, the English Regiment, and some Dutch Companies, having placed themselves in two Battalions, on either side of the great Court of the Princes Palace, we proceeded between them.
First went a number of Collonels and Captains, English, Scots, and Dutch, af|ter whom followed the chief Officers of his Excellency's Household, then my self, bearing on a Purple Velvet Cushen the Robes of the Order, the great Collar, and the Garter, and a lesser Iewel of the George, fastned to a Blue Ribband, with King Charles his Commission, under the Great Seal of England: The Prince went be|tween the Lord Ambassador and the Palsgrave, who that day wore the whole Habit of the Order of the Garter. We were conducted up the great Stairs, through the old Hall of the Palace, and so brought to the Council Chamber of the States General, who were all placed on either side of a long Table, the whole length of the Room.
The Estate of the Table was bolden in the midst thereof, where four Chairs were placed, the Prince of Orange and the Ambassador took the two middlemost Chairs, the Palsgrave on the right hand, and my self on the left. The French Ambassador, and the Venetian, sate at the upper end of the board. The Earl of Coningburg, Pre|sident of the Council of the States, the Treasurer, and Admiral of Holland sate op|posite to the Prince, and all other of the States on either side in their degrees. Si|lence being made, the Ambassador Carleton stood up, and began his Harangue or Oration, signifying, that by the Example of the great love and amity long time con|tinued; between the Queen's Majesty of England, Elizabeth of famous memory, and Prince Maurice, with the States General of the United Provinces; King James her successor intending no less good, welfare, and prosperity to his Excellency, and the States then and still being, had presented him with the Noble Order of the Gar|ter, as to his intimate Friend, Confederate, and Ally, which he princely accepted, acknowledged, and used during his life. And that now the high and mighty Prince, King Charles his son, understanding of the right noble and valorous disposition of his Excellency, Henry Prince of Orange, and having a like desire, as his Father had, to continue the same amity and friendship inviolably between them, had made especial choice of him the said Prince, to be a Companion and Consrere of the said most Noble Order, which he was there by Commission to present his Excellency withall.
The Oration ended, the Ambassador presented his Majesty's Commission, under the Great Seal of England, during the reading whereof, by one of the Secretaries of the States; The whole Table of the States stood up, their heads uncovered, only the French Ambassador excepted, who sate covered.
Then Garter, after Reverence made, with an audible voice, pronounced in French the Stile of the King of Great Britain, as is accustomed, and after it the Stile of Henry Prince of Orange; which done, by a signal made at one of the Windows, the Trumpets sounded, the Drums strook up, and a thousand Musket shot were discharged in Volley.
Then stood up at the Table a French Orator, who began his Harangue in the praise of the Noble Order of the Garter, relating as he said he was informed, how many Emperors, Kings, and Princes had been thereof, applauding the worthy Election and choice of both the famous Princes of Orange, Prince Maurice lately deceased, and Prince Henry then Governing; only be excepted against the patronage of Saint George, who was he said, but a Legendary Saint, and not Canonical, nor approved

by general Councils, and in effect, but a moral Allegory: For every Christian man that for his Faith would fight, and defend the Church, yea and for the same suffer Martyrdom, he should conquer the Dragon, that is the Devil, and be as much holy reputed as St. George. But the Order to be stiled of the Garter, was more significant, because it carried with it a bond or tie of Fellowship, as a Symbol of Amity and Friendship between Princes, being Companions of the said Order. So concluding his Harangue with a Prayer for the Soveraign's prosperity King Charles, and the whole Fellowship of the said most Noble Order of the Gar|ter, he ended.
Then the Lord Ambassador Carleton, with his Excellency the Prince of Orange, the Prince Palatine, and my self standing up, the Ambassador took the great Collar with the George, and assisted by the Palatine, put it over the head of his Ex|cellency, and fastned it on his shoulder; for at that time he refused to wear the Robes of the Order, because he said, his Brother Grave Maurice had not done it, but laying up his leg on my Chair, the Ambassador and I put on the Garter.
Which done, by another signal, six and thirty Canons reported, and so way being made, we returned that way as we came, the Trumpets sounding, and the Drums beating, until his Excellency was entred into his Court. That day or night we had no Feast, for avoiding Precedency and Place between the Ambassador, drinking of Healths, and other complements, which might have occassioned question or difference on either party. That night Bonfires of pitched Barels were made through the Town, as is accustomed to be done in all their Triumphs.
The next day following, being Monday, I was invited by a Messenger to dine with his Excellency, where, in his great Chamber, the Table ready furnished with meat, without Ceremony of other service, or attendants, but his own Pages, being half a dozen in number, his Excellency sate down, not at the end of the Board, but at the right hand thereof, and Count Lodowick of Nassaw his Vncle on the left hand side, I was placed on the Princes side, at a convenient distance from him by his Marshal; Collonel Boage a Scottish man sate right against me, next to Count Lodo|wick, and these were all the Guests at the Table; during Dinner, his Excellency ask|ed me sundry questions, namely, whether Queen Elizabeth did wear the Garter of the Order about her leg, as the Knights did? I answered, I thought not, for it was not proper for her Sex so apparently to shew her leg. Then he demanded, whe|ther the Institution of the Order was from the fall of a Blue Garter from the La|dies leg, with whom the King danced? I told him it was so holden by tradition, but the truth was otherwise, as it is recorded in the old Register Book of the Order, that King Edward the Third returning home after his conquest of France, to remu|nerate those Knights, that had done him the most noble service in that Expedition, did select of them the number twenty five, and gave them Blue Garters embroidered, and buckled under the Knee, with this Motto, Hony soit, qui mal y pense, as a ca|veat to avoid the emulation of other, who might perhaps presume, they had deserved as much honor as others. Now the question may be asked, said the Prince, why a Garter rather than any other thing should be made an Order? It is to be answered, said I, that at that time most men (especially men of Arms) wore their Boots close up gartered, and buckled with thongs of Leather under their Knees (a Custom yet used of some men for the strengthening of their Leg) so with divers other trivial questions the Dinner was spent and ended, and I with due thanks and humble salu|tations took my leave.
Tuesday morning I delivered the Robes of the Order to the Master of his Ward|robe, and on Tuesday in the Afternoon, I with my Sons, and Mr. Lennard kissed his Excellencies hands, and took our leave, who most princely thanked us for the pains we had taken to do him honor.
Wednesday in the morning, I was presented with four Chains, one for my self of the value of 240 l. sterling, two Chains for my Sons, the third for Mr. Lennard, being all lesser in value than those which I had received of Grave Maurice by 130 l. The Ambassador Lord Carleton had a standing Cup with a Cover of 500 l. being of pure Gold. The same day in the Afternoon I gave Rewards to the Chastellain, and his Wife, with the Servants of the House, and taking my leave that night of the

Ambassador, with whom I supped, I took my Iourney on Thursday in the morning by Water to Delf, where I hired two Waggons to transport me to Maisland Sluce, where I took shipping for England, in the same Merchants Ship that brought me thither.
Friday morning, the first of June, we set sail, and on Saturday in the After|noon we all safely arrived at Gravesend, thanked be God; Tuesday following, I went by Coach to Oatlands, and delivered my Letters to the King, from the Prince of Orange, and the Lord Ambassador Carleton, making a brief relation of the performance of our Employments, which it was his Majesties pleasure I should do.


A Relation of the Investiture of Charles the Eleventh King of Sweden, with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order drawn up by Henry St. George, Esq; Richmond Herald.
Charles the Eleventh, King of Sweden, c. being elected into the most Noble Order of the Garter, at a Chapter held by the Soveraign and Companions of the said Order, the 18. day of June 1668. The Right Honorable Charles Earl of Car|lisle, c. was by the Soveraign appointed his Ambassador extraordinary to the said King, and Henry St. George, Esq Richmond Herald, was commanded to attend the Ceremony of his said Majesty's Investiture, in the place of Garter Principal King of Arms.
Being furnished with all Necessaries for this service, as the Robes, Collar, George, Garter, c. and having received his Majesty's Commission, under the Seal of the said Order; they set sail from Greenwich in the Anne (a Yaght belonging to his Royal Highness the Duke of York) on Friday the 5. of February 1668. and landed at Rotterdam on Sunday the 7. of the said Month, from whence they proceeded on their journey to Stockholme, first to Hamborough, and then to Lubeck, where my Lord Ambassador having received command from the King, to go for Denmark, they took shipping at Framond (the Port of the said City) on Saturday the 20. of March, and landed at Copenhagen on Monday the 22. of the said Month. After same 10 days there, in which time his Lordship dispatched his business in that Court, they again im|barqued themselves in a Frigat of the King of Denmark's, and arrived at Stock|holme, on Saturday the 10. of April, being Easter Eve, where his Excellency continued some weeks incognito, till the arrival of his Train and Equipage.
Saturday, June the 5. the Countess of Carlisle landed at Stockholme, and about a week after arrived the Ship with my Lord Ambassador's Goods and Retinue.
Wednesday the 7. of July, my Lord Ambassador made his Entry into Stockholme, and on Saturday the 10. of the said Month had his publick Audience of the King.
Monday the 26 of July my Lord Ambassador and Mr. St. George, at a private Audience, delivered their Credentials concerning the Garter; and his Majesty of Sweden received the lesser George.
Thursday the 29. of July was appointed for his Majesty's publick reception of the whole Habit of the Order, which Ceremony was performed as followeth; Abouth three of the Clock that Afternoon, my Lord Ambassador and Mr. St. George, were by two principal Senators Count Neile Brahe, and Count John Steenbook, the Master of the Ceremonies, with the King's Coaches, Pages, and Footmen (all in new Liveries) with many Officers and Cavalier, conducted to the Castle, being come into the great Court, they were met at the Stairs foot (where they alighted) by several of the King's Ser|vants, and so conducted up to certain Rooms, where the Robes, c. were deposited (having been sent thither that morning) here my Lord Ambassador for a while re|posed himself, whilst Mr. St. George made ready the Robes, c. and put on his Man|tle, and having now notice, that his Majesty was come into the Great Hall, they pro|ceeded thither, Mr. St. George bearing the Robes, c. on a Velvet Cushen: At the entrance into the Hall, they were met by the Rix-Marshall Count Gabriel Oxenstiern (having in his hand a long Staff of Silver gilt) and conducted to the upper end of the Room, which was inclosed within a Rail and Ballister. Here stood the King in

a Suit and Cloak of Cloth of Silver, with a large Plume of White Feathers in his Haet, under a State of Crimson Velvet, fringed with Gold, to the back of which said State was affixed an Escotcheon of his Majesty's Arms within the Garter, and his Stile un|derneath; on the King's right hand was erected a like State for the Soveraign, with an Escutcheon of his Arms, and his Stile also underneath, with a Chair and Foot|stool. Opposite to the King of Sweden's Chair, was placed a Chair, like in all things to that of the King's, for my Lord Ambassador, and on the left hand of my Lord Ambassador was a Chair set for Mr. St. George, and near it, close to the Rails, was a little Table to lay the Robes on. On the King of Sweden's left hand, at a good di|stance, near the other end of the Rails, sate the Queen, under a lesser State of Cloth of Silver, the haut-pas was covered with Turkie Carpets, as was also all the ground within the Rails, where stood the Regents and the rest of the Senators (all in Cloaks and Bands as is used at their Dyets and most solemn Assemblies) with Chairs be|hind them: The whole Room was hung with Tapestry, having a great number of Scaffolds in it, filled with the principal persons of quality, both of the Courtand City.
After my Lord Ambassador and Mr. St. George, had saluted the King, Mr. St. George placed the Robes, c. on the Table, and having made an obeysance first to the Soveraigns State, then to the King of Sweden, stood before his own Chair, till the King and my Lord Ambassador were both of them seated; they being seated. Mr. St. George sate down on his Chair, until the Trumpets and Kettle Drums ceased (which had beat and sounded from their first entrance in the Room) all being quiet Mr. St. George arose, and making an obeysance first to the Soveraign's State, and then to the King of Sweden, stood by the Table, then the Ambassador arising, began his Speech to the King, which ended, his Secretary delivered a Copy of it, in the Swedish tongue, to the Ambassador, who gave it to the Lord Stein Bielk, who deli|vered it to a Secretary, by whom it was read aloud, whereunto a Reply was made by the same Senator, in Swedish; this Reply translated into English, was given by the said Senator to the Ambassador, and by him to his Secretary, who read it in En|glish. Then did Mr. St. George deliver the Commission under the Seal of the Order, to my Lord Ambassador, who presented it to the King, who having received it gave it to a Secretary, by whom it was read aloud.
The Commission being read, Mr.St. George devested the King of his Cloak, Sword, and Belt, untying also the Silk Garter on his left leg, and delivered the Book of the Sta|tutes of the Order to the Ambassador, who presented them to the King, then was the Garter of the Order presented to his Majesty by Mr. St. George, who at the delivery pronounced the accustomed words in Latin, which ended, my Lord Ambassador and Mr. St. George did both of them buckle it on the King of Sweden's left leg; in like manner was presented the Surcoat, the Girdle, and Hangers with the Sword, the Mantle, the Hood, the Collar, and great George, last of all the Cap and Feather. His Majesty thus fully invested with the whole Habit of the Order, continued standing under his State, whilst Mr. St. George descending from the haut-pas, towards the lower end of the Rails, returned, and having made three obeysances as he came up, proclaimed the Stile of the Soveraign in Latin, French, and English; and afterwards the Stile of the King of Sweden in French only.
This being done, Mr. St. George returned and stood before his Seat, whilst my Lord Ambassador complemented his Majesty in a short Speech in English, which was after|wards read in Swedish by a Secretary; and a Reply made by the afore named Senator Stien Bielk in Swedish read in English by my Lord Ambassador's Secretary.
After this another Senator, viz. Baron John Gyllenstiern, did in a long Harangue congratulate his Majesty's Election and Investiture into this most Noble Order; which ended, the King, my Lord Ambassador, and Mr. St. George took their Seats again, whilst the Trumpets and Kettle Drums beat and sounded, being the signal for the firing 124 great Guns, from the Ships of War in the River, and several parts of the City, and of divers Vollies of small shot from Horse and Foot, purposely drawn into the Town for this occasion; after they had all fired the first time, they gave a second Volley, which being near ended, my Lord Ambassador, and Mr St. George arose, and making their obeisances to the King (who stood in his Robes under his State) they withdrew, and were conducted by the afore mentioned

Senators Count Brabe and Count Steenbook, to the same Room from whence the Robes of the Order had been brought, where Mr. St. George put off his Mantle, and after a little repose, my Lord Ambassador and Mr. St. George were in the same manner conducted home to my Lord Ambassador's House.
About eight of the Clock that Evening, my Lord Ambassador and Mr. St. George were again brought to Court in the King's Coach, by Count Torstenson, and the Master of the Ceremonies, to Supper; where in a fair Room, under a state of Crim|son Velvet, sate the King covered, and in the Robes of the Order, on his left hand the Queen, and on her left hand my Lord Ambassador, all under the State, at each end of the Table sate two of Regents, and on the other side of the Table near each end, sate two of the senior Senators, and between them stood two Carvers.
At another Table in the same Room sate Mr. St. George, with the other Senators and the Officers of the Army; during Supper, several Healths were drank, as the Soveraign's, the King of Sweden's, the two Queens, the Duke of York's, the Companions of the Order, c. at each of which were fired 4 great Guns, 24 being purposely planted for that service, under the Wall of the Castle: Supper being ended my Lord Ambassador and Mr. St. George, having waited on the King and Queen back again in the same manner they attended them to Supper, about three of the Clock the next morning, they were again conducted home by Count Torstenson, and t Mster of the Ceremonies, in the King's Coach; and as they descended from the Castle, the 24 great Guns were all fired twice over.
Sunday, the 1. of August, my Lord Ambassador, and Mr. St. George were by Count Torstenson, and the Master of the Ceremonies, in the King's Coach, brought to the Castle about 7 of the Clock in the Evening, from whence they went with their Majesties in their Barge, to see the Fireworks which had been preparing about three Months, as English mile from Stockholme (in honor of this Solemnity) this di|vertisement continued about two hours, and was concluded with a Banquet; which ended, they returned in the same manner, being saluted both in their going and re|turn, with four Guns from each Ship of War in the River, besides the Guns from the Fort; At their landing, Count Torstenson, and the Master of the Ceremonies were ready to conduct my Lord Ambassador, and Mr. St. George home, in the same man|ner as they came.
Thursday the 19. of August, Mr. St. George received his Majesty of Sweden's Letter to the Soveraign, and a Certificate of his Majesties Reception of the said Order, both signed by the Queen and the Regents.
Sunday the 22. of August, Mr. St. George took his leave of the King and Queen, being attended by the under Master of the Ceremonies.
Thursday the 2. of September, Mr. St. George was presented by the under Ma|ster of the Ceremonies, with a Chain of Gold, and a Meddal set with Diamonds, from his Majesty.
Saturday the 4. of September, Mr. St. George began his Iourney from Stock|holme to the Sound by Land, and came to Elsineur the 12. of the said Month; the 29. he took shipping for England, and landed at Hull the 20. of October, the 27. he came to London, and was the next day by the Earl of Carlisle (who was newly returned) brought to his Majesty in his Bed-chamber, where be kissed the King's hand, presented the King of Sweden's Letter to his Majesty, and so concluded his Employment.
The Fire-works above mentioned, which the King of Sweden caused to be pre|pared, to close the Solemnity of his Investiture, and manifest to the world his great satisfaction in the honor received, were ordered in the following manner.
In the middle of the work was erected a great Pillar 52 foot high, on the top of which was placed a gilt Crown; 18 foot below the Crown were the initial Letters of the Soveraign's and King of Swedens Christian Names, set breast to breast: and below at the Foot were placed several Military Colours, both of Horse and Foot, filled with Fire-works.
This Pillar stood in the middle of four antique Trophies, filled with Fire, and upon each side of the Pillar, 40 foot distance from it, was placed St. George on

Horseback, having the Dragon under his Feet, of 24 foot in length, and 28 in heighth, and on each side of St. George two Pyramids of 36 foot high.
In several places of the Work were set great Wind-Pipes, filled with Water, for playing of Water-Balls, and round the Work about 2000 Musket-Pipes, 60 together in a Frame, with 72 Chests in and about the Work, full of Rackets 12 foot high, besides 28 Chests with Swarmers in the Earth, 2 foot high; and above 1000 Pattroles fired by Degrees, which flying high threw from them all sorts of Figures of Fire. Lastly, at each corner a Fire Murser, which threw up all sorts of pleasant Fire-Balls, and in their breaking presented several Figures.


A Relation of the Investiture of Iohn George Duke of Saxony, with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, drawn up by Sir Thomas St. George Knight, Somerset Herald.
John George the Second, Duke of Saxony, was elected into the Society of the most Noble Order of the Garter the 18. of June 1668. at a Chapter held at White|hall, and by the Soveraign and several of the Companions of the Order, Sir Tho|mas Higgons Knight, and Thomas St. George Esq Somerset Herald, in the place of Garter Principal King of Arms, were then appointed and ordered to carry the Gar|ter, with the Habit and other Ensigns appropriated to the Order, to the said Duke of Saxony; which being provided and delivered unto them, on the 27. of February following they set forward from London, and arrived at Dresden the 5. of April 1669. and lodged at an Inn, from whence they gave notice to the Hoff Marshal of their arrival.
Vpon Wednesday morning about 10 of the Clock, being the 7. of April, the Duke of Saxony sent his Coach and several of his Servants, for them to their Audi|ence, where Sir Thomas Higgons presented his Majesty's Credentials, and Mr. St. George the Book of Statutes, the Elector having sent to see them the day before.
They were conducted from this Audience by the Duke's Servants to their several Lodgings within the Castle, where they remained and were entertained at the Duke's charges, and attended by his Servants during their stay at Dresden.
Vpon the 8. of April in the morning, the Duke sent a Complement to them, ac|knowledging how sensible he was of his Majesty's great affection unto him, in send|ing him the Order of the Garter, and that he was very desirous to receive it, where|upon they desired an Audience, to which they were conducted about 4 of the Clock in the Afternoon by the Dukes Servants.
Being brought to the Duke, Sir Tho. Higgons told him that he understood by his Secretary Mr. Voght, his Electoral Highness was very desirous to be invested with the Order of the Garter, and that thereupon he and Mr. St. George were come to present his Electoral Highness with the George and a Blue Ribband, which was usually worn by the Companions of that most Noble Order, before their Investiture, whereupon he gave them thanks; and then Mr. St. George delivered to Sir Tho. Higgons the George, and by him it was presented to the Duke, who having re|ceived it, and viewed it a little while, returned it again to Sir Tho. Higgons, then he and Mr. St. George put it about his neck; which being performed, the Duke returned thanks, and declared that he intended to be invested on Tuesday or Wed|nesday following, whereof they should receive more particular notice.
Vpon the 9. of April the Duke sent to them by his Secretary, to signifie that he had resolved to be invested on Tuesday following, and thereupon discoursing about the Ceremonies, said that his Electoral Highness had given order for the furnishing a stately Room for that occasion, which he was ready to shew them, but that if any part of the Ceremony were accustomed to be performed in the Church, he desired that might be omitted; which being by them consented unto, they repaired to the Room appointed, and gave directions how it should be ordered.
Vpon Easter-day, being the 11. of April, they were attended by several of the Duke's Servants to Church first, and after to Dine with him.


Vpon Tuesday the 13. of April, between 10 and 11 of the Clock in the morning, the Duke sent a great number of his Servants to them, to let them know he was ready to receive the Order; wherupon Mr. St. George put on his Roe or Mntle, and having placed the Habit, Collar, George, Garter, and his Majesty's Commis|sion upon a Blue Velvet Cuhen, they were conducted to a little Room appointed for that purpose, where the Duke stayed for them, Mr. St. George carrying the Robes and the other Ensigns of the Order, which he presented to the Duke, and after placed them on a Table standing by him.
Then Sir Thomas Higgons and Mr. St. George, having first prayed the Duke's leave, took off his Cloak, and his Sword and Belt, which the said Mr. St. George had for his Fee, and after that the Blue Ribband and George, which they had pre|sented to him before, which Mr. St. George delivered to one of the Duke's Servants.
The Duke being in this posture, Mr. St. George took the Surcoat which Sir Tho|mas Higgons and he presented to the Duke, and then put it on; after that the Gir|dle and Hangers, which they likewise girt about him, having receive another Sword from the Master of his Horse.
Then the Duke's Secretary brought and laid upon the Table before his Electoral Highness, the Letters Testimonial ingrossed in Parchment, of the presenting him with the Ensigns of the Order, which he there signed, and being sealed by him before them, they were delivered to Mr. St. George by the Duke.
These things being thus performed, they proceeded to the great Room prepared, where the principal part of the Ceremony was to be accomplished, where there was a great concourse of People, and towards the upper end on the right hand was a place raised, where sate the Dutchess, the Prince of Saxony and Princess, the Princess of Anhalt, and below them a great many Ladies of quality, and the Ladies of the Court.
First passed the Dukes Servants two and two.
Then the Cap and Feather, carried by Mr. St. George's Son.
Next Mr. St. George, carrying the rest of the Habit and the Ensigns of the Order.
Then Sir Thomas Higgons.
After him the Duke of Saxony in his Surcoat, his Sword girt about him.
On each side, and closing the Rere, were his Guard of State richly habited, with Partizans in their hands, the Staves covered with Blue Velvet, and set thick with gilt Nails.
In this manner they passed through divers stately Rooms, entertained with seve|ral sorts of Musick, until they came to the great Room, where there was also ex|cellent Musick of several sorts, with Kettle-Drums and Trumpets, placed in a high Gallery at the lower end, which entertained them as soon as they entred.
In this Room was two States of Crimson Velvet, the one at the upper end for the Soveraign with a Chair and a Foot-stool, and an Escotcheon of the Soveraign's Arms within a Garter, having his Stile underneath, set over the Chair; the other on the side of the Room on the right hand of the Soveraign's State for the Duke, with an Escotcheon of his Arms within a Garter, and his Stile underneath; and on the left hand two Chairs, the one for Sir Thomas Higgons, the other for Mr. St. George.
Being entred this Room, as they passed from the lower end, three obeysances were made to the Soveraign's State going up, then the Duke going to his State, and there standing, Mr. St. George placed the Robes on a Table on the Duke's right hand; which being done, Sir Thomas Higgons and Mr. St. George did go to their Chairs opposite to the Duke's, on the left hand of the Soveraign's State, making their obeysances to it as they passed by, then the Duke sate down, and they did the like. Then being entertained with Musick for a little while, they rose from their Seats, and making their obeysances as before to the Soveraign's State as they passed by it, and repaired to the Duke, who standing up, they placed themselves on each side of him: being in this posture Mr. St. George took up the Commission, and holding it in his hand, Sir Thomas Higgons made a Speech to the Duke, relating to the Anti|quity and Nobleness of the Order, declaring how many Emperors, Kings, and Fo|reign Princes had been Companions thereof since its institution, and in relation to the election of his Electoral Highness of the splendor and greatness of his Family, c.

which having ended, Mr. St. George gave the Commission to Sir Thomas Higgons who presented it to the Duke, which he caused to be read with a loud voice by his Secretary, and then received it again, and delivered it to Mr. St. George.
After this Mr. St. George took the Garter, and with the assistance of Sir Thomas Higgons, buckled it about the Duke's left Leg, then they put on the Mantle, the Hood upon the right shoulder, and last of all the Collar and George.
Thus being fully invested, Mr. St. George spoke to the Duke as followeth, Ayant investi vostre Altesse Electorale avec tous les habits  les autres ornaments du tres-noble Ordre de la, Iartiere, Je souhaite toute sorte de prosperit de gran|deur  de longue vie au tres-hault tres-puissant  tres-illustre Prince Iean George le Second, par la grace de Dieu Due de Saxe, de Iuliers Cleves,  des Montz, Archimareschall  Prince Electeur du Saint Empire, Landgrave de Thuringe, Margrave de Misnie,  de la haute  basse Lusre, Burgrave de Magdeburg, Conte de la Marche  Ravensperg, Seigneur in Rauenstein,  Che|valier du tres-noble Ordre de la Iartiere; which being ended, the Trumpets and loud Musick sounded.
The Musick ceasing, Sir Thomas Higgons congratulated his Electoral Highness's Investiture, whereupon one of his Council made a Speech in Latine, declaring his Electoral Highness's great obligation to the King of Great Britain, how highly he esteemed the Order, and his Majesty's particular kindness to him, c. and con|cluded with his thanks to Sir Thomas Higgons and Mr. St. George.
Then Mr. St. George took the Cap and Feather and presented it to the Duke, which he put on; and they returned in the same order as they came, to the Chamber from whence they brought him, Mr. St. George's Son bearing his Train; and there they left him and retired, being attended to their Apartments by the Duke's Ser|vants. About half an hour after, the Duke sent his Servants again for them, they found him in the same Room where they left him, in the Habit of the Order, and in the same manner as before they passed to the Room, where the Duke's Dinner was upon the Table, and they dined with him that day, the Duke wearing the Habit of the Order, and Mr. St. George his Robe. After Dinner they attended him back to the same Room, and there took their leaves and departed.
Vpon Sunday the 18. of April, the Duke's chief Chamberlain came to Sir Tho|mas Higgons first, and after to Mr. St. George, and presented each of them with a Chain of Gold, and the Electors Picture set in Diamonds hanging at it, and also to each of them a Bason and Eure; he also presented Mr. St. George's Son with a little Iewel of Diamonds, and invited them to Dine with the Duke, and the Master of the Ceremonies presented all their Servants.
On Monday the 19. of April, Sir Thomas Higgons, and Mr. St. George took their leaves of the Duke to return for England, and dined that day with him: and that Evening the Duke's Secretary brought them a Proxie, under the Duke's hand and Seal to the Earl of Bath, to be installed for him at Windesor.
The next morning being Tuesday, the 20. of April (Sir Thomas Higgons and Mr. St. George, having before hired a Boat to carry them down the River of Elbe to Hamburgh) the Dukes Coaches and Servants attended them to their Boats, and there all but two of them took their leaves of them, those two that remained had laid in provision, and attended and defrayed them by the Dukes command, as long as they travelled in the Dukes Territories, which was within two German Miles of Magdeburgh, and there they took their leaves.
Sir Thomas Higgons and Mr. St. George parted at Hamburgh, the former to go for England by the way of Holland, the other by shipping. Vpon Sunday the 16. of May, Mr. St. George arrived first in England, and that day Fortnight Sir Thomas Higgons; and when Mr. St. George kissed his Majesties hand at his re|turn, he was pleased to confer the honor of Knighthood upon him, with the same Sword the Duke of Saxony gave him.
By way of Corollry to the present Section, it will be necessary to give an account of those Transactions relating to this most Noble Order, which past, du|ring the interval of the late Rebellion and Usurpation.
The present Soveraign, by reason of his frequent removals from several places, beyond the Seas, where his rebellious Subjects had forced him to re|tire, was obliged to dispence with the accustomed Ceremonies of the Order, and to such Strangers as he was pleased to Elect, to send only the George and Gar|ter, together with the Glory or Star of Silver (to wit the Cross of St. George ir|radiated within a Garter, curiously wrought in rich embroidery) to be worn upon their upper Garments: Declaring also, that the Investiture therew should be sufficient to stile themselves Knights-Companions of this most Nob Order, as effectually, as if they had been formally, and with the usual Solem|nities, installed at Windesor Castle, where then it was not possibly to be done.
And in these Cases, instead of such formal Commissions of Legation, as had been accustomed to be made out, the Soveraign sent only his Letters Appendix. Num. CIII CIV. CV.  CVII. signifying Election to the Elect-Stranger, and a Num. C  CVIII. Warrant to Sir Edward Walker Garter, un|der his sign manual, whereby he was authorised, according to his Office, to de|liver those Ensigns to the Elect-Stranger, with such Ceremonies as were usual, and might be performed in the place where he was.
Of this kind were the Warrants issued out to the said Sir Eward Walker, for delivery of the Garter, George, and Star Ex Collect. E. W. G. to Charles Prince of Tarante, to Ex Collect. E. W. G. Wil|liam Prince of Orange, to Ex Collect. E. W. G. Frederick William Marquess of Brandenburgh, and by virtue of which he invested these Princes with them.
The manner and order of Investiture of a Stranger upon these occasions, was briefly thus.
The Stranger-Elect, to whom the Ensigns were sent, entred into the Room, ap|pointed to receive the Ceremony, and placed himself under the State.
In the mean time, Garter, having retired into another Room neer thereunto, put on his rich Coat of the Soveraign's Arms, and placed the Garter, George, and Cloak (on the left shoulder whereof was embroidered the Cross of St. George, within a Glory of Silver) upon a Velvet Cushen; then taking them on his arms before him (together with the Soveraign's Letters) went towards the Room, where the Elect-Stranger expected his coming, and where (a free passage being made) he proceeded up with three Reverences, and being arrived neer unto him, laid down the Cushen on a Table, placed for that purpose, neer the fore|said State.
This done, he began his Oration, and having made an entrance, sufficient to usher in the delivery of the Soveraign's Letters, he presents them to the Elect-Stranger, who opening the same, returned them back for Garter to read, which having done he redelivered them to him.
These things being dispatched, he took the Garter from off the Cushen, and kneel|ing down, first buckled it on the Elect-Strangers left leg, next he took the Blue Ribband and George, and hung it about his Neck, and lastly the Cloak, which he put likewise over his shoulders; and leaving him thus Invested, proceeded on with his Harangue: which being ended, he attended what the Invested-Stranger should please to say, by way of acknowledgment, or thanks to the Soveraign, for the Honor received: and then with usual obeysance departed the Room to put off his Coat.


The Copy of Sir Edward Walker's Speech, made in delivering the Garter, to William Prince of Orange, at the Hague, on Sunday in the Afternoon, being the 4. of May 1653.
May it please your Royal Highness,
I Have lately received the Commands of his sacred Majesty, Ex Collect. E. W. G. the King your Brother, Charles the Second of that name, by the Grace of God King of England, Scot|land, France, and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith, and Soveraign of the most Noble and Renowned Order of St. George, called the Garter, humbly to attend his Ne|phew the Prince of Orange, only Son unto your Royal Highness, and to deliver unto

him the Ensigns of that most Noble Order, with his Majesty's Letters of Dispensation investing his Highness with the most splendid Ornaments thereof. But because the tenderness of his Highness age allows him not the capacity to comprehend the great honor the King hath done him, in this early electing his Highness into this most Noble Society, the Reasons whereof are best exprest in his Majesty's gracious Letter; I shall therefore humbly address my self unto your Royal Highness, his Mo|her and Tutrix, and by your permission, open and read his Majesty's Letters, and all then, in obedience to his Majesty's Commands, deliver unto his Highness the Gar|ter and George therewith sent. The Investiture being dispatched, he thus proceeded.
Now that his Highness is by his Majesty's gracious Election and Dispensation In|vested, and become a Companion of this most Noble Order, I should according to the obligation of my Office, represent unto his Highness somewhat of the Antiquity, Nature, and Dignity of this most famous Order; but (as I said before) the tender|ness of his Highness age denying him the notion of matters of this kind, my hopes and wishes shall supply that present deect, which are, that as his Highness grows in years, under the happy tuition of your Royal Highness, and observing that he wears an Order and Habit not common to others, that he will with curiosity examine the cause of that effect, and then I doubt not but he will be informed, and with delight retain in his memory, that it was the most victorious King of England, Edward the Third, his Highness Ancestor, that 300 years past for noble and generous ends insti|tuted this Order, that it was the King his Vncle that elected him thereunto in his insncy, That e is of an Order neer 100 years more ancient than any other meerly Military, and that it hath been so highly valued and desired, as that the greatest Mo|narchs of Europe in their times have been Companions thereof. And to make the impression deeper, his Highness will then also find, that his great and excellent Fa|ther, your Royal Highness Husband, was a Companion of this most Noble Order, as were formerly those two most potent and fortunate Supporters of this State, his High|ness most heroick Grandfather Henry, and his great Vncle Maurice, all Princes of Orange in succession; The great Examples of whose admired and noble actions, as of other his Royal and Princely Ancestors, will certainly induce his Highness with alacrity and vigour to endeavour to be equal unto them in all honor, magnanimity, and princely virtues.
I shall conclude, that as your Highness hopeful Son, the Prince here present, is the youngest that ever yet was chosen into this most Noble Society, so it cannot be other|wise esteemed, than an early Omen of his future felicity and greatness, which with length of days and all prosperity, is humbly and heartily wished by me unto his High|ness, the most high, mighty, and excellent Prince, William Henry of Nassau, Prince of Orange, c. Knight and Companion of the most Noble Order of the Garter.


A brief Journal of Sir Edward Walker's passage and employment, in passing from Amsterdam to Hamborough, and so from thence to Berlin, to deliver the Garter, to his Electoral Highness, Frede|rick Guillaume Marquess of Brandenburg, An. Dom. 1654.
ON Tuesday in the Afternoon, Ex eod. Col|lect being the 17. of March New Stile, I began my Iourney, and arrived at Hamborough the Monday following being the 23. I stayed there from Monday till Thursday in the Evening, and then I departed with the Messenger of Berlin. On Monday morning I came to Spanda, a good Town, where there is the strongest Fort I ever saw, of four Bulwarks, environed by the River Sprey, and a Morass towards Berlin, from which place the Elector hath caused the Wood to be felled, that he might see this Fort from his Castle at Berlin.
At 11 of the Clock that day I arrived at Berlin, here I lodged my self in the Burgomasters house, a good Inn, and that Afternoon sent for one Mr. Roe an En|glish-man, but an old Servant of the Electors Family; to him in general I made my self known, and desired his advice for my addresses, he presently went and acquaint|ed the Electors Marshal with my Arrival, who presently informed the Elector, and

so I had answer, if I sent to the Marshal the next day at 10 of the Clock, I should understand his Highness pleasure; accordingly I sent, and the Marshall returned me answer, that at 11 his Highness would send a Gentleman to conduct me to the Court, and accordingly there came his Carver, in one of his Highness Coaches, to conduc me thither, where when I was arrived, I was brought through two or three Rooms (the Guards standing in order in the first, and Gentlemen in the rest) by the Gentle|man to the Electors Anti-Chamber; there his Chamberlain received me, and brought me into his Highness ed-chamber, to whom I presented my self in the best posture I could, and briefly gave him an Accompt of my Employment, and delivered him his Majesty's Letter, which he presently opened and read, and in few words of great re|spect acknowledged his Majesty's favour: After that I delivered him her Majesty the Queen of Bohemia's Letter, which he received with great demonstration of affection, and then returned to discourse with me about the time and manner of receiving the Order.
Hereupon I having prepared a Paper of all things necessary, that so I might do my best for his Majesty's honor and service, I presented it unto his High|ness, which he presently gave to Monsieur Scurein (one of the chief of his Coun|cil, and the only person, besides his Chamberlain, then present) to read, which he did, and it gave the Elector so full satisfaction, as he proposed to receive the Order the next day being Wednesday; but I being weary, and besides other particulars be|ing to be advised, I put it off till Thursday: so I took my leave of his Highness for that instant, and the Surintendant being Hofmaster to the Electrix, brought me to her Apartment to wait upon her, to whom I likewise delivered her Majesty's Letter, she received me with great favour, and told me her Mother had given her notice of my coming, so after some questions of the young Prince of Orange, the Princes Royal, c. I took my leave, and was conducted into his Highness Dining-Room, where the Dinner being on the Table, he presently appeared, leading his Mother who with her Brother the Palatine of Zimerne, his Lady, with a Son and Daughter came to this Court few days before. The old Electress, seeing me present, with high civi|lity seemed as if I should apply my self unto her; hereupon I briefly told her, that I was assured, had her Majesty the Queen of Bohemia known I should have found her there, I should have had the honor to have brought her Letters from her Majesty, which she took in good part, so she placed her self with her Sister-in-Law, her Daughter-in-Law, the young Electress her Sister, the Princess Katherine, and the young Princess of Zimerne on the outside of the Table; in the interim the Elector, the Duke of Zimerne and his Son washed, the Chamberlain giving the Towel, then the Gentleman gave water to the Ladies, so they took their places at a long Table; at the end sat the Dutchess of Zimerne, and the old Electress on the inside of the Table, the Electress, the Princess Katherine, and the young Princess of Zimerne, on the outside sate the Duke of Zimerne, then the Elector (then stood the Carver) and below sat the young Prince of Zimerne, and below him the Chamberlain, opposite to the young Prince and next to his Sister I was placed, beneath me the Master of the House to the Old Electress, and then at the end sate the Electors Master of his Horse, and ano|ther: The Table was excellently served, having at the first course 20 Dishes of gilt Plate, covered with Silver, and the Plates the same; so was the second course, and at the third, the Banquet was served in, in as many standing scalloped Cups gilt. At the second course the Elector began to me his Majesty's Health, and a while after the Duke of Zimerne the Queen of Bohemia's, and these were all the Healths past at the Table, so as to my great joy, instead of drinking after the German mode, I rose from Table thirsty.
Dinner being done, his Highness and the Ladies returned into her Highness Chamber; in the interim I stayed in the Dining-Room, where the Marshal came and told me, his Highness had given order, I should be lodged neer the Court, at his Stables, and should have a Coach to wait upon me to come to Court that Evening, and so constantly while I stayed. I excused the first, at least till the next day, and the last for that time, and so returned to my Lodging. The next day after Dinner, I went into the Electress Room with the Elector, and presently the old Ele|ctress applied her self to entertain me, and did so neer an hour. Then I took my leave of her and the Elector for that time, and was brought by one of his Gentlemen to my new Lodging at the Stables, where (after a large half pace, at the top of a Stair)

I was brought into my Stove hung with good Arras, at the upper end were two large round Tables, the one covered with a Carpet of Crimson Velvet fringed with Gold, the other of Cloth of Gold, on which stood a great Silver Bason and Ewer, out of that Room I went into my Bed-Chamber hung with silk Hangings, the Bed was of Cloth of Gold Damask, and the Counterpart of rih Cloth of Gold, and Chars of Crimson Velvet; towards Evening I was sent to, to know whether I would sup at the Court or there, I desired the last at my Lodging, in regard I was to deliver the Garter the next day. So in the Evening Wax Candles were brought me in great Silver Candle|sticks, and Wine and Beer in two great standing gilt Cups, and then eight or ten Dishes of meat in Silver Dishes, and (the Table being covered with rich Damask Linen) the meat was brought by six or eight Footmen, and a Page of the Electors to wait upon me, towards the end of Supper, five or six Plates of Sweet-meats were set on the Table, and so the Supper ended.
The next morning being Thursday, the 3. of April, Stilo Novo, I made my self ready to deliver the Garter, and about 10 of the Clock went to Court conducted by a Gentleman sent of purpose, when I came there I found all things ready as I had designed, and present|ly the Elector came and set himself under the Cloth of State, a Table standing by him whereon to lay the Garter, c. Then I presently retired into another Chamber, and put on my Coat of Arms, having laid on a Velvet Cushen his Cloak, the Garter, George, and his Majesty's Letter (which was again delivered me, as I had proposed, to be then pub|lickly read) so having made my three Reverences, I approached near his Electoral High|ness, and then laid down the Cushen, and applied my self by way of introduction in the French Tongue, to give an account of my Employment, and therein again deli|vered to his Highness his Majesty's Letter, which he re-delivered me. Then having finished my introduction, I read openly his Majesty's Letter, which done, I again de|livered it to him, and kneeled down and put on the Garter, then the George, and lastly the Cloak, and so proceeded with the rest of my Harrangue; which done, the Elector in few words returned humble thanks to his Majesty, for the great honor he had done him, in making him Companion of so Noble and worthy an Order, and was likewise pleased to give me thanks for the pains I had taken in bringing it unto him; so I made my Reverences and departed to put off my Coat. During the time of exercising my Function, I saw him very well pleased with it, and after, all the Com|pany present, being his Council and Servants, congratulated his admission.
Presently after his Highness came forth to Dinner with the accustomed company, and as formerly he drank to me his Majesty's Health; afterwards the Duke of Zimerne began his Highness Health to me, and her Majesty of Bohemia's Health and the Ele|ctresses passing, Dinner was ended, so being weary I went not into the Elector's Chamber, but returned to my Lodging; where I had not been long, but the Elector accompanied with the Duke of Zimerne, and most of his Court, came to the Escure to see his Horses, so I presently went down to wait upon his Highness, who used me with high civility, causing me to put on my Hat (for by the way, at home I never saw him covered) at first I saw his Stables full of excellent Horses, at least 30 of several breeds for the Great Saddle, thence he went up Stairs, the Stable being a quadrangle well built, and the Rooms above divided into six or eight Rooms, all full of Carbines, Pistols, Swords, rich Armour, c. of divers fashions and richness, and the two last of very rich Saddles of all fashions, and Furniture for Horses, many of them set with Turquoises, Rubies, Emeralds, c. and one set with Diamonds; which done, his Highness took his Coach and departed. That Evening I had a Supper at my Lodging as formerly, and the Mr. de la Lane grand Esquire came to me from his Highness, telling me he had order, if I pleased, to wait upon me to shew me the Fort at Spanda, and likewise that at Castrein 10 Miles off, I excused the last as being far off, and would take the opportunity of seeing the other at my return. Fryday I went to Court again, and then I delivered his Highness the Copy of my Speech, and told him I had no more to do now, but to attend his Commands, resolving to depart about the middle of the week following.
The next day being Saturday I dined at Court as formerly: The following day being Easter-day, I went early to the Court, and waited on the Elector to the Church, which by a Gallery is joined to the Court; I had the honor immediately to precede

his Highness leading his Mother, and to have a stool set me in his Clo, whi  at the lower end opposite to the Altar above his Chamberlain, next the young Prince of Zimerne; there I heard the Service and Sermon, which ended, the Elector an all the Company went down to receive the Sacrament, leaving me in the Clost wt to Lutheran Gentlemen to bear me company; all being done, we returned in t s order we came to Church, and went immediately to Dinner, which was serve up as formerly, but the number of Dishes of all sorts surpassing other days, yet there pst only his Majesty's health, and the Elector's at that time. That Evening I suppe t Court, where the entertainment was agreeable to the former.
Monday after Dinner I represented to his Highness, that having obeyed his Ma|jesty, in delivering the Order, I had no more to do, but to beseech his Highness  to depart on Thursday, and therefore prayed him to honor me with his Comm on Wednesday, which he granted, though at Dinner he proposed to me to go and see his strong Fort at Castrin 10 Dutch Miles thence, but I excused it, saying, I would satisfie my self seeing that at Spanda two Miles in my way back, which is of great strength both by art and situation.
The next day being Wednesday, I sent to have audience, to take my leave of his Highness in the Morning, but I was put off till after Supper. Yet I waited on his Highness to Dinner, and after Dinner I waited upon the old Electress, the Duke of Zimerne, and his Lady and Children, and the Princess Katherine, and had Letters from most of them to the Queen of Bohemia and Princess Louisa, with as great testi|monies from them of their affection and good wishes to his Majesty, and resect and thanks to my self as was imaginable: After Supper that Evening, I took my  of his Electoral Highness, who with all respect delivered me his Letter to his Majesty, and then with extraordinary civility he dismissed me. After that, although the le|ctress had taken Phisick that day, I had audience of her, who gave me her Letter to the Queen of Bohemia, and when I desired one to her Mother, she told me she had written by the Post, and so I returned to my Lodging.
The next morning being Thursday, Moneur le Cane Captain of his Highness Guard and Master of his Horse brought me a Present of 100 pieces of Gold, weighing each 5 Daiats, which were coined of purpose for me, uing much Complement from the Elector his Master in the delivery, and then presently by his Highness Order, he brought me out of Town in one of his Highness Coaches, there being two other Gentlemen with him: and first he shewed me the place of casting Ordinance, where there were newly cast two great whole Cannons and a very large Mortar-piece, then through a very large Park we came to Spanda, where at the entry of the Fort I was saluted with three pieces of Cannon, and met by the Governor, who shewed me all the strength and provisions thereof, which are in all kinds very great both of Brss, Ordinane, and Arms. After that, I was very well entertained at Dinner by the Governor, and after Dinner saw the Elector's Lodgings, where only the great variety of rare Stags-horns is worth observation, and so the Mes|senger being arrived, I took my leave of the Governour and Monsuer le Cane, who brought me out of the Fort, and through the Town, returning by the same way and means. Thus I came to Hamburg on Monday following, and so returned to Amster|dam on Sunday night the 20. of April.
Shortly after the present Soveraign was most happily restored to his Kingdoms, he took care to send over the rest of the Habit and Ensigns of the Order (namely the Mantle, Surcoat, Hood, and Collar) to the said Prince Elector of Brandenburgh, who had yet been invested but with part; these were committed to the care of Garter, who thereupon sent them to Prince Maurice of Nassau to be conveyed to the said Elector; the Receipt of which, with the Elector's particular thankful acknowledgments to the Soveraign, may be found in the Num. CIX CX. CXI. CXII.  CXIII. Appendix.




SECT. IV. Certificates of having received the Habit and Ensigns of the Order.
THE great and magnificent Solemnity of Investiture with the Habit and En|signs of this most Noble Order, being compleatly finished, and the Ambas|sadors having fully performed their duties therein, with all circumstances of ho|nor, as belongs to so great a Ceremony, they are yet further to obtain from the new Invested Stranger, before their departure, a publick Instrument, testifying the reception of the said Habit and Ensigns, signed with his Hand, and sealed with his Great Seal.
This we find anciently done, as appears from that Certificate sent back by Charles Duke of Burgundy, bearing date at Gaunt the 4. of February an. 9. E. 4. and was generally demanded and obtained since that time, as will fully appear from the several Certificates sent from those Stranger-Princes, to whom the Ha|bit and Ensigns of the Order have been presented.
Hereupon was a Clause to this effect usually added in the Instructions, given to Ambassadors in such their Legations, as appears from those to the Lord Howard and Garter, in the Embassy to Iames the Fifth King of Scotland; namely, Appendix, Num. CII. That Garter should remember (after the Investiture was performed) to purchase and so|licite a Certificate from the said King, of his reception of the Order, and taking the Oath, both under his Seal.
The form and substance of those Certificates which have come to our view, are much alike; for Ibid. Num. CXIV. c. after a recital of all the powers given to the Ambassadors, named in the Commission of Legation, the Stranger-Prince first makes Certificate of his Receiving, and Investiture with the Garter, Mantle, Surcoat, Collar, and other Ornaments of the Order, and that they have been presented to him by the Soveraign's Ambassadors, with due honor, and all the Solemnities accustomed: and generally where the Letters signifying Election, and the Habit of the Order have been sent together, the Certificate of receiving them hath also contained the Strangers grateful acceptation of the Order, together with his due thanks (in such cases necessary to be returned) and an acknowledgment, how accepta|ble the choice, and assumption into this Society, hath been to him.
And in some of these Certificates, namely from Ibid. Num. CXV. Ferdinand Prince of Spain, an. 15. H. 8. from Num. CXVI. Francis the First, the French King, an. 19. H. 8. and from Num. CXIX. Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, an. 3. Car. 1. we find, the taking the Oath ap|pointed by the Statutes to be also certified, with such qualifications and under such conditions, as had been advised and agreed upon, between them and the Soveraign's Ambassadors beforehand.
Of the return of these Certificates, the Annals of the Order sometimes take notice, as in particular, that of Lib. C. p. 89. Frederick the Second King of Denmark, which the Lord Willoughby brought back with him, Lib. C. p. 89. signed by that King, and sealed with his Great Seal, which he presented to the Soveraign in the Lib. C. p. 89. Chapter|house at Windesor, upon the finishing of his Legation; as also that of the French King Ibid. p. 97. Henry the Third, by the Earl of Derby.
Moreover by a late Lib. R. p. 120. Decree an. 13. Car. 1. care was taken to oblige the Ambassadors to produce these Certificates to the Soveraign at their return.
And besides the Certificates testifying the Investiture, sometimes the Stranger-Prince hath been pleased to give therewith, a particular testimonial of Garter's punctual discharge of his duty in the Legation, or of the Officer of Arms employ|ed in his stead; as did See the Let|ter inserted at the beginning of Eh. Ceus his Eq. Aur. Anglo-Wir|temb in the So|veraigns Li|brary at St. James's. Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, in a Letter to the So|raign, an. 1. Iac. R. The like did Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, in the pre|amble of his Seld. Tit of Honor. p. 459. Diploma, whereby he testifies the bestowing upon Henry St George Richmond Herald, the honor of Knighthood.
Of those Gratuities given to Garter by Strangers, after they had received their Investiture, notice of some of them have come to our hands, which we therefore think fit to mention here.

Ferdinand Arch-Duke of Austria gave him a Ex Collec. E. W. G. Cup worth 22. l. and 100 Rhe|nish Guilders.
The French King Francis the First Ex Collec. E. W. G. 250 Crowns.
Iames the Fifth King of Scotland Ex Collec. E. W. G. 100 Crowns of the Sun.
Iohn Casimire Count Palatine of the Rhyne, a Gold Chain and a Cup worth 30 Pounds.
Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, a Eq. Au A|glo-Wirtemb. p. 29. rich Sword and Dagger, a Chain of Gold with his Picture hanging at it, and lastly 1000 Rix Dollars.
Maurice Prince of Orange a MS. penes . O. Y. p. 132. Chain of 6 pound weight, and a Medal with his Picture thereat, set about with Diamonds.
Charles Prince of Tarent a Ex Rela|tione E W. G. Diamond of 200 l. value.
William Prince of Orange Ex Rela|tione E W. G. 1200 Dollars.
Frederick William Elector of Brandenburgh Ex Rela|tione E W. G. 100 pieces of Gold, each of the value of 10 Rix Dollars.
Iohn Gasper Count Marchin about Ex Rela|tione E W. G. 20 l. in Gold.
Charles the Eleventh King of Sweden gave to Henry St. George Esq at his Inve|stiture, a Ex Rela|tione E W. G. Gold Chain and a Medal pendant thereto, worth 200 l.
And lastly, Iohn George Duke of Saxony bestowed on Thomas St. George Esq a Ex Rela|tione E W. G. Silver Bason and Eure, a Gold Chain and Medal, and a Sword with a Cross Hilt of Agat, adorned with Gold.





CHAP. XVI. THE Installation OF A Stranger by Proxie.

SECT. I. Touching the Choice and Nomination of a Proxie.
THE Invested Stranger, of what Dignity, State, or Condition soe|ever, is enjoined by the Statutes (after such his Investiture) to send hither a Ed. 3. Stat. Art. 20. Proctor or Deputy (for we find both Titles indifferently applied to one person) to be installed on his behalf, in the Seat assigned him within the Chappel of St. George at Windesor.
The time limited by the Statutes of Institution, for sending him hither, is Ed. 3. Stat. Art. 20. eight Months after Investiture with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order. Yet in King Henry the Fifth's Statutes it is but Art. 20. seven Months; and those of King Henry the Eighth allow only Art. 21. seven Months and no more, and that not only af|ter Investiture, but after the Stranger hath Art. 21. certified the Soveraign of his Re|ception of the Order.
The French King Francis the First, was so earnest for the compleating this honor, that he Lib. N. p. 257 speedily (after he had received the Habit and Ensigns) dispatch his Proctor hither, to perform what the Statutes required in this particular. And for the general we observe so little slackness in Stranger-Princes, nay so great a forwardess to obtain the accomplishment of this Honor, that their Deputie have been installed for them within the limited time.
But King Henry the Eighth's Statutes have further provided, Art. 21. That in case a Stranger do not send his Deputy or Proctor within seven Months, without having a reasonable excuse, and such as should be allowed by the Soveraign or his Deputy, the Election (notwithstanding his former acceptation) should be also void, except so it be, that the Stranger be hindred or disturbed by great Affairs, and then might he send his Excuse to the Soveraign or his Deputy, within one month after; and ac|cording as the Soveraign or his Deputy should allow or disallow of is Excuse, that then the Soveraign or his Deputy might give unto him four months of respite more, within which time, if he neither come nor send his Deputy to be installed for him, then the said Election should be void for that time.
And sometimes it hath fallen out, that through the multiplicity of Affairs, Strangers could not punctually observe the ancient Law of the Statutes in this point; nevertheless, by virtue of the limitation in those Statutes of King Henry the Eighth, upon a sufficient cause, the Soveraign hath been pleased to excuse the delay; but the instances are very few, as that of the French King Charles the Ninth, who was Ex Collect A V. W. invested at Lyons, an. 6. Eliz. but not installed till the Lib. C. p. 5. 22. of Ianuary, in the eighth year of the same Queen.
And when of late the Garter and George only were sent to a Stranger, the Ce|remonies of Installation have also been dispensed with till a more convenient time, as appears from the Ex Autogr penes praef. Iac. Palmer Instructions of the 4. of March, an. 19. Car. 1. given at the sending these two Principal Ensigns of the Order to William Prince of Orange, and Bernard de Foix Duke d' Espernon (in regard of the interruptions then given by the Rebellion here) nevertheless Ex Autogr penes praef. Iac. Palmer then to be performed with all usual Rites and Honors due to persons so neerly allied unto, and so much esteemed by the then Soveraign of the Order.
Such Dispensations, and for the same reason, was the present Soveraign neces|sitated to give those Strangers, whom he honored with Election into this most Noble Order, while he remained in Foreign parts.
And upon his Majesties happy Restauration, among many other things relating to the Order, this particular was at several Chapters, taken into serious conside|ration, in reference not only to the Duke d' Espernon and Prince Maurice, that were dead, but those Strangers also then living, both wanting the full comple|ment of their Honor by a formal Installations; for at a Chapter held at Whitehall the 10. of April, an. 13. Car. 2. Lib. Carolin p. 27. directions were given to Garter, to place the Banners, and other Atchievements of the surviving Strangers over their respective Stalls: The Soveraign then also did by his Supream power (induced by divers considerable reasons) Collect. E. W. G. dispence wholly and absolutely with their Instal|lations, nevertheless declared them and every of them to be esteemed Compani|ons, and to enjoy all priviledges of the Order, as if they had been installed Personally, or by Proxie; with this further declaration notwithstanding, That as the like necessity and conjuncture could never happen again, so he would not upon any motion or pretence whatsoever give the like Dispensation. Finally, at another Chapter, held at Whitehall the 20. of February following, it was con|cluded, and the Soveraign again declared his pleasure, to dispence with the said Strangers Installations by a formal Act, thereupon commanded to be drawn up by the Chancellor; which he having performed, read it in a subsequent Chapter, where it received approbation. A Copy whereof here follows.

WHereas it is expresly provided by the Statutes of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Ex Lib. Collect. Hen. de Vic. Bar. nuper bu|ju Ord. Can|cel. p. 23. That no Companion Elect of the same, shall enjoy the priviledges of a compleat Knight thereof, before he be actually installed, either in his Person o by his sufficient Proxie, within the accustomed time, and according to the usual Rites and Formalities, which some of those noble Persons, who though Elected, could not possibly perform and receive, during the late troubles, nor legally since our return into our Dominions, by reason of the space of time elapsed since their Election, beyond that which is allowed and prescribed by the Statutes, as also for the many difficul|ties and incumbrances, through which the performance of their Installations must pass, in some of them who are Strangers, and have their aboad in Foreign and

remote parts; which we taking into our consideration, and that if not all, most part of the foresaid Knights were admitted into our said Order, without those Formali|ties, which at other times, to have omitted had been an unexcusable breach of Sta|tute: We conceiving it no more irregular to pass by the Statutes, in matter of their Installation, than it was in point of their Election, the observation of the usual forms in either of them having proved equally difficult or rather impossible; for these and other reasons, particularly for the avoiding that prejudice, which some of the said Companions, who are now dead, and have a like interest therein, with those that survive them, would have undergone (who for want of being installed, would have been left out of the Catalogue of the Founders in the Register-Books of our Order) as we heretofore declared our pleasure to be, That such of them as are dead, should not for want of being installed, be deprived of the honor of being called Founders, and for those that are yet alive, that they should not suffer likewise in that respect, or in point of their Ranks and Precedency: And accordingly with the advice and consent of our other Companions, in the Chapter held the 10. of April last, we did regulate the Stalls, and command their Hatchments to be set up in the Chappel of St. George, in our Castle of Windesor, according to their Elections in point of time, We conti|nuing in our former purpose, for the putting an end to the irregularities which the late troubles occasioned in our foresaid Order, and the many questions and difficul|ties which have ensued thereupon, and especially in this particular, We have thought good to dispence with the Installation of all the said Knights, whether they be Subjects or Strangers, dead or living, and whatsoever omission of, or contravention to the Sta|tutes, may have hapned upon that account, And that the same notwithstanding, they all shall be held and reputed for compleat Knights of our foresaid Order, and enjoy all the priviledges and advantages of it, with the rest of the Companions, in as full and ample manner, as if they had installed and performed all the Rites, and Ce|remonies, usual upon such occasions.

But it seems to rest in the pleasure of the Stranger, whether he will chuse to send over hither any person of his own Court, or give his Procuration to some one of the Soveraign's Subjects, to receive his Stall, and in his name to take pos|session of it; the later of which hath been several times done, out of desire to favour some of our Nobility, or other persons of quality at Court, with this ho|nor: For instance, Frederick the Second King of Denmark; gave his Procura|tion to the Append. Num. CXXI.  CXXII. Lord Willoughby (principal in the Legation, for the carriage of the Habit of the Order to him) to be installed for him; and in like manner, Append. Num. CXXI.  CXXII. Iohn Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, deputed Sir Philip Sidney to the same Employ|ment: Lib. R. p. 41. Viscount Dorchester was installed for Henry Prince of Orange, to whom he (and Sir Williams Segar, Garter) had before carried the Habit and Ensigns: and this was done by virtue of a Deputation pen'd in Lib. R. p. 41. French, and sent him hi|ther from the said Prince. The Earl of Carlisle received his Deputation from Charles King of Sweden at Stockholme; and the Prince Elector of Saxony sent his hither to the Earl of Bath.
But it hath sometimes hapned, that a Proctor for the installation of a Stranger, hath been appointed and nominated by the Soveraign of the Order, though the Principal had named another before, perchance induced thereto by some extraordinary necessity. Thus it hapned in the case of Maurice Prince of Orange an. 10. Iac. R. who having deputed MS. penes Edw. Fau|conbridge. Count Henry his Brother to be installed for him, and he having put to Sea in order thereto, but by reason of MS. penes Edw. Fau|conbridge. contrary winds, not arriving in England before the day appointed for his Installation, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions ordered, that MS. penes Edw. Fan|conbridge. Lodowick of Nassau, Kins|man to the Elect Prince, should take possession of his Stall on his behalf; to the end that the honor designed the said Prince, in accompanying Frederick Prince Elector Palatine to his personal Installation, might not become frustrate.
A case somewhat like to this, was that of Iohn George Duke of Saxony; for having sent over his Procuration to Iohn Earl of Bath, and he being detained in the West by extraordinary occasions, when St. George's Feast was held at Windesor, an. 23. Car. 2. wrote to the Chancellor of the Order, to obtain the

Soveraign's Dispensation for his not appearing there in the name of his Princi|pal; who E Praef. li. Collect. Hen.  ic. p. 159. representing his humble request to the Soveraign, in Chapter held on the Eve of the said Feast, he was pleased to grant it, and appointed Heneage Earl of Winchelsey to be the Duke's Proxie, who performed the whole service.
And there is an ancient Example in this kind, Lib. N. pag. 164. an. 9. H. 5. where the Soveraign nominated the Lib. N. pag. 164. Lord Fitz-Hugh, Procter for the King of Denmark; which yet was not done, till after the Soveraign had been certified, that the said King had been invested with the Habit and Ornaments of the Order, and also Lib. N. pag. 164. ob|liged himself by Oath to the observation of the Statutes.
In like manner it is recorded,Lib R p. 40. that the Earl of Cleveland was by the Soveraign appointed Deputy, for the Installation of Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden; and yet not unlike but this might be by consent of the said King, though the An|nals herein are silent; (as is very usual, and sometimes in circumstances and passages of note) for if we look towards the end of the said King's Certificate, returned of his Receipt of the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, we shall there find he desired, Appendix Num. CXIX. that the Qualifications therein before mentioned, might be admitted into his Oath, when any solemn attestation should be made by his Pro|ctor in his Name; whence it may be well enough (and without much wresting) inferr'd, that he had not then named his Proctor, but probably either by a pri|vate Letter, or verbal message, returned by those (or some of them) joined in the Legation with the Habit, might leave him and the time to the choice and appointment of the Soveraign.
But suppose the Soveraign (being loth to defer this King's Installation too long, considering the hazards of War) did appoint a Deputy for his Installation, with|out his direction; as the case stood he might do it, and not intrench upon that leave given a Stranger by the Statutes, to chuse his own; because in the body of the said Kings Certificate, there is set down the very qualifications where|with his Oath should be taken by his Proctor, which being allowed and admit|ted by the Soveraign, any further concern in this Affair was but matter of indifferency.
But if the Soveraign, having nominated a Proctor, should also cause him to take the ancient Oath, in its absolute nature and form, not allowing those qualifications, which the interests of his Principal, to his Religion, or to other Princes Orders, and such like, might justly exact (which without consulting an invested Stranger, cannot well be known or set down) and such an Oath as his Principal had neither allowed of, nor consented unto: this might seem good cause of exception, and be esteemed done in prejudice to his preingaged interests.


SECT. II. The Proctor's Qualifications.
BUT whether the Proctor be nominated by his Principal, or by the Soveraign, the Statutes of the Order put some qualifications upon the person so sent, or appointed as aforesaid: and first,
That he be E. 3. Stat. Art. 20 Procurator sufficiens,  Ib. Art. 24. idoneus; that is, Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 19. such a person who hath been always accounted of an unblamable conversation, not branded with any note of infamy, but altogether irreproveable. And such as one was Domi|nus Franciscus  Deputy to Hercules Duke of Ferara, who in the Black-Book of the Order, is characterised to be Pag. 147. a Knight of an incorrupt Fame; nor are we to doubt, but that other Proctors to Strangers were such, though the testimoni|als of their virtue do not appear in the Annals of the Order.
Secondly, the Proctor ought to be a person E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. Vide|i H. 5. Stat. Art. 20.  H. . Stat. Art. 21. correspondent to the State and Dignity of that Stranger which doth depute him; so that answerable to the dignity of the Invested Knight, ought to be (in some Proportion) the quality of the Proctor. And how this Injunction hath been observed, will sufficiently ap|pear in the following Scheme.



Knights.
Proctors.



Emperor.
Maximilian the First.
Marquess of Branden|burgh.
An. 6. H. 7.


Kings.
Ericus King of Denmark.
Lord Fitz-Hugh.
An. 9. H. 5.


Kings.
Francis the First of France.
Andrian de Tercelin Lord of Bross.
An. 19. H. 8.


Kings.
Iames the Fifth King of Scotland.
Lord Iohn Erskine.
An. 26. H. 8.


Kings.
Charles the Ninth of France.
Iaques Lord Remboil|liet.
An. 8. Eliz.


Kings.
Frederick the Second King of Denmark.
Peregrine Lord Wil|loughby of Ersby.
An. 24. Eliz.


Kings.
Henry the Fourth of France.
Sier de Chastes Vice-Admiral of France.
An. 42. Eliz.


Kings.
Christierne the Fourth King of Denmark.
Henry Ramell, heredita|ry Lord of Wosterwitz and Beckeskaw.
An. 3. Iac. R.


Kings.
Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden.
Thomas Wentworth Earl of Cleveland.
An. 4. Car. 1.


Kings.
Charles King of Sweden.
Charles Howard Earl of Carlisle.
An. 23. Car. 2.


Arch Duke
Ferdinand Arch-Duke of Austria.
George de Halwyn, Ba|ron of Gomyns.
An. 16. H. 8.


Dukes.
Peter Duke of Conimbero.
Iohn Lord Typtost.
An. 6. H. 6.


Dukes.
Guido Vbaldus Duke of Vrbin.
Sir Balthasar de Casti|lian Knight.
An. 22. H. 7.


Dukes.
Emanuel Duke of Savoy.
Iohan Thomas Langusts des Contes de Stro|piane.
An. 1.  2. Ph. Mar.


Dukes.
Adolph Duke of Hol|stein.
Walter Devereux Vis|count Hereford.
An. 3. Eliz.


Dukes.
Henry Prince of Orange.
Dudley Carleton Vis|count Dorchester.
An. 4. Car. 1.


Dukes.
Iohn George Duke of Saxony.
Heneage Finch Earl of Winchelsey.
An. 23. Car. 2.


Earls.
Anne Montmorency Earl of Beaumont.
Sir Amye de Courteney Knight Sier de Villert.
An. 25. H. 8.


Earls.
Philip Chabot Earl of Newblank.
Sir Iames Deschateners Knight Sier de Beaulion.
An. 25. H. 8.


Thirdly it is provided, Ibid. that he be a Knight, and without any manner of Re|proach; and if it so happen, that he have not received the degree of Knighthood, the Soveraign is to bestow that honor, before he be allowed to take upon him the execution of his deputative power; for none butNam f as non est alios quam Milites munus istud in se sus|cipere, R. pag. 20. Knights are capable of this Ho|nor, or Ibid. p. 159. permitted to bear the Ensigns of so great an Order.
Hereupon the Lord Willoughby of Ersbie, Proctor for Frederick the Second King of Denmark, and Sir Philip Sidney, for Iohn Count Palatine of the Rhyne; were Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. 30.both Knighted by the Soveraign at Windesor Castle, the morning before they proceeded to take possession of their Principals Stalls.
Notwithstanding, there was a reason why this particular was not strictly stood upon (though moved) in the case (and it is the single case) of Lib. C. p. 1 Henry Ramell, Deputy for Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, an. 3. Iac. R. for it being ta|ken notice of, that he was not a Knight, certain persons were sent from the So|veraign to signifie his pleasure, that he should be advanced to the honor of Knighthood, before he took upon him the Ensigns of the Order, in his Kings be|half; to which he made answer, . R. p. 1. that he appeared here not in his own, but in the name of the King of Denmark, and that such a Degree of honor was unu|sual in his own Country (being born in Pomerania) and therefore humbly desired that he might be excused for receiving the honor. Upon which answer the So|veraign was pleased to Ibid. dispence with him, and forthwith the said Deputy (but no Knight) Ibid. received the Ornaments of the Order, and was admitted to take the Stall assigned to the said King his Principal.


SECT. III. His Letters of Procuration.
THE authority wherewith an Elect-Stranger invests his Proxie, is chiefly deduceable from the words in his Letters of Procuration or Deputation, which ought to pass under the Hand and Seal of his Principal, and do generally contain these particulars.
First, Appendix Num. CXXI. CXXII.  CXXIII. he premiseth the Soveraign's Election of him into the Order of the Garter, and his Receipt of the Habit and Ensigns thereof; then takes notice of the obligation which the Statutes of the Order put upon him, for sending a Proxie to take possession of his Stall, in regard the dignity whereunto he is advanced in his own Country, will not permit him to repair personally to Windesor; and being not only desirous, that the Election and Investiture should obtain its due effect, but to fulfil, as far as in him lies, the Injunctions of the Statutes, in what concerns the assuming of his Stall, and taking the Oath appointed, He there|fore ordains, authorises, and deputes, a person fitly qualified (named in the De|putation) his sufficient Proctor and special Deputy, to appear at the Castle of Windesor on his behalf, and in his Name at the next Solemnity that should be held there, to supply his room, and receive possession of the Stall assigned him, according to the usual form; and to perform in all respects those Cere|monies and things, in his behalf, due and accustomed, or should appear to be|long any way to the splendor or ornament of the Order: As also to take the accustomed Oath, with those qualifications, and in that form, as had been (or should be) agreed upon; and further to fulfill all other things, which he should think necessary, to be performed on this occasion, or whatsoever thing might require a more special command, than was contained in the Letters of Procu|ration; and as fully as the Stranger should be obliged unto, and would do, if he were there present in his own person. Lastly, there is usually added a Clause of Ratification and Confirmation of all such things, as the Proctor should say or do, in reference to the Solemnity of Installation.


SECT. IV. Of the Proctor's Reception.
SOon after the arrival of the Proxie, and that the Soveraign is acquainted with the occasion of his coming, he at some convenient time Collect. W. l N. l. giveth him Audi|ence;

after which a day for Installation is assigned, (where the Soveraign or his Lieutenant are present) the Soveraign nominates some of the Knights-Compani|ons his Commissioners to perform the Ceremonies.
Heretofore, the Soveraign hath caused the Proctor to be received with very great state; for so was Ex ve. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. p. 24. b. Sir Balthasar Castilian, sent hither from the Duke of Vrbin, an. 22. H. 7. whom Sir Ex. ve. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. p. 24. b. Thomas Brandon, with a goodly company of his own Ser|vants, well horst, met at the Sea side; and thence continually kept company with him, till they came neer Deptsord in Kent, where, by the Soveraign's com|mand, he was met by Sir Ex ve. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. p. 24. b. Thomas Dokara, Lord of St. Iohns, and Sir Thomas Wriothesley Garter: The said Sir Thomas Dokara had attending him Ex ve. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. p. 24. b. 30 of his Servants all in new Liveries, well horsed, every Gentleman bearing a Javelin in his hand, and every Yeoman a Bow, and a Sheaf of Arrows, and so they con|veyed him to his Lodging. The next day they conducted him to London, and by the way there met him divers Italians, and Paulus de Gygeles the Popes Vice-Collector, to whose house he was conveyed and there lodged.
The Reception also of Iames Lord Rambouillet, Proctor for the French King Charles the Ninth, was very noble; to whom, as soon as the Soveraign heard of his arrival at Gravesend (being Collect. W. le N. Cl. Tuesday the 8. of Ianuary an. 8. Eliz.) she sent thither Collect. W. le N. Cl. Arthur Lord Grey of Wilton, Mr. Midlemore, and other Gentlemen, who the next day landed him at the Tower-Wharf, where all taking Horse, they conduc|ted him to his Lodgings, neer St. Collect. W. le N. Cl. Maries Spittle, without Bishops-Gate; within which place lay the Ambassador Leiger of France.


SECT. V. The Preparations for Installation.
THE Preparations for the Installation of a Stranger by Proxie, are the same as for the Proxie of a Knight-Subject, and mentioned as before, namely the (1.) Commission for Installation, (2.) Letters of notice to the Commissioners. (3.) Warrants for removal of Stalls, (4.) for the Strangers Atchievements, and (5.) some other particulars of less note: All which are to be obtained by the Chancellor of the Order, under the Soveraign's Sign Manual, to which the Signet of the Order is to be affixt.
1. Commission for Installation. The form of the Commission is much the same, with that drawn up for In|stallation of a Knight-Subject, both as to the material and circumstantial parts; whereof we have Chap. 11. Sect. 3. already discourst. The Appendix. Num. CXXIV. CXXV. CXXVI. CXXVII. Preamble constains the same matter, and the authority wherewith the Proxie is impowered, and is penn'd with like words; the variation lies only in those expressions, which lay down the causes of the Stranger's absence, and for the most part are generally exprest, but if in particular, then are the words fitted with alterations sutable to the occasion.
2. Letters to the Commis|sioners. The Letters sent from the Soveraign to each of the Commissioners appointed for Installation,Ibid. Num. CXXVIII.  CXXIX. giving them notice and information of the Solemnity, and requiring their attendance at Windesor, on the day assigned, are of the same nature with those prepared against the Installation of a Knight-Subject by his Proxie; the necessary alterations being taken in, where the occasion requires.
3. Warrants for removal of Stalls. Thirdly, a Warrant for the Removal of Stalls, is likewise to be obtained from the Soveraign, and sent unto Garter, to see it put in execution, according to its tenour, whereby a Stall being assigned to the Stranger, his Proxie having ta|ken possession thereof, may set over it the Atchievements of his Principal. The ground of this Removal, and the practice thereupon, in relation both Stran|gers and Knights-Subjects, is discoursed of at large, among the  11. Preparations made for the Personal Installation of a Knight-Subject.
In the last place,4. Warrants for Atchievement. a Warrant is to be drawn and signed by the Soveraign, for providing the Stranger's Atchievements at the Soveraign's charge; namely, his Helm, Crest, Mantlings, and Sword, together with a Banner of his Arms and Quarterings; and these the Proctor is E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. H. . Stat. Art. 20. H. . Stat. Art. 1. enjoined to bring along with him to Windesor.
Sometimes a Warrant hath been directed to the Mter of the Wardrobe, to pro|vide but some part of these Atchievements; and another Warrant to the Lord Treasurer of England, to deliver Garter money to provide the other part; in each of which, the particulars relating to either are enumerated. For so were the Warrants drawn up, for the Atchievements of the French King Apendix, Num. CXXX,  CXXXI. Henry the Second. At other times the direction hath been to the Master of the Great Wardrobe, to provide and deliver to Garter the whole, who thereupon put the charge upon account; as were those Warrants for Atchievements for the Ibid. Num. CXXXII.  CXXXIII. Duke of Chevereux and King of Sweden.
Sometimes particular Warrants have been directed to the Master of the Ward|robe, to deliver forth several parcels of the Materials, for the making up these Atchievements, to the persons employed in the work, or oversight thereof, as were those Warrants to deliver the Ibid. Num. CXXXIV CXXXV. CXXXVI.  CXXXVII. Soveraign's Embroiderer, and to Ibid. Num. CXXXIV CXXXV. CXXXVI.  CXXXVII. Garter so much Velvet, Cloth of Gold, c. for making the great Banner and other the Atchievements of Charles the Ninth, and Henry the Third the French Kings, and Christian Prince of Denmark.
But it appears that Garter hath sometimes laid out the money, for making all, or part of the Atchievements, and then he delivered his Bill of disbursements into the Wardrobe, as is manifest from those Bills drawn up for the Atchieve|ments of Ex Collect. A. V. W. Frederick the Second King of Denmark, MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 160  156. Iohn Count Palatine of the Rhyne, and the MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 160  156. Duke of Holstien.
Besides the Atchievements,5. Some othe particulars. some other things used at the Solemnity, are com|monly included in the foresaid Warrants, as (1.) a Plate of Brass gilt, whereon are engraven and enamelled in Colours the Stranger's Coat of Arms and Quar|terings, within a Garter; as also his Helm, Crest, and Supporters, and under|neath these his whole Stile and Titles of Honor: (2.) A Majesty Scutcheon, to be set over the Soveraign's Stall, and another over the Strangers, there to remain during the time of Installation. And when Prince Henry was constituted the Soveraign's Lieutenant for St. George's Feast, at which time also Christian the Fourth King of Denmark was installed; he likewise had a Ex Autogr. penes uil. Knight, an. 1657. Majesty Scutcheon placed  his Stall: (3.) Some Lodging Scutcheons of his Arms, marshalled in the same order as they are in his Plate: and (4.) a Cushen of Crimson Vel|vet, whereon to lay the Mantle, when Garter bears it before the Proctor into the Choire, in case the Proctor doth not carry it on his own arm. Lastly, for the carriage of all these things to Windesor, a Trunk is likewise to be provided.
We do not think it needful to place the Mantle of the Order here, with those things that are to be prepared at the Soveraign's charge against this Solemnity; for the E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. vide etiam H. 5. Stat. Art. 20.  H. 8. Stat. Art. 21. Statutes of Institution appoint the Proxie to bring one with him, not that the Soveraign should provide it, having done that before at the Ibid. Legation with the whole Habit: Nor have we found in the Rolls or Books of the Sove|raign's Great Wardrobe, any account made for providing a second Mantle, when the Proxie of a Stranger came hither; which, had the Soveraign been at such charge, would not have been omitted.


SECT. VI. The Proctor's Cavalcade to Windesor.
THE day appointed for the Installation drawing on, the Lib. N. p. 316. Proxie was here|tofore accompanied on Horseback, from London to Windesor, with the

Soveraign's Lieutenant and his Assistants (if the Feast of St. George were then al|so celebrated) or otherwise the Soveraign's Commissioners, with a very great Retinue.
Amongst the rest, when Adrian de Tercelin, Deputy for the French King Francis the First, rode to Windesor, the day before his Installation (being the 24. of Ian. an. 19. H. 8.) Autogr. in Bibl. Coton, vi|de MS. fol. pe|nes G. O. Y. p. 21. all the Knights-Companions that were in Commission for that Solem|nity, assembled at the Lord Sandys his Place, neer St. Paul's Church in London, whence they rode to the Deputies Lodging, then at the Dean of Pauls his House; and thence accompanied him in good order and gallant equipage, to the Castle of Windesor; where Lodgings were prepared for him at the Dean's House.
In like manner on Tuesday the 15. of Ianuary an. 8. Eliz. the MS. penes W. D. N. f. 24. b. Earls of Sussex and Leicester and Lord Clinton, (Lib. C. p. 50. three of the four Commissioners appointed for the Installation of the French King Charles the Ninth) with other Lords and Gen|tlemen, took their Horses at the Ex MS. praed. Court Gate at Westminster, and with a great Train rode to the Lodging of the said Kings Proxie (being then at St. Mary's Spittle in London) whence they took their way through Holborn towards Winde|sor, the Earl of Southampton, Viscount Mountague, Sir Henry Lea, and Sir Edward Vmpton met them at Langford neer Colebrook with their Hawks, and there shew|ed the Proxie variety of sport, with which he being exceeding well pleased, they rode to Windesor; where he was accommodated with Lodgings in the Dean's House, Lib. N. p. 316. for that hath usually been the place to entertain the Stranger's Proxies, when they came to Windesor, upon this solemn occasion.


SECT. VII. Supper after his arrival there.
THE Evening of their arrival passeth with a Supper, for the most part costly and sumptuous; but the principal entertainment is reserved to set forth the magnificence of the following days Dinner, in case the Instalment be appointed to be solemnized on the next morning.
At the Installation of the French King Francis the First, all the Autogr. in Bibl. Coton. Commissioners met at the Marquess of Exceter's Lodgings, and went together to the Dean's House, where they were entertained by him at Autogr. in Bibl. Coton. Supper, all at one Table, at another Table sat Autogr. in Bibl. Coton. Garter, with certain of the Deputy's chief Gentlemen, and some of the Heralds; and at a third Table sat the Autogr. in Bibl. Coton. rest of the Heralds, and other of the Proxy's Servants.
The MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 25. Commissioners, and other Noblemen, who also accompanied Charles the Ninth's Proctor to Windesor, supped (the Evening of their arrival) with him; he MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 25. himself sitting at the upper end of the Table, then the Earls of Sussex and Leicester by him, one against the other, next the Earl of Southampton, and Vis|count Mountague, then the Lord Clinton, and Lord Herbert of Cardiff, after them two Strangers, namely Monsieur Cleremont, and Monsieur de la Lupe, then lower sat the Lord Grey, and other Strangers, and last of all sat Monsieur Doze alias St. Michael, the French Herald, at the lower end, opposite to the Proctor. MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 25. Garter, Black-Rod, and divers Strangers, supped with the Dean; and in the Parlour and Hall sat divers Pensioners, Gentlemen, and Strangers.



SECT. VIII. Of the Proceeding to the Chapter-house.
WHat hath been before set down, touching the publick Proceeding to the Chapter-house, at the personal Installation of a Knight-Subject, and other particulars relating to that Ceremony, will extend hither, both as to order and circumstances; and there needs no further instruction here, but to look back to the Chap. 12. Sect. 4. Discourse thereupon: Nevertheless, this general rule is to be born in mind, That the place of a Stranger-Prince's Proctor here, is Collect. W. le N. Cl. next after the Provincial-Kings (unless the Proctor of a Knight-Subject happen to intervene) and Collect. W. le N. Cl. before the junior Knight-Companion (unless a Knight-Subject Elect pass then in the Pro|ceeding) of which we have an instance at the Installation of the Dukes of Lib. R. p. 29 Bruns|wick and Chevereux, and the Earl of Dorset by their Proctors, but the Earls of Salisbury, Carlisle, and Holland, with Viscount Andover, in person, an. 1. Car. 1. when the Proceeding was ordered as followeth.

MS. penes Edw. Fau|conbridge. gen First, two Waiters of the Soveraign's Hall in their Livery Coats, bearing white Rods.
Alms-Knights.
Prebends of the Colledge.
Officers of Arms.
Proctors to the absent Elect-Knights.
Elect-Knights in person.
Knights-Companions.

Black-Rod.
Register.
Garter.
Chancellor.
Prelate.

Soveraign's Lieutenant.
Courtiers and Gentlemen in the Rear.

Only in the single case of Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, an. 3. Iac (as an extraordinary respect and honor) his Proxie went in the Proceeding to the Chapter-house, MS. fol. penes E. W. G. fol. 146. b. next before the Soveraign's Lieutenant.
As we had an example before, of a Proctor to a Knight-Subject, who past in this Proceeding before the Alms-Knights and Officers of Arms, namely, Sir Henry Sidney, Deputy to the Earl of Warwick, an. 5. Eliz. so here (in the case of a Stran|ger) the Viscount Hereford, Proxie to the Duke of Holstien, Lib. C. p. 37. installed the 15. of December, an. 3. Eliz. who went in the Proceeding to the Chapter-house before the Officers of Arms also: which Proceeding was ordered in this manner.

Collect. W. l N. Cl. Gentlemen, and Knights.
The Proctor, and Ambassador of Holstein together.
Officers of Arms.
Register and Garter.
Lord Hastings Commissioners.
Lord Paget Commiccioners.

If the Proxie of a Stranger pass in the Proceeding which the Soveraign, or his Lieutenant, or Commissioners make to the Chapter-house, then doth he for the most part give his attendance in the Presence-Chamber, or in that Room, from whence the Lieutenant or the Commissioners do proceed, and there joineth himself thereunto.
But sometimes the Commissioners, after their setting forth (as an act of grand respect) have taken the Proxie's Lodgings by the way, and there received him

into the Proceeding. Instances in this, are first Prince Henry, Lieutenant at the Installation of Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, who proceeded from the Ex eod. MS. penes eund. E. W. G. loco citato. Presence-Chamber, down to the Deans House (where the said King's Proxie lodg|ed) and Ex eod. MS. penes eund. E. W. G. loco citato. received him at the Door, from whence the Lieutenant pass'd to the Chapter-house. And at the Installation of the Duke of Wirtemberg, Lib. C. p. 153. 19. April an. 2 Iac. R. the Commissioners proceeded from their Ex. MS. praed. Lodgings (having the Alms-Knights and Officers of Arms before them) unto the Dean's House, where Ex. MS. praed. Grave van Eveston his Proctor likewise lodged; and from whence to the Chapter-house, the now full Proceeding passed.
We observe, that the Proxies of Strangers have not always gone in the Pro|ceeding, but sometimes stayed at their Lodging in the Castle, till the Commissio|ners were ready to send for them into the Chapter-house. And thus it was at the Installation of the French King Charles the Ninth, for on the MS. penes  D. N. f. 25. 16. of Ianuary, an. 8. Eliz. in the morning (at the Earl of Leicester's Lodgings in the Castle) the other three Commissioners met, where they and the three inferior Officers of the Order, robed themselves, and went thence to the Proxie's Lodging; and hav|ing a while conferred with him, took leave and MS. penes  D. N. f. 25. proceeded to the Chapter-house. After some time of consulation there, they Ex Collect. A. V. W. sent out Garter to the Proctor, with desire to repair to them, who, upon the delivery of the message, was forthwith conducted by Ex Collect. A. V. W. Garter (attended with the Earl of Southampton, the Lords Herbert and Grey, and many others) to the Chapter-house door; where being arrived, the Earls of Sussex and Leicester (being the two senior Commissioners) received him between them.
Sometimes the Proxies have past privately to the East-Isle of St. George's Chap|pel, and there rested, before the Soveraign and Knights-Companions went ito the Chapter-house (or proceeded into the Choire, without entring thereinto, for o it hath sometimes hapned) as did the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Earl of Cleveland, and Marquess Dorchester, Proxies for Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, and Henry Prince of Orange, an. 4. Car. 1. The like did the Lib. R. p. 84. Earl of Dover Proxie to Charles Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, an. 9. Car. 1, and of late, Sir George Carteret, Proxie to Christian Prince of Denmark, an. 15. Car. 2. So also the Earls of Carlisle and Winchelsey, Pro|ctors to Charles King of Sweden, and Iohn George Prince Elector of Saxony, an. 23. Car. 2.


SECT. IX. The Ceremonies performed therein.
WHen the Proceeding hath arrived at the Chapter-house door, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions (or the Lieutenant and his Assistants, or Com|missioners) with the Officers of the Order before them, enter to hold their Con|sultation: but first the Stranger's Proctor is Lib. N. p. 316. intreated to stay without, until his Deputation or Letters of Procuration be read, to the end they may understand the elect thereof.
To this purpose we find it also MS. in Offic. Arm. [H. 2.] fol. 8. b. directed, (under an ancient hand) that where any Knight is installed by his Deputy, he ought to stay without the Vestry (or Chapter-house) door, until he be brought in by two Knights-Companions: Hereupon the Collect. A. V. W. Lord Pagit, one of the Commissioners for installation of the Duke of Savoy, when the Proceeding was come to the Chapter-house door, acquainted his Proxie with this Custom and Injunction, and desired him to walk aside, which he accordingly did.
The East-Isle behind the High Altar, is the MS. fol. pe|nes E. W. G. accustomed place for the Proxies to walk or repose themselves in, till they be called into the Chapter; as it is

also for the Deputies of Knights-Subjects, where Chairs and Cushens are ready prepared for this occasion.
The first thing done,1. Reading the Commissions. after the Chapter is opened, is Collect. W. le N. Cl. Reading the Commission for Installation, by the Register of the Order (but if the Soveraign be present at the Installation, no Commission issues) and next the Letters of Procuration; this being as the most proper, so the most accustomed place for this act.
Nevertheless, at the Installation of the French King Francis the First (we know not by what (but certainly a most unusual) compliance, the Autogr. in Bibl. Ha|ton. Commissio|ners went from the Chapter-house, after they had called in and invested the Earl of Oxford (then also present to receive his Installation) with his Surcoat and Hood, unto the Deans House, where the Proctor was lodged, and in the great Chamber there, Autogr. in Bibl. Ha|ton. shewed him the Soveraign's Commission, and in it the authori|ty for admitting him into the Stall of his Lord and Master: Whereupon the Proctor Autogr. in Bibl. Ha|ton. presented them with his Procuration, by which he was impowered to take the possession of his Principal's Stall, and further to do and perform all such Ceremonies, as to the Order of the Garter did appertain, which Instrument was forthwith read before them, by the Register. This Ceremony being end|ed, they all proceeded to the Chappel; where entring, they waved their return into the Chapter-house, and pass'd directly into the Choire.
After some time of consultation in the Chapter-house,2. Receiving the Proxie in|to the Chap|ter-house. the Proxie is sent for in thither by Garter, who conducts him to the Chapter-house door; and his Collect. W. l N. Cl. Re|ception there by the Commissioners, is after the same manner, and with the same circumstances of respect and ceremony, as is used to the Knight-Elect, or to his Proxie. But whether he ought to enter into the Chapter-house, or be admitted any further than the door or Porch thereof, (and to pass thence immediately into the Choire) hath been. some question; because the practice seems to have been sometimes one way, and sometimes another.
All that we find to prohibite his entrance thereinto, is an expression in the Lib. N. p. 31. short Ceremonial of Installation of Strangers by Proxie, entred in the Blak-Book, where it saith, That the Mantle is to be laid on the Proctor's right shoul|der in the Porch of the Chapter-house, Ibid. because he is not to enter into it.
And there are two instances, where the Mantle was delivered to the Proctor at the Chapter-house door, from whence some may infer, that the Practice also of those times was agreeable to the aforesaid direction; namely, that of the Pro|ctor of the French King Ex Aogr. in Bibl. Haton. Francis the First, an. 19. H. 8. where Ex Aogr. in Bibl. Haton. Garter stood at the Chapter-house door, with the Mantle, and as the Proceeding passed by pre|sented it to the two Senior Knights-Companions (the Marquess of Exeter and Viscount Lysle) who placed it upon the Proctor's right arm, and of the Proctor to Ex Collect. A. V. W. Emanuel Duke of Savoy, an. 1  2. Ph.  M. who entred not into the Chap|ter-house, but had the Mantle of his Principal, laid on his arm and spread upon his shoulder at the Ex Collect. A. V. W. door.
But these instances (if duly weighed) cannot properly or with advantage, be alledged to prove the assertion, because the affairs relating to both, received dispatch in the Proctor's Lodging, a little before, and where the Proctor himself was present; which Convocation or meeting of the Commissioners and Proctor, cannot be called less than a Chapter (though not held in the Chapter-house) from the Transactions which pass'd therein, namely producing the Soveraign's Com|mission, and the Proctor's Instrument of Deputation, which were both read before them by the Register, and the Proctor accordingly admitted, which being finish|ed, nothing referring to the present occasions, required their passing into the Chapter-house, or remained to be done till they came into the Choire
But the general practice runs strong on the contrary side, for we find, that the Proxie for Lib. C. p. 5.  MS. pe|ne W. D. N. f. 25. Charles the Ninth of France, an. 8. Eliz. was met at the Chapter-house door, by the Earls of Sussex and Leicester, who took him Lib. C. p. 5.  MS. pe|ne W. D. N. f. 25. in thither be|tween them; where after the Register had read as well the Soveraign's Commission for Installation, as his Lib. C. p. 5.  MS. pe|ne W. D. N. f. 25. Letters of Procuration, and the Commissioners had admit|ted him Deputy for the said King, they all came forth and laid Lib. C. p. 5.  MS. pe|ne W. D. N. f. 25. his Principal's Mantle on his right arm and shoulder, the Lib. C. p. 5.  MS. pe|ne W. D. N. f. 25. Train whereof was born by the Earl of Southampton, assisted by the Lord Herbert of Cardiff.
Again it is remembred, an. 25. Eliz. that Garter conducted the Proxie of Ex Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 30. sub finem. Fre|derick the Second King of Denmark, to the Chapter-house door; and at that place the Earl of Leicester and Lord Hunsdon, received and led him in. So also was Christian the Fourth's Proxie MS. fol. penes E. W. G. fol. 151. a. led in thither, by the Earls of Nottingham and Dorset; and an. 10. Iac. R. MS. fol. penes E. W. G. fol. 151. a. Lodowick Count Nassaw, Proctor to Maurice Prince of Orange, was MS. fol. penes E. W. G. fol. 151. a. called into the Chapter-house and there MS. fol. penes E. W. G. fol. 151. a. left, while the Soveraign and Knights-Companions proceeded into the Choire: And so in like manner was Sir George Cartret Vice-Chamberlain, Proctor to Christian Prince of Denmark, an. 15. Car. 2. and the Proctors to the King of Sweden and Duke of Saxony, an. 23. Car. 2.
Nor are these instances, and the practice in this latter case (in truth) dero|gatory to the Statutes, which though it prohibite the Proxies entrance into the Chapter-house, yet doth not this Prohibition extend to any time before, but after the Ceremony of Installation is finished; for the Article of the Statutes having first directed the delivery of the Mantle to the Proxie, and next the assumption of his Principals Stall, in these words, Dictus Procurator installatus, it immedi|ately subjoins E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. videsis H. 5. Stat. Art. 20.  H. 8. Stat. Art. 21. that from thenceforth (namely the time of installation) he shall neither wear the Mantle, nor enter into the Chapter, nor have any voice there, by virtue of any power granted unto him: all which are prohibitions, plainly relate|ing to the future, and after such time as the Ceremonies of Installation are past, and not to any time preceding.
And it seems the Law hath been thus understood, in regard the greater stream of Practice hath gone along with it; for not only the Proxies of Stran|gers (as before is observed) but generally of Knights-Subjects, have been called into the Chapter-house, and there received the Mantle before they proceeded in|to the Choire.
3. Delivering him the Man|tle.The Ceremony of delivering the Mantle to the Proctor is performed by the Ibid.  loc. sequent. Soveraign, his Deputy, or the Commissioners (Garter presenting it to them) and the manner thereof was heretofore, by putting it upon the Proxies Ibid.  loc. sequent. right arm, Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 19. or shoulder, in the name of his Lord and Master, there to hold it until the end of Divine Service.
But as there hath hapned some doubt, touching the entry or not entry of Proctors into the Chapter-house, before they proceeded to Installation; so likewise here, concerning the receiving of the Mantle, viz. whether in the Chapter-house, or Stall allotted to their Principal, of which there are Examples.
That part of the Article of the Statutes of Institution which concerns this point runs thus, That the Mantle E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. tempore Installationis Procuratoris, shall be laid up|on his Arm. c. but whether this shall be strictly limited to that instant of time, when the Proctor is brought to the Stall of his Principal, or with some greater latitude construed, to be during the time of Installation (including the very first action, or beginning of the Ceremony of Installation, namely, the being called to the Chapter-house door, and entrance into it) is the question; be|cause there are instances in both, but the latter is more warrantabale by the Statutes and general practice.
The 21. Article in King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, being much more large in description, and passing further in setting down the Ceremonies of Installation, than any of the former (the particulars of which, as in the rest, so to this point, we take to be as well placed in a true series and order of action) having men|tioned the Soveraign (or his Deputy's) laying the Mantle on the Proxies Arm; it immediately follows (as the very next thing to be performed in course of time) That afterward he shall be led by two Knights, from the Chapter-house door, unto the Stall, and there being shall make his Oath, and be installed; but it saith nothing of laying the Mantle on the arm of the Proctor, now at the instant of installation in the Choire; for that was directed to be done before. It is also recorded in the Black-Book, where the order of this Ceremony is more fully and particularly set down, That Lib. N. p: 316 Garter shall take the Mantle upon his Arms, and deliver it to both the Knights-Commissioners, and that they (according to the tenor of the Statutes) shall lay it on the Proctors right shoulder, in the Porch of the Chapter-house.
Besides which, and the ancient usage of receiving the Mantle in the Chapter-house, or at the Chapter-house door, either before or in the Proceeding to the Choire, by the Proctors of the French King Francis the First, of Emanuel Duke of Savoy, Ex Collect. A. V. W. of Charles the Ninth the French King, and Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 30. Frederick the Second King of Denmark; we have likewise the Examples of later times, as that of the Proctor for Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, an. 4. Car. 1. who Lib. R. p. 40. proceeded into the Choire with the Mantle upon his arm; and that at the Installation of Charles Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, the Ibid. p. 83. 5. of November, an. 9. Car. 1. where the Earl of Dover his Proxie bare the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Mantle on his right shoulder into the Choire, and Garter carried the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Collar of the Order, before him, on a Velvet Cushen.
But there are several modern instances, where the Mantle hath been born to the Choire (and sometimes the Collar of the Order with it) not by the Proctor but by Garter before him, and delivered in his Principal's Stall; as in the Pro|ceeding of the Proxie for the Duke of Wirtemberg, an. 2. Iac. when MS penes E. W. G. f. 145. b. after he had taken the Oath and was led into the Duke's Stall (not before) was the Robe laid upon his arms and so was it done in the following year, at the Installation of Ib. f. 146. b. Christian the Fourth King of Denmark.
So also at the Installation of Er fol. 151. Maurice Prince of Orange, an. 10. Iac. Garter per|formed the like service for him, and in the very same manner, and after he had taken the Oath appointed, the Mantle was laid upon his arm. And lastly, MS. penes Edw. Faucon|bridge gen. after the Proxies of the Duke of Brunswick and Chevereux, had taken the Oath, not only the Mantles but Collars were placed on their arms.
Which manner hath so far prevailed, as to be continued in practice since the Restauration of the present Soveraign; for at the Installations of the Prince of Denmark, Charles King of Sweden, and Duke of Saxony, Garter carried the Mantle on a Cushen before their Proctors into the Choire, nor was it laid on their arms, till they had taken their Oaths, and so laid, that the Cross of St. George might be conspicuous.


SECT. X. Of the Proceeding to the Choire.
BUT let us pass on to the Proxie's proceeding into the Choire, concerning which, King Henry the Eighth's Statutes direct, (as is remembred a little before upon another point) Art: 21 That he shall be accompanied and led by two Knights-Companions of the Order, from the door of the Chapter-house, unto the Stall as|signed to his Principal; agreeable to which is that passage in the short Memorial of Installation entred in the Black-Book, That as soon as the two Knights have placed the Mantle on his arm, Pag. 316. they shall take him between them, and conduct him to the Stall of his Lord: and thus assisted have all Proxies proceeded to the Choire.
But in relation to the order of the rest of the Proceeding, it will be necessary to exhibit a Scheme or two.
The ordinary Proceeding into the Choire, the Installation being celebrated when the Soveraign's Lieutenant holds the Feast of St. George.

Alms-Knights.Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Verger of the Chappel.
Prebends of the Colledge.
Officers of Arms.

Black-Rod.
Register.
Garter.

The Proxie between two Knights-Assistants.
The Lieutenant having his Train born.

The Proceeding into the Choire, at the Installation (by Commission) of Charles the Ninth the French King, an. 8. Eliz.

MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 25. b. vide etiam Col|lect. A. V. W.Gentlemen, attendants on the Soveraign's Commissioners.
Gentlemen, attendants upon the Proctor.
Verger of the Chappel.
Alms-Knights.
Officers of Arms.

Black-Rod.
Register.
Garter.

Viscount Mountague the two Iunior Commissioners.
Lord Clinton the two Iunior Commissioners.
The Proctor, between the Earl of Sussex and Earl of Leicester (the two senior Commissioners) his Train being born by the Earl of Southampton, assisted by the Lord Herbert.

Since the Custom of receiving the Collar in the Chapter-house was laid aside, if the Soveraign (or his Lieutenant) was present at an installation of a Stranger, so soon as the Mantle was delivered to the Proctor, or (as of late) that he hath been admitted, according to the purport of his Deputation, the Soveraign (or his Lieutenant) proceeds to the Choire with the Knights-Companions present, and leaves the Proxie behind him in the Chapter-house, and after he and the Knights-Companions have taken their Stalls, directs two of the Knights-Companions to descend; who taking the Alms-Knights, Officers of Arms, and the three inferior Officers of the Order before them, pass to the Chapter-house, and bring thence the Proxie to his Installation.
Thus was it done an. 4. Car. 1. at the Installation of the King of Sweden, when Lib. R. p. 40. vide MS. penes Edw. Faucon|bridge gen. William Earl of Penbroke, and Philip Earl of Montgomery, proceeded forth of the Choire, and introduced the Earl of Cleveland, Proctor to the said King: In like manner, the Lib. R. p. 84. Earls of Penbroke and Arundel went out to conduct in the Earl of Dover, Proctor to Charles Prince Palatine of the Rhyne.
So also were the Duke of York and Prince Rupert sent out, to introduce Sir George Crterett Proctor to the Prince of Denmark an. 15. Car. 2. and the Earl of Carlisle Proctor to the King of Sweden, an. 23. Car. 2. And where there are more than one Stranger, at the same time to be installed by Proxie, there the two next senior Knights pass out, as did the Lib. R. p. 40. Earls of Kelly and Salisbury, who brought in Sir Dudley Carleton, Proctor to the Prince of Orange, an. 4. Car. 1. and the Dukes of Ormond and Buckingham, the Earl of Winchelsey, Proctor to the Duke of Saxony an. 23. Car. 2.
In this Proceeding the Proxie goes bare-headed, for so did the before men|tioned Collect. W. le N. Cl. Earl of Dover, Sir George Carterett, the Earl of Carlisle, and the Earl of Winchelsey.


SECT. XI. The Ceremonies of Installation.
WHen the Proceeding hath entred the Choire, and Collect. W. le N. Cl. paid the accustomed Reverences, both towards the Altar and the Soveraign's Stall, and the Alms-Knights, Officers of Arms, and of the Order, taken their usual Stations; the two Commissioners (Knights-Assistants or Knights-Companions) and Proctor make their Reverences together, and then is he conducted by them into the Collect. W. le N. Cl. lower Stalls, directly before the Stall appointed for his Principal, the foresaid Officers of the Order standing below in the Choire.
If the Installation pass by more than two Commissioners, then the two Collect. W. le N. Cl. senior Knights-Commissioners bring him to the foresaid lower Stalls, and perform the Ceremonies belonging to his Installation, while the rest of the Commissioners at their entrance, take their Station Collect. W. le N. Cl. below in the Choire, before their proper Stalls, and there Stand until the Installation be finished. And the like do the Lieute|nants Assistants, except the two senior that are employed in the Ceremonies of Installation.
The Proxie thus introduced into the lower Stalls,Taking the Oath. Sedere De|putato non li|cet. Lib. R. p. 40 circa finem. stands there while the Register Collect. W. le N. Cl. pronounceth the Oath of the Order to him, after whom he Lib. R. p. 41. repeateth the words distinctly; during all which time he Ex Collect. R. C. Cl. p. 32. layeth his hand upon the New Testament, and lastly kisseth the Book.
The ancient Oath, Art. 24. appointed by the Statutes of Institution, to be taken by a Stranger's Proxie, is short, absolute, and without limitation or exception, and in all points the same with that, which a Knight-Companion himself took, at his Per|sonal Installation, viz. Art. 24. Faithfully to observe to the utmost of his power, the Statutes of the Order.
But afterwards the Soveraigns and Fellows of those other Orders of Knight-hood, whereof Kings of Free-Princes are Soveraigns, (as the Golden-Fleece, Mon|sieur St. Michael, and the Annuciade) before their admition into the Order of the Garter, sued for, and obtained the allowance of some relative exceptions or provisoes, to be added to the foresaid Oath; which commonly were such as stood with the interest of their Religion, their great state or dignity, or prece|dent obligation to the Orders they had before accepted.
There is a Precedent entred in the Pag. 311. Appendix, Num. CXXXVIII. Black-Book, of the Oath to be taken by an Emperor; whereby he is obliged to Pag. 311. Appendix, Num. CXXXVIII. promise upon his Royal word, and give his Faith, upon his honor and the holy Evangelists, Pag. 311. Appendix, Num. CXXXVIII. That he will faithfully and truly, to the utmost of his power, observe the Statutes of this most Noble Order, and that particularly in every branch and Article thereof; Pag. 311. Appendix, Num. CXXXVIII. at least so far as they can or ought to be observed by him, and so far as they shall not be contrary or deroga|tory to those, whereunto he hath before given his name and sworn, and saving all other conditions agreed on.
Besides this, there are also two other Precedents lodged in the Pag. 312. Ib. Num. CXXXIX, Annals, the one of the form of the Oath, as it is fitted for the Proctor of an Emperor or a King; the other for the Proctor of a Prince, Arch-Duke, and every other inferiour de|gree to a Knight, including him also.
By the first of these, the Pag. 312. Ib. Num. CXXXIX, Proctor is to oblige himself in the name and behalf of his Lord,Pag. 312. Ib. Num. CXXXIX, and with a sincere heart and true faith shall promise and swear, that his said Lord shall well and faithfully fulfil and observe, all and every the Statutes, Ordinances, and Decrees of this Order, according to the force, form, and effect; any way thereunto belonging, saving the conditions before agreed on between him and the Soveraign. By the second he is Ibid. Num. CXL. also in the name and behalf of his Lord, with a real heart and sincere faith, to promise and swear, That his said Lord shall faithfully observe and fulfil the Statutes, and every several Branch and Article thereof, according to the force, form, and effect of the same, Ibid. Num. CXL. at least so far as the Soveraign's Dispensation shall limit and appoint. But we have not found any of these Precedents made use of, because being rather too general, they have other|wise and more particularly fitted the Oath to the present interest and occasion, at least so far, as they could obtain the Soveraign to condescend unto.
And hereupon Philip King of Castile and Leon (Soveraign of the Order of the Golden Fleece) when he received a Personal Installation at Windesor, an. 22. H. 7. though the Oath he took was absolute and without limitation, viz. Lib N. p. 184 Append. Num. CXLI. To observe all the Statutes of the Order of the Garter, according as they were contained in the Book then lately sent unto, and accepted by him; as faithfully, as if every one of the Ar|ticles were then rehearsed unto him, and to fulfil them from Article to Article, at faithfully and readily as he looked for help from God and all his Saints. Yet never|theless, soon after he obtained the Soveraign's free and full Dispensation, in these two things only; first, Lib. N. loc. cit. that the use of the Collar, and the other Ensigns of the Order, might be left to his pleasure; and secondly, that he might not be obliged to be present at future Chapters.
Not long after, some other Exceptions were admitted, but such were obtain|ed with very great difficulty, and much debate had between the Soveraign's Council, and the Stranger-Princes Ambassadors, lest otherwise the dignity and re|putation of the Order should (instead of being kept up) be lessened; because, where the forbearance or omission of any circumstance, either in the Investi|ture or Ceremony of Installation, hath been yielded unto, it hath sometimes or other been taken notice of, and brought into Precedent, to the prejudice of the Order. Therefore great circumspection ought to be taken, in yielding to the omission of any part of so grand a Ceremony: And the standing upon terms hath not been without good success, since known, that though other Interests (different or contrary to the Soveraign's) have sometimes assaulted Strangers desirous of this Honor, yet their present necessities of obtaining his Friendship, by receiving this Order, have caused them (though with some un|willingness) to accept of this obliging Tye from him.
The Exceptions that were allowed to Ferdinand Arch-Duke of Austria, when he took the Oath at his Investiture at Noremberg, the 8. of December, an. 15. H. 8. were these that follow.
Append. Num. CXLII.Not to wear the Garter and Collar, but at some certain times in the year, at his own pleasure.
That if he were not in place convenient, to go to hear Mass on St. George's day, he should cause a Priest to say it in his presence.
Not to be obliged, if busied in weighty Affairs, to wear the Garter, Collar, or whole Habit of the Order on St. George's day, longer than during Divine Service: Nevertheless he promised, if he could not then wear it, for a whole day together he would willingly wear it upon some other solemn day, within the compass of the year.
And much to the same purpose is that Proviso, added in the Oath of Emanuel Duke of Savoy, taken the 6. of November, an. 1.  2. Pb. Mar. viz. To Ibid. Num. CXLIV: observe the Statutes of the Order, so far forth as they might be conveniently observed by him, and were not inconsistent with those things, wherein he had formerly bound himself by Faith and Oath; yet not to be obliged to wear the Garter and Habit of the Or|der, but when he should see good, and have convenience so to do, and never else.
Of another nature were the Exceptions which Francis the First of France pro|cured to be admitted into the Oath, taken by Adrian Tercelin his Proctor, an. 19. H. 8. viz. Ibid. Num. CXLV. To observe the Statutes of the Order of the Garter, so far as they were consistent with, and not contrary or prejudicial to the Statutes of the Order of St. Michael, and other Orders, which his Principal had before taken of other Princes.
And like to this, was the Oath of Charles the Ninth, adding only an excepti|on of any thing contrary to his royal dignity, which was received from him in the Church of the Colledge of St. Iohns at Lyons in France, the 24. of Iune in the morning after Mass, an. 5. Eliz. namely, Ibid. Num. CXLVI. To observe the Statutes of the Gar|ter, so far forth as they were not contrary or derogatory (1.) to his greatness Royal, (2.) the Statutes of St. Michael, nor (3.) to any other Oath, which he had be|fore taken.
Neer to these, were the Provisoes allowed in the Oath made by Maximilian the Emperor at Vienna, the 4. of Ianuary an. 10. Eliz. Ibid. Num. CXLVII. To observe the Statutes, so far forth as they were not contrary or derogatory to his (1.) Greatness and Ma|jesty Imperial, nor to the (2.) Statutes of any other Order, nor any (3.) Oath which he had before taken.
But by the French King Henry the Third, because now our Church was re|formed, the Exception of the Catholick Religion, was thought of consequence to be gained from the Soveraign, and thereupon the Proviso in the Oath, which he took in the Chappel of the Augustins in Paris, an. 27. Eliz. runs thus, Ibid. Num. CXLIX. so far forth as the Statutes of the Order should not be found contrary (1.) to the Catho|lick Religion, his (2.) Greatness and Majesty Royal, and (3.) the Statutes and Ordinances of the blessed Holy Ghost, and St. Michael.
And this was the form of the Oath word for word, which Ibid. Num. CL. Henry the Fourth of France took at Roane, an. 38. Eliz. And when Monsieur de Chastes came over

four years after, to be Installed for him, viz. an. Lib. C. p. 14 42. Eliz. his Oath then taken, referred to the Appendix, Num. CLI. form of the foresaid Oath, which Henry the Fourth himself had before made, and upon the Conditions agreed on, between the Soveraign and his Master.
Such like Exceptions were allowed, in the Oath of Gustavus Adolphus and Charles Kings of Sweden; Ibid. Num. CXIX.  CXX. To observe the Articles of this Order in all things, which should not be any way derogatory to the Religion by him profest, his Dignity and Majesty Royal, or contrary to any other Articles or Orders.
Frederick the Second King of Denmark at his reception of the Habit of the Order, Lib. C. p. 90. took in effect the usual Oath, and to observe the Statutes of the Order, Num. CLII. so that they were not derogatory to those he had before sworn unto, or other con|ditions whereunto he had been formerly obliged: And yet I find that his Proctor, Lib. C p. 89. an. 25. Eliz. obtained a larger latitude both in point of Religion, and particular Interest, being admitted to take the Oath with these reservations, Append. Num. CLIII. so far forth as the Statutes of the Order, concerned the said King, and should be agreeable to the Word of God. And the same Oath was taken by Sir Philip Sidney, Proctor to Iohn Count Palatine of the Rhyne; But Lib. R. p. 160 Henry Ramel, Proctor to Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, an. 3. Iac. R. took it with the salvo of those Append. Num. CLIV. Condi|tions and Covenants, wherein his Master had been already pre-ingaged.
But the Princes of the Empire have allowed them another manner of Excepti|on, as appears by that Oath of Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, an. 1. Iac. R. viz. Ibid. Num, CLV. To observe the Statutes, so far as they were not inconsistent with the Constitutions of the sacred Roman Empire, and faith which he owed to the Roman Emperor and his Empire.
And with a like Salvo did Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhyne (personal|ly installed at Windesor, Lib. C. p. 178 an. 10. Iac. R.) take this Oath, viz. MS. penes E. W. G. f. 151. Salvis sacri Impe|rii constitutionibus.
But as touching the Proxies of such Strangers, not Soveraign Princes, but Sub|jects; the form of their Oath is usually framed (by the indulgence and dispen|sation of the Soveraign) with just limitations, not only relative to their obliga|tion to the Statutes of any other Order, which they had before accepted, or any Oath formerly taken, but sometimes to the fidelity and allegiance, which they owe to their Soveraign Lord and Prince. And hereupon the Earl of Newblank's Deputy, an. 25. H. 8. was sworn to the observation of the Statutes, MS. so far forth as they were not contradictory to the Statutes of the Order of St. Michael, his Prin|cipal being one of the Fraternity of that Order.
After the MS. in Offic. Arm. [H. 2.] fol. 8, b. Oath hath been administred to a Strangers Proxie (with such or the like exceptions before set down) the two Knights-Commissioners Collect. W. le N. Cl. pass up with him into the higher row of Stalls, and so to that assigned for his Principal; where being arrived, they take the Mantle from Garter, and lay it upon the Proctor's left arm, with the Scutcheon of St. George uppermost; for so was it or|dered to be born, in a Chapter held at the Feast of St. George the 28. of May, an. 23. Car. 2. and to be a standing Rule for the future; and the Proxies to both the King of Sweden and Duke of Saxony did so observe it the same day, at and after Evening Service.
The next thing that follows is the act and ceremony of Installation, which is breifly thus; first, the Commissioners, who conducted the Proxie into the Choire, jointly embrace him; next, the Proxie makes his Ex Colle. A. V. W. double Reverence, and lastly the Commissioners, according to the custom of Installations, Lib. N. p. 316 set him down in his Principal's Stall, where he hath used to remain during the time of Divine Service.
But by the foresaid Order in Chapter held the 28. of May, an. 23. Car. 2. the Proxies are prohibited for Ex eod. Lib. Collect. H. de Vic. loco cit. sitting in their Stalls during the time of Divine Ser|vice, but on the contrary directed to stand before them, in the uppermost Row of Stalls (Lib. R. p. 4. uncovered) holding their Mantles on their right arms until it be ended.
And thus this great Ceremony of Installation with all its Circumstances being finished, the two Knights (between whom the Proxie proceeded to Installation)

descend into the Choire, and stand before their own Stalls, and after a while ascend up into them with usual Reverences, but the senior Commissioners first; and then be|gins the celebration of Divine Service.


SECT. XII. The Proctor's Offring.
THE Proctor having now received the possession of his Principal's Stall, performs his part in all the following Ceremonies, while he stays in the Choire, as if his Lord and Master were present, until he hath surrendred up his Mantle; the chiefest of which is, the Offring of Gold and Silver, and this he doth according to the MS. in Offic. Arm. [H. 2.] fol. 8. b. degree and seniority of his Principal's Stall, in case the In|stallation be in the morning.
If the Installation be celebrated when St. George's Feast is held by the Sove|raign's Lieutenant, the Proxie ought not to offer, until the Lieutenant have first offered for the Soveraign. And in case the Lieutenant's Stall be higher than the Stranger's for whom the Proctor is installed, then the Lieutenant also offereth for himself before him.
As to the order observed in Offring by the Proctor, he doth it with all the circumstances of Ceremony, as if his Lord were present.
First, when the Knights-Companions descend from their Stalls (which Ceremo|ny begins with the junior Knight) he also descends in his turn and course, and placeth himself below in the Choire, before the Stall of his Principal.
Then in case he have an opposite Knight-Companion present, he joins himself unto him, and so proceeds up towards the Altar to the Offring, taking the Offi|cers of Arms before him; but if not, he then proceeds alone without him, having his Train born, and a Knight-Companion, or some other great personage, sutable to his degree, attending on his left hand, to give him the Offring, with Carpets and Cushens spread to kneel upon at the time of Offring; after whom the Lib. N. p. 316. rest of the Knights-Companions present offer, every one according to the seniority of their Stalls.
The Proctor to Francis the First of France, was Ex Autogr. in Bibl. Coton. served in all respects, as if himself had been there present, and at the time of the Offring, Ex Autogr. in Bibl. Coton. Sir Richard Sands (who was of greatest quality there present excepting the Knights-Com|panions) gave him his Offring, Ex Autogr. in Bibl. Coton. after whom the residue of the Knights-Compa|nions offered in their due order.
Charles the Ninth's Proctor proceeded up to the Offring first, (no Feast of St. George being then solemnized, and consequently no Lieutenant to offer for the Soveraign) with the MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 25. b. three inferior Officers of the Order before him; he had his MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 25. b. Train carried up, and the MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 25. b. Earl of Sussex (the principal Commissioner) follow|ing, delivered him the Offring; for whom also a MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 25. b. Carpet and Cushen was laid, and assay thereof taken by Mr. Monk, Servant to the Earl of Leicester, MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 25. b. instead of a Gentleman Usher, with the assistance of a Yeoman Usher.
Henry Ramel, Deputy to Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, was usher|ed up to the Offring by MS. penes E. W. G. f. 146. b. Garter, and the Black-Rod (MS. penes E. W. G. f. 146. b. still bearing the Mantle of his Principal on his arm) and having his MS. penes E. W. G. f. 146. b. Train born up by a Gentleman.
When the Proxie hath offered, he returns back to his Lords Stall, in the same manner as do the Knights-Companions, that is, by the Ex. Collect. W. le N. Cl. East end of the Stalls (not through the body of the Choire) and so along till he arrive at the Stall of his Principal, as did the foresaid Ex eod. MS. penes E. W. G. loco cit. Henry Ramel.
Divine Service being finished, and like honor in all respects shewed to the Proxie, as would have been done to his Principal, had he received a Personal

Installation; the Poxie ought to remain in his Masters Stall, until his next ju|nior Knight have left his Stall, and then is he to descend after him, and stand below before his Stall, until his turn come to join himself again to the Proceed|ing, and so to pass out of the Choire.
Where note, that sometimes the Proctor hath been received at his coming down from his Lords Stall by the two Knights-Commissioners, who installed him; for so were the Ex Collect, R C. Cl. p. 31. Proctors of Frederick the Second King of Denmark, and of Iohn Count Palatine of the Rhyne, between Ex Collect, R. C. Cl. p. 31. whom they also proceeded to the Chapter-house door, in the same manner as they were conducted to the Choire.
But rather the Proctor ought, in this his return, to take the place of his Prin|cipal (as he did at the Offring, and which in truth is his right) as we find it allowed to the Proctor of Francis the First of France, who wentEx Autogr. in Bibl. Coton. behind alone, in his Principal's place, and followed the Knights-Commissioners from the Choire, to the place where he lodged.
In like manner Viscount Hereford, Proxie to the Duke of Holstien, an. 3. Eliz. who though in his Proceeding to the Choire, he went before the Officers of Arms, yet in his return from Installation, pass'd Collect. W. l N. Cl. behind the Knights-Commissio|ners, in the room and place of the Duke, and the Ambassador of Holstien fol|lowed him, because the said Duke's Stall was higher than any of the Commissio|ners, as many be seen by the following Scheam.

Alms-Knights.Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Officers of Arms.
Garter and Register.
Lord Loughborough Commissioners.
Lord Pagit Commissioners.
The Proctor.
The Ambassador of Holstien, and Sir Henry Pagit.
Knights and other Gentlemen.

The like did the Proxie for Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, and Henry Prince of Orange, an. 4. Car. 1. who as they returned from the Choire, MS. pnes Edw. Facon|bridge held the rooms of their Principals, among the Knights-Companions in the Proceedings: So also the Proctor to Charles Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, in his Collect. W. le N. Cl. return; but was then commanded by the Soveraign (present in the Proceeding) to Lib. R. p. 8. put on his Hat, which he had kept off in all the preceeding parts of the Ceremony.
As the Proctor passeth along by the Chapter-house door, he hath usually here|tofore delivered up his Mantle there, and so is it directed in the Pag. 316. Black-Book of the Order; as did the Proctor to the French King Francis the First, an. 19. H. 8. So also the Duke of Savoy's Ex Collect. A. V. W. Proctor, an. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar. And at the same Collect. W. le N. Cl. place did the Verger receive the Mantle from the Duke of Holstein's Proctor an. 3. Eliz. But of later times when the Soveraign hath been present at the In|stallation, some Proxies have been permitted to go along in the Proceeding to the Presence-Chamber, covered, as were the Proxie to MS. penes Edw. Faucon|bridge. Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, to Lib. R. p. 85 Charles Count Palatine of the Rhyne, to Ex Lib Col|lect. praef. Hen de Vic p. 158. Charles King of Sweden (the Train of whose Mantle was born by Monsieur Leyonberg, the Swedish Resident) and to Iohn George Duke of Saxony, whose Train likewise was car|ried up by Mr. Richard Richaut, one of the Earl of Winhelsey's Gentlemen.



SECT. XIII. The Dinner.
WHen the Installation hath past in the morning, there hath usually been prepared a great Dinner at the Soveraign's charge; we shall need here only to mention such particulars as are peculiar to the Proxie of a Stranger, or different from the Instances set down in our discourse of this particular, in the Chap. 12. Sect. 10. Personal Installation of a Knight-Companion.
And first, Lib. N. p. 316. before Dinner (if the Installation pass by Commissioners) the Proxie (representing the State of his Principal) shall wash alone he shall sit at the chief place of the Table, and alone, and shall be served alone; but the other Knights-Commissioners shall sit at the end of the Table.
Thus was it observed at the Installation of Ex lib. vocat. Dalton. p. 105. b Ferdinand Arch-Duke of Austria, an. 14. H. 8. and of Ibid. p. 112. Francis the French King, an. 19. H. 8. for when the later of these was Installed, the Dinner was held at Ex. Autogr. in Bibl. Co|ton. the Deans-house, and his Ex. Autogr. in Bibl. Co|ton. Proctor washed alone, and sat down to Dinner in a Chair: nor did any of the Ex. Autogr. in Bibl. Co|ton. Knights-Commissioners sit at his Mess. The services were all performed to him in every particular, as Ex. Autogr. in Bibl. Co|ton. though his Principal had been present, saving his Ex. Autogr. in Bibl. Co|ton. Cloth of State. The Lord Ex. Autogr. in Bibl. Co|ton. Marquess of Exceter, and all the other Knights-Companions (having first washed) sat on both sides the same Table, yet beneath the Proctor, and in their whole Habits of the Order.
The Dinner was likewise prepared in the Dean's great Chamber, at the Instal|lation of Charles the Ninth the French King, whose Proctor was served with Wa|ter and a Towel by the MS. penes W. D. N. f. 6. Earl of Southampton, and Lord Herbert; Sir Iohn Rad|cliff performed the Office of MS. penes W. D. N. f. 6. Sewer, Henry Brooks alias Cobham Esq was MS. penes W. D. N. f. 6. Carver, and Mr. Francis Hervy, Cupbearer.
This Proctor had a MS. penes W. D. N. f. 6. Cloth of State allowed him, under which he sat at Din|ner, the Mantle lying by him all the while on a Stool and Cushen; at the MS. penes W. D. N. f. 6. Ta|bles end, on the Ex Collect. A. V. W. right hand, sat the four Commissioners in their Robes, being served Ex Collect. A. V. W. apart from the Proctor.
But if the Soveraign's Lieutenant be present, the Proctor dines at the same Ta|ble with him, and then a little before the second course is brought in, is the So|veraign's Stile proclaimed in MS. penes E. W. G. Latin, French, and English with usual Ceremony: but otherwise, only the Stile of the new Installed Prince, and but once.
The Stile and Titles of Christian the Fourth King of Denmark were proclaim|ed in MS. penes E. W. G. Latin, and of Maurice of Orange in MS. penes E. W. G. French.
Dinner being ended, all rise in MS penes W. D. N. fol. 26. order and wash; first the MS penes W. D. N. fol. 26. Proxie alone, and after him the Knights-Commissioners; and thence they accompany the Proctor to his Chamber, where having left him, they retire to their own Lodgings, and MS penes W. D. N. fol. 26. there put off their Habits.
The Proctor to Charles the Ninth took the Mantle of his Principal, on his arm in|to his Chamber, when he rose from Dinner; and MS penes W. D. N. fol. 26. there delivered it to Garter.
So soon as the Solemnity of Installation is over, the Proctor is to take care, that Garter forthwith set up the Atchievements of his Principal over his Stall, and fix the Plate of his Arms upon the back thereof; in memorial of the Honor done him, by this Ceremony of Inauguration into the most Noble and most Honorable Order of the Garter.
And sometimes we find the Proxie hath, upon his request, obtained an Instrument under the Sign manual of the Soveraign, and Seal of the Order, attesting his be|ing conducted to St. George's Chappel at Windesor, and placed in, and taken possession of the Seat assigned to his Principal, in whose name he hath also taken the Oath, attested by his subscription, and performed all the Ceremonies in due form as the Statutes direct; for so did the Append. Num. CLVI: Sieur de Chastes, Proctor to the French King Henry the Fourth, an. 42. Eliz.
In close of all, let us here remember, that the present King of Sweden, against his late Installation, caused both Gold and Silver Medals to be made in memory of that Solemnity, and to perpetuate the honor so received: Those of Gold were bestowed upon the Knights-Companions present, and other persons of quality, and those of Silver distributed among some of the Officers attending at the In|stallation, and others. The Devise was sutable to the occasion, and present in|terest of both Kings, as may be observed from the Representation here exhibited





CHAP. XVII. THE Duties and Fees PAYABLE BY THE KNIGHTS COMPANIONS AT THEIR Installations.

SECT. I. Touching the Fees due to the Colledge of Windesor.
SUch was the piety and bounty of our Ancestors, that they thought no work well performed, without being attended with some charitable do|nation, especially if it had relation to the Church, whereunto they ge|nerally bore a venerable esteem. Hence was it, at the Installation of this Order, ordained, E. 3. Stat. Art. 22. H. . Stat. Art. 22 H. 8. Stat. Art. 24. That every Knight-Companion should at his entrance bestow a certain sum of money, according to his quality and degree, That is to say,




l.
s.
d.


The Soveraign of the Order
26
13
4


A Stranger-King
20
0
0


The Prince of Wales
13
6
8


Every Duke
10
0
0


Every Earl
6
13
4


Every Baron
5
0
0


Every Knight-Batchelor
3
6
8


What use these sums were employed in, and how distributed, appears by the appointment there set down, viz. E. 3. Stat. Art. 22. H. 5. Stat. Art. 22. H. 8. Stat. Art. 24. Towards the relief of the Canons of Windesor, the Alms-Knights, and augmentation of the Alms deeds there appointed perpetually to be done. To the end E. 3. Stat. Art. 22. H. 5. Stat. Art. 22. H. 8. Stat. Art. 24. That every one entring nto this Military Order, might thereby more worthily obtain the Name, Title, and Priviledge of one of the Foun|ders of the order: Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 21. It being supposed a worthy and just thing, that whosoever ob|tained this Priviledge, should add some small increment to this Founation.
Not long after establishing the Statutes of Institution, the Titles of Marquess and Viscount, came to be special dignities, for Robert Vere Earl of Oxford, was the first among us, who as a distinct dignity, received the title of Cart. an. 9. R. 2. m. 13. Marquess, the first of December, an. 9. R. 2. and Iohn Lord Beaumont the first here also that had the Title of Pat. 18. H. 6. part 2. m. 21. Viscount conferred on him, as a distinct Title of Honor, the 12. of February, an. 18. H. 6. And whereas both these Degrees of Honor, at their Creations, were setled as intermediate, the first between a Duke and an Earl, for so saith the Rt. Parl. an. 9. R. 2. m. 3. n. 17. Roll (where it speaks of the Marquess his precedency) the Marquess was commanded to sit among the Peers in Parliament, in a higher place (than his Degree as Earl of Oxford could justly challenge) viz. Rt. Parl. an. 9. R. 2. m. 3. n. 17. between Dukes and Earls; and the Viscount between Earls and Barons, as the said Viscount Beaumont, is by his first Patent ranked, to wit, Pa. 18 H. 6. ut supra. above all Barons; and afterwards in another Patent, to render his place more certain and apparent, Pat. 23. H. 6. part 2. m. 20. above all Viscounts after|wards made and created, and before and above the Heirs and Sons of Earls, and immediately and next to Erls, both in all Parliaments, Councils, and other Places.
Upon these grounds, and sutable to the ranks of Honor thus setled, ere the Fees of Installation to the Colledge, from Knight-Companions of these Degrees proportioned, for shortly after the precedency so granted and setled to the said Viscount Beaumont (his latter Patent bearing date the Ibid. Pat. 12. of March, an. 23. H. 6.) the Soveraign with the unanimous consent of the Knights-Companions, at the Feast of St. George held at Windesor the Lib. N. p. 95. 12. of May following, Decreed, Ibid. p. 97. That a Marquess, forasmuch as his Degree of Honor was above an Earl, and intermediate between him and a Duke should therefore contribute more than an Earl. Now the sum for an Earl, being (as appears above) set at 10 Marks, the Marquess was by this Decree, obliged to pay 33 s. 4 d. more than the Earl; viz. in toto 8 l. 6 s. 8 d. And for the same reason also, was a Viscount enjoined, to give the proportion of 6 s. 8 d. more than a Baron; and so his whole Fee amounted to 5 l. 16 s. 8 d. The Installation Fees of these two Degrees, being thus added to the former, were with them confirmed by King Henry the Eighth's Art. 24. Statutes.
And though in all the Bodies of the Statutes, the Soveraign of the Order is charged with payment of Fees to the Colledge, no less than the rest of the Knights-Companions, yet is it to be understood only of those Soveraigns, who were not (before the assumption of their Stall) elected into this Order: for we see in the case of King Henry the Sixth (the first Soveraign that had not before his being so, been elected a Knight-Companion) there past an order in Chapter, Lib. N. p. 75. an. 1. H. 6. for payment of his Fees, upon assuming his Stall, according to the appointment of the Statute.
The case also of the Lord Weston is here observable, who although at the time of his Installation (the 5. of October, an. 6. Car. 1.) he was seated in no higher a rank of Nobility, than the Degree of a Baron; yet being then by an

honorary Title Lord Treasurer of England, did (for the honor of his Office) not only pay as much as an Lib. R. p. 66. Earl ought by the Statutes, but in all other customary Fees and Duties bare a proportion to that Dignity.
But the matter of Installation Fees, Lib. Carat. p. 48.49.59.66.67.73.  74. being by several Petitions represented to the Soveraign and Knights-Companions in Chapter, since the present Soveraign's happy return, was referred to the standing Committee of Knights-Companions, to make enquiry and take into their examination, all the pretentions and de|mands thereunto: in relation to which, much time having been spent in a diligent and full examination thereof, through the zealous endeavours, and con|tinual sollicitations of the Register, out of respect to his Successors, the Colledge and Choire of Windesor, so also of Garter on behalf of his Successors, the Officers of Arms, and other the Soveraign's Officers and Servants claiming Installation Fees, and due consideration had of the reasons and proofs to justifie the same, as also to the reasonableness and equity of the whole matter: Finally, a Re|port was made the Ib. p. 84. 5. of March, an. 22. Car. 2. by the Duke of Ormond, the Earls of Sandwich and Manchester, whereby such Installation Fees were thought rea|sonable and requisite to be paid by the Knights-Companions, as were contained in an annexed Schedule, ascertaining the sums, proportioned according to the Dignities and Degrees of the Knights-Companions; which, both Append. Num. CLVII. Report and Schedule being afterwards Ibid. p. 87. read over and approved by the Soveraign, part of it containing the Fees due to the Dean and Canons, Choire, and Alms-Knights of Windesor, the Register, Garter, Black-Rod, and Officers of Arms, were command|ed to be entred upon the Register of the Order, in perpetuam rei memoriam, to prevent all future questions and controversies that might otherwise arise; the other part, wherein was set down the Fees payable to the rest of the Soveraign's Servants, was appointed to be only signed in Garter's Bills, with all the other Fees as they became due.
In this Decree the Installation Fees made payable to the Dean and Canoni are these,



l.
s.
d.


Ex ipso Au|togr. A Stranger-King
20
00
00


A Stranger-Prince
10
00
00


The Prince of Wales
20
00
00


A Duke
10
00
00


A Marquess.
08
06
08


An Earl
06
13
04


A Viscount
05
16
08


A Baron.
05
00
00


A Knight-Batchellor
03
06
08


These Fees ought to be paid E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 2 H. 8. Stat. Art. 24. at the time of the Knights Installation, whether Personal or by Proxie, so also for a Stranger; and as to the practice, it hath been thus; See before, p. 367. to pay them by the hands of some one of the Knights-Companions Servants, so soon as the Ceremonies of Installation were ended; and in truth, that which quickned their care herein, was the strict injunction repeated in all the Bodies of the Vide etiam Lib. Carol. p. 81. Statutes, which do expresly prohibit the setting up of their Atchievements, till payment be made.
That anciently the Alms-Knights shared in the Fees paid to the Colledge,Alms-Knights is ma|nifest from the Statutes of Institution, the use for which they were given, being therein exprest to be E. 3. Stat. Art. 22. towards relief of the Alms-Knights, no less than the Ca|nons, and so say the H. 3. Stat. Art. 22. H. 8. Stat. Art. 24. succeeding bodies of the Statutes. Howbeit, since their re-establishment by Queen Elizabeth upon a new Constitution, they have re|ceived Installation Fees apart from those paid to the Colledge, which by the fore|said Establishment of Installation Fees, an. 22. Car. 2. are made Ex ipso Au|togr. equal and alike to those thereby payable to the Dean and Canons.
The Choire of Windesor,Choire, c. under which not only the Vicars, but the Vergers, Choristers, Sextons, and Bell-Ringers, are comprehended, reap some benefit by the Installation of a Knight, and have in all times been thought deserving of Fees among others, who performed service at these Solemnities: Hereupon were they taken into the Establishment made, an. 22. Car. 2. which has setled on them these following Fees, viz.




l.
s.
d.


Ex ipso Au|togr. A Stranger-King
16
00
00


A Stranger-Prince
08
10
00


A Prince of Wales
16
00
00


A Duke
08
10
00


A Marquess
06
15
00


An Earl
05
10
00


A Viscount
04
00
00


A Baron
04
00
00


A Knight-Batchellor
03
00
00




SECT. II. Fees due to the Register, Garter, Black-Rod, and Officers of Arms.
Register.IN the rank of those Officers to whom Installation Fees are due, stands first the Register, who by the Constitutions of his Office, is to have of every Knight-Companion Lib. N. p. 235. 13 s. 4 d. in money, and a Robe.
After that Doctor Matthew Wren had enjoyed this Office for some few years, and supposing himself defrauded by the concealment of part of his Fees, he pe|titioned the Soveraign, that the Fee anciently due to his place, might be resto|red and setled, with the allowance of a Robe, or composition for it from the new installed Knight; the grounds of which address were set forth in the fol|lowing Petition.

To the Kings's most sacred Majesty, Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter. The humble Petition of Matthew Wren, Register of the said Order.
Sheweth,
Autogr. penes Doct. Chr. Wren nuper Or|dinis Regist.THat at his first entry into this Office, the Black-Book (wherein the chiefest Record's of the Order are) being in the custody of Sir William Segar then Garter, he was forced to receive from him the Instructions which concerned his place: And whereas at the Installation of any Knight, the said Sir William Segar did use to make a Bill of such Fees as were to be paid, wherein of later years, he would set down for the Register but half as much as for himself, upon whose atho|rity the Register for a while rested, and knowing no other had no more; Copies of which Bills are privately transmitted from one Lords Officer to another.
But since the Black-Book was by the honorable Chapter remanded to the Registers custody, upon survey of the Records, and view of the Statutes (in the Book by him latey exhibited to your Soveraign Majesty) the rule for the Registers Fee in more express Text, than for any Officer else, appears; That as oft as any Knight chosen into the Order, is installed, the Register shall have of him thirteen shillings and four pence, and a Robe. [Statut. de Officialibus Ordinis, cap. 6.]
He therefore most humbly beseecheth, on the behalf of his place, that, according to every Lords Oath, not wittingly to break the content of any Statute, this Statute may be without question observed, and the Robe be allowed him; and that Sir John Burrowes, no Garter, may have order to reform this Error, with such of the Com|panions or their Officers, as have not yet paid the Register an Installation Fee.
But in case that any Lord, shall rather chuse to compound with the Register for the said Robe That it may now please your sacred Majesty, for the avoiding of all exception to the said Register, to set down a proportion meet to be demanded for the same by him; who both in the order of his place is before Mr. Garter, and in the proportion of his Annual Fee from your Soveraign Majesty above him.
At the Court at Greenewich, the 6. of May 1634.
It is his Majesty's pleasure, that all Fees due to the Officers of the Order, by the Institution, shall be precisely paid; and that this particular of the Re|gister shall be satisfied, according to the words of the Institution, and not ac|cording to the custom lately used, of which Mr. Garter is to give notice, as there shall be occasion.
Fr. Crane, Cane.

But it seems that nothing was done in his time, upon the Soveraign's Answer to this Petition, besides its entry into the Pag. 98. Red-Book; and thereupon afterwards, when his Brother Doctor Christopher Wren had succeeded him in the Register's place, and the Robe assigned him out of the Soveraign's Wardrobe at his entrance into his Office, being of the value of Ex. Collect. praed. Dr. Chr. Wren. 28 l. 1 s. 0 d. according to this valuation of his Robe, a Ex. Collect. praed. Dr. Chr. Wren. like value was proposed (by way of Composition) upon the Knights-Companions Batchellors (the lowest Degree among the Knights of the Order) to be paid him in lieu of the said Robe, supposing they could not give him less: and from hence was raised the Ex. Collect. praed. Dr. Chr. Wren. proportions, for each several Degree of honor, upon those who should be admitted into this most Noble Order, thus 


s.
d.

l.
s.
d.


Ex. Collect. praed. Dr. Chr. Wren.Imprimis for a Knight-Batchellor
13
04
and
28
00
00


Item for a Baron
13
04
and
30
00
00


Item for a Viscount
13
04
and
32
00
00


Item for a Earl
13
04
and
34
00
00


Item for a Marquess
13
04
and
36
00
00


Item for a Duke
13
04
and
8
00
00


Item for a Prince
13
04
and
40
00
00


Afterwards, taking occasion from the Instalment of the present Soveraign then Prince, an. 14. Car. 1. the Dean desired the Deputy-Chancellor, to know the So|veraign's pleasure once again, and to Palm. large Iour|nal, p. 23  24. represent, that the Registers Fees were anciently 13 s. 4 d. in money, and the Robe in kind; and seeing that the Sove|raign was pleased to allow encrease of Fees, to the other Officers of the Order, particularly to Garter King of Arms 40 l. at the Installation of the said Prince, and every other Officer in proportion; and that it stood both with the honor of the Prince, to give as honorable a Fee, as any Prince Stranger, at his Installa|tion, and also with the Dignity of the Registers place, to expect no less than others, that were not above him in rank; that it would therefore please the So|veraign, to think the Register worthy to make the like Plea.
Thus much the Deputy-Chancellor represented to the Soveraign at Greenewich, sometime after the Prince's Installation, and thereupon the Soveraign was gra|ciously pleased, to think it most reasonable, on the Register's behalf, and Order|ed, Palm. large Iour|nal, p. 23  24. that at every Installation of a Prince, the Register should receive for his Fee 13 s. 4 d. and 40 l. in lieu of his Robe; and that Prince Charles (then newly in|stalled) should pay him the said sums, which was accordingly done; and the same were since setled on this Officer by the Establishment of Installation Fees, made Ex. ips Autgr. an. 22. Car. 2. to be thenceforth paid, not only by the Prince of Wales, but for the Installation of a Ex. ips Autgr. a Stranger-King; whereto is added for a Ibid. Stranger-Prince 38 l. 13 s. 4 d. But those thereby made due from Knights-Subjects of other Degrees, are the same as were proposed by Doctor Christopher Wren, mention|ed a little above.
Next to the Register doth Garter claim both Droits and Fees,Garret. for his service and attendance at this Solemnity, who in reference to its preparations, and employment at the time, hath a greater share of business than any other Officer

of the Order: As to the first of these, it was Ordained by the Constitutions of his Office, Lib. N. p. 236. That as often as any Knight should happen to be Installed, he might chal|lenge for himself the Garments worn by him, immediately before his Investiture with the Surcoat of the Order. And the constant practice hath interpreted this, to be the Knight's upper Garment, anciently a short Gown, of later times a Cloak, but now a Coat; which he puts off in the Chapter-house, when the Investiture begins.
When Garter had received the Gown of Philip King of Castile, immediately before his Investiture with the Robes of the Order, an. 22. H. 7. he came before the Soveraign, and MS. veter. pe|nes W. le N. Cl. f. 295. humbly besought him to give thanks to the King, who, for his sake, had bestowed it on him, which the Soveraign accordingly did.
Heretofore, when Garter had received the Knight's Gown, he immediately put it on, and wore it during the whole Ceremony of Installation, and there|fore the Gown of Henry Duke of York, second Son to King Henry the Seventh, MS. fol. penes Io. Vincent, p. 151. though he was very young when installed, was made large enough for Garter's use. But because this short Gown hath been so long out of fashion, as to be well nigh forgotten, we shall therefore mention several of the kind, wherein their description will appear remarkable enough, both for their materials, and the then fashionable Trimmings.
King Henry the Seventh's Gown, at his assumption of the Soveraign's Stall, was made of Ex amplo Codice MS. penes praef. Io. Vincent p. 151. Black Velvet, and lined with Cloth of Gold, full of red Roses. Prince Arthur wore a Gown of Ex amplo Codice MS. penes praef. Io. Vincent p. 151. Crimson Velvet, lined with Black Velvet, when he proceeded to his Installation. And the Gown made for the foresaid Henry Duke of York, was of Ex amplo Codice MS. penes praef. Io. Vincent p. 151. Crimson Velvet, lined with Black Sattin.
In the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, the materials of some of the Knights Gowns, were as followeth.
The Lord Dudley's, of Ex eod. MS. p. 157. Tinsel Sattin Violet, lined with Black Sarcenet. The Lord Howard's of Ex eod. MS. p. 157. Tawney Velvet, furr'd with Leopards. The Lord La Ware's, of Ex eod. MS. p. 157. Tawney Velvet, lined with Black Bogye. The Earl of Devonshire's, of Ibid. p. 158. Cloth of Silver, lined with Cloth of Gold. The Viscount Lysle's of Ibid. pag. 159. Black Velvet, furr'd with Black Bogye. The Lord Fitz. Walter's, of Ibid. pag. 159. Black Damask, and double Black Velvet. Henry Fitz Roy Duke of Richmond, of Ibid. pag. 159. Black Sattin, with Buttons and Aglets of Gold on his Sleeves, and furr'd with Sables. The Earl of Arundel's of Tawney Velvet, lined with Black double Sarcenet. The Earl of Westmerland's of Ibid. pag. 159. Black Velvet, lined with Sattin, with Aglets of Gold. The Earl of Oxford's, of Ibid. p. 160. Black Sattin, lined with Jennets. The Lord Russell's of MS. in Offic. Arm. [L. 1.] f. 19. Black Velvet, lined with Black Sattin. The Coat of King Philip (installed an. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar.) was MS. penes praef. G. O. Y. p. 132. embroidered on Velvet, with Gold-Wire, of Gold|smiths work, and lined with White Taffaty: His Gown was made of MS. penes praef. G. O. Y. p. 132. Purple Velvet, garnished with the same, and twisted Silver Lace laid on the Gard; his other Coat of Velvet embroidered with Silver, lined with White.
This kind of upper Garment or Gown continued also in fashion, a great part of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, for we likewise find, that the Earl of Leicester's Gown was made of MS. penes praef. G. O. Y. p. 132. Velvet, garded with four gards of the same, and thereon 38 pair of Aglets. The Lord Burghley's of MS. penes praef. G. O. Y. p. 132. Taffaty, with three gards of Velvet, and three dozen of great Buttons of Gold. The Lord Buckhurst's of Ibid. Velvet, with a broad embroidery gard, and Buttons of Gold. The Lord Shandos Ibid. of Sattin, with a broidered gard of Velvet, and two dozen of Gold Buttons. The Earl of Worcester's of Ibid. Velvet lined with double Sarcenet, with a paceman Lace about it. The Duke of Norfolk's of Ibid. Black Sattin, furr'd with Squirrels, faced with Sables, withpair of Aglets. The Earl of Bedford's such ano|ther Gown, but had a Silver Lace about it. The Lord Hunsdon's of Sattin, furr'd with Luzarts, and garded withThe Earl of Warwick's of Russet Sattin, embroidered all over with Russet Lace, and furr'd with Cony. The Duke of Northumberland's was a loose Velvet Gown, furr'd with Pavilion, and had a falling Cape.
But at length, the fashion of this upper Garment began to alter, and by that time Iohn Casimire, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, was received into the Order,

it was converted to a Cloak, for such was his upper Garment (and of Velvet) faced and furr'd with Sables, and two Gold Laces garded thereon, cut, with Buttons and Gold Lace, where the Sleeves were wont to be. And ever since, till of late, hath the Cloak been most in fashion, for an upper Garment, but ve|ry much varied both as to materials, lining, and ornament.
Sometimes Garter had not this Garment in kind, but received a Fine in lieu thereof; and this by vertue of a Decree made in Chapter, an. 25. H. 6. wherein it was ordained, Regist. Chart. f. 2. b. to be at the pleasure of every Knight-Companion, at the time of his Installation, whether Garter should have the Garment which each Knight did then wear, or a composition in money according to his Estate.
Since when the Compositions grew higher, as this upper Garment was made richer; for Ex. Collect. E. W. G. Algernon Earl of Northumberland bestowed on Garter upon this oc|casion for Fees and Droits Ex. Collect. E. W. G. 200 l. in Gold, and Henry Earl of Danby, the Habit he wore on the day he rode from London towards his Installation with Ex. Collect. E. W. G. 100 l. in the Pockets, and by the late Soveraign's order, at the Installation of his Son Prince Charles our now Soveraign, Garter received for his Fee Ibid. 40 l. and for the composition of his upper Garment 60 l. in the whole 100 l. The like sum was given the present Garter, by the Dukes of Ormond and Albemarle, and the Earls of Sandwich, Lindsey, and Manchester, shortly after their Installations, by parti|cular agreement; but herein his Fee for signification of their several Elections was included.
Finally, by the Establishment of Installation Fees, an. 22. Car. 2. the compo|sition set upon each Knight-Companion, for his upper Garment, was thus rated, proportionably less than what was paid for the said Prince, an. 14. Car. 1. viz.


l.
s.
d.


Ex ipso A|togr. A Prince of Wales
60
00
00


A Duke
55
00
00


A Marquess
50
00
00


An Earl
45
00
00


A Viscount
40
00
00


A Baron
35
00
00


A Knight-Batchellor
30
00
00


Besides this Droit or Composition, there hath in all times been paid to Gar|ter, by every Knight-Companion a Fee for his Installation, proportioned also to his state and dignity, which was likewise brought to the following certainty by the said late Establishment.



l.
s.
d.


Ibid. A Stranger-King
30
00
00


A Stranger-Prince
20
00
00


A Prince of Wales
40
00
00


A Duke
35
00
00


A Marquess
30
00
00


An Earl
25
00
00


A Viscount
20
00
00


A Baron
15
00
00


A Knight-Batchellor
10
00
00


The Fee anciently due to the Black-Rod at the Installation of a Knight,Black-Rod. like all other Fees, hath in succeeding times received augmentation; for the Fee paid him at the Installation of Prince Charles, an. 14. Car. 1. was 40 l. and by the foresaid Establishment an. 22. Car. 2. he hath allowed him



l.
s.
d.


From a Ex ipso Au|togr. Stranger-King
20
00
00


From a Stranger-Prince
20
00
00


From a Prince of Wales
40
00
00


From a Duke
20
00
00


From a Marquess
18
00
00


Earl
16
00
00


Viscount
14
00
00


Baron
12
00
00


Knight-Batchellor
10
00
00


Officers of Arms. As Fees were in all times paid to the Register, Garter, and Black-Rod for their particular services, at the Feasts of Installation, so likewise have the Officers of Arms accustomably received Fees, in reward of their attendance and ser|vice at those Solemnities; which having been encreased by the bounty of the Givers, were by the said late Establishment (pursuant to the Fees, paid them for the Installation of the now Soveraign when Prince) brought to the Ex ipso Au|togr. same thereby allowed the Black-Rod, only in the Fee of a Stranger-King, they have an addi|tion of 10 l. more, his Fee to them being 30 l.
Besides these Installation Fees, when the Elect-Knights rode publickly from London to Windesor, to their Installations, they were accustomed to bestow upon the Officers of Arms, that attended them thither, Scarfs, Hats, and Feathers, as did the Earls of Danby and Moreton, an. 10. Car. 1. viz. to Ex lib. Part. in Offic. Armor. [3] f. 155. b. each of them 9 Ells of rich Taffaty, and a black Beaver Hat and Feather. And the Earl of Northamp|ton, upon the like occasion, an. 5. Car. 1. allowed Ib. f. 70. b. 35 l. to the seven Officers of Arms, that attended him to Windesor, in lieu of Taffaty Scarfs of his Lordships Colours, and Beaver Hats, and gave each of them besides, Feathers worth 20 s. a piece. Lastly, at the Installation of Charles Prince of Wales, an. 14. Car. 1. there was given to the 13 Officers of Arms, for the like allowance 10 l. a piece, in all Ex Autogr. penes E. W. G. 130 l.


SECT. III. Fees belonging to other of the Soveraign's Servants.
TO these forenamed Officers, we have seen added in the Lists of Installa|tion Fees of former times, some other here set down, who gave their at|tendance at these Solemnities, with the several sums received: some were then accounted Fees, and other run under the Title of Benevolences; all which ne|vertheless were admitted into the List of Installation Fees established, an. 22. Car. 2. and though not entred in the Register of the Order, yet are to be given in, under the hand of Garter, with the other Fees payable at Installations, and to be paid by every Knight, to all persons concerned respectively, according to ancient custom.Ex ipso Autogr


Viz.
The Prince
A Duke
A Marquess
An Earl
A Viscount
A Baron
A Knight-Batchelor



l.
s.
d.
l.
s.
d.
l.
s.
d.
l.
s.
d.
l.
s.
d.
l.
s.
d.



To the Wardrobe
06
00
00
03
00
00
02
10
00
02
00
00
01
15
00
01
10
00
01
05
00


To the Trumpets
12
00
00
06
00
00
05
00
00
04
00
00
03
00
00
02
10
00
02
00
00


To the Serjeant Trumpeter
02
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00


To the Musicians 4 Companies.
16
00
00
08
00
00
07
00
00
06
00
00
05
00
00
04
00
00
03
00
00


Knight-Harbenger
03
06
08
03
06
08
03
06
08
03
06
08
03
06
08
03
06
08
03
06
08


Drums and Fifes
04
00
00
02
00
00
01
15
00
01
10
00
01
05
00
01
00
00
01
00
00


To the Porters
06
00
00
03
00
00
02
10
00
02
00
00
02
00
00
01
10
00
01
00
00


Master Cook
03
00
00
01
10
00
01
05
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00


Serjeant Porter
06
00
00
03
00
00
02
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00


Vestry
02
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00


Yeomen Harbengers
06
00
00
03
00
00
02
10
00
02
00
00
02
00
00
01
10
00
01
00
00


Ushers of the Hall
02
00
00
01
10
00
01
05
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00


Grooms of the Chamber
03
00
00
01
10
00
01
05
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00


Yeomen Ushers
06
13
04
03
06
08
03
00
00
02
10
00
02
00
00
01
10
00
01
00
00


Quarter Waiters
08
16
00
04
08
04
03
16
08
03
06
08
03
00
00
02
10
00
02
00
00


Sewers
08
00
00
04
08
04
03
16
08
03
06
08
03
00
00
02
10
00
02
00
00


Buttery
03
00
00
01
10
00
01
05
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00


Pantry
03
00
00
01
10
00
01
05
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00


Cellar
03
00
00
01
10
00
01
05
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00
01
00
00





SECT. IV. Fees payable for Strangers.
AND because it was thought unfit (the dignity of the Order considered) that on the one side Strangers should be liable to the demand of Fees, and on the other, that charitable disposals should be defeated; provision was made in the Art. 22. vide etiam H 5. Stat. Art. 22.  H. Stat. Art. 24. Statutes of Institution, by obliging the Soveraign to pay the respective Fees, for every Stranger that should be Elected, at the time of his Installation, either Personally or by his Proctor. And the first example pursuant thereto (that we have met with) is an Order made in Chapter at Windesor, an. 1. H. 6. which appointed, Lib. N. p. 75. That the usual Fees due for the Installation of the King of Denmark, should be discharged by the Soveraign, as the Statutes did enjoin.
To which purpose, in after times have Privy Seals accustomably isued forth, directed to the Lord Treasurer for the time being, to pay the Fees due for Stran|gers Installations, unto the Register of the Order (and sometimes to him and Garter) out of the Soveraign's Exchequer; but those due to the Alms-Knights, since their Establishment by Queen Elizabeth, were paid to themselves by par|ticular Privy Seals.
And thus were the foresaid Fees paid out of the Exchequer, as they became due, until the late Soveraign King Charles the First, did by Letters Patent, bear|ing date the 23. day of Iune, in the 13. year of his Reign, setle an annual Pen|sion of Lib. R. p. 121 1200 l. unto and upon the Order; and by a Rowe's Iour|nal, p. 40. Commission dated the 3. day of May the following year, was the Chancellor of the Order, and his Successors impowered to pay out of the same, not only the ordinary, but also extraordi|nary Charges of the Order, wherein the Fees for Installation of Strangers are included.
But notwithstanding which, yet did Ex Collect. E. W. G. Sir Henry de Vic the late Chancellor make some scruple to pay the Fees due to the Colledge, upon the Installation of Stran+gers, since the happy return of the present Soveraign; whereupon it occasioned the Lib. Carol. p. 48. Dean, Canons, Choire, and Alms-Knights, as also the Register, Garter, and Black-Rod, to petition the Soveraign at the Feast of St. George, an. 15. Car. 2. for the continuance of some rights, and payment of their Fees, which being Ib. p. 49. re|ferr'd to three or more of the Knights-Companions of the Order, upon full exa|mination of the matter, they made the following Report.



At the Court at Whitehall, the 16. of May 1663.
WHereas your Majesty,Ex Collect. E. W. G. vide et|am Lib. Carol. p. 49, 50. c. Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, in a Chapter held in the Castle of Windesor, the 23. of April past, where were present divers Companions of the said most Noble Order, was graciously pleased to receive a Petition, humbly presented in the name of the Dean, Canons, Chaplains, Choire, and Poor-Knights, belonging to your Majesty's Free Chappel of St. George in Windesor, wherein they, in all humility, desired to have some Rights and Fees (which are contained in a Schedule thereunto annexed) to be continued unto them; which Petition, your Majesty was then graciously pleased, to refer unto any three or more Companions of the said most Noble Order, to consider of, and examine the particular, and accordingly to make Report unto your Majesty, what they conceive proper to be done thereupon: And in like manner the said Lords Re|ferrees upon a Petition delivered the 24. of April, were to consider, examine, and report the humble desires of the Register, Garter Principal King of Arms, and the Gentleman-Vsher of the Black-Rod, Officers of the Order in relation to the Fees demanded by them from your Majesty, for the Installation of all Princes, and other

Strangers, that are and have been, lately admitted and declared, Companions of the said most Noble Order.
Hereupon, we the Knights and Companions of the said most Noble Order, whose names are hereafter subscribed, meeting in the Council-Chamber at Whitehall, upon Saturday the 8. of this instant May, being then attended by Sir Henry de Vic Knight and Baronet Chancellor, Dr. Bruin Ryves, Dean of Windesor Register, and Sir Edward Walker, Garter Principal King of Arms (all Offi|cers of the said most Noble Order) have fully considered and examined, the pre|tences and demands of the Dean and Church of Windesor, as also of the Offi|cers of the said most Noble Order, whereby the ensuing particulars, were then made to appear.
First, That every Knight-Companion of the most Noble Order, within one year after his Election, shall bestow for the use of St. George's Chappel at Windesor, 20 l. in Plate at the least.
Secondly, That the Obit Monies, upon the death of every Knight-Companion of the Order, ought to be paid according to custom, and the Statutes of the Order.
Thirdly, That the Fees for Installation of all Strangers, are to be paid by the So|veraign; and that those desired by the Register, Garter, the Officers of Arms, c. have been proved, to have been paid their Predecessors, by several Privy Seals, for the Installation of divers Princes Strangers, and are no other for them, and the Colledge of Windesor, than have been heretofore, and lately, paid by the honora|ble Companions your Majesty's Subjects, at their Installations (the old Installation Fees to the Canons and Poor-Knights being therein comprised) not including there|in other Fees and Gratuities, usually paid unto many others of your Majesty's Ser|vants by the Knights your Majesty's Subjects (though not by your Majesty for Stran|gers) for any thing appears, nor the Gratuities unto Garter for signification of Ele|ctions, or composition for the upper Garments of the Companions, according to an|cient Custom.
This being the true state of the whole matter, and we having met again thereupon this 16. day of May, do humbly hereby Report the same unto your Majesty, and do thereupon offer our opinion unto your Majesty, That we conceive it may be fit for your Majesty (seeing the Soveraign is to pay for the Installation of all Strangers) to give your Warrant unto Sir Henry de Vic, Chancellor of the most Noble Order of the Garter, to pay unto the Register, Garter, Usher of the Black-Rod, Canons, Poor-Knights, Choire at Windesor, and Officers of Arms the several sums hereaf|ter mentioned, for the six Foreign Knights lately declared installed; as also for the Prince of Denmark, installed by Proxy the 22. of April past; out of such Moneys, as he the said Sir Henry de Vic hath, or shall have in his hands, of the 1200 l. year|ly assigned for the use of the Order, since his first receipt thereof, viz.

For the Installation of the Prince of Orange.


l.
s.
d.


To the Dean of Windesor as Register
38
13
04


To Garter Principal King of Arms
20
00
00


To the Usher of the Black-Rod
20
00
00


To the Officers of Arms
20
00
00


To the Canons
10
00
00


To the Choire and Choristers
6
00
00


To the Vergers, Sextons, and Bellringers
2
00
00


To the Poor-Knights
10
00
00



126
13
04






l.
s.
d.


For the Prince Elector of Brandenburgh for all as above
126
13
04


For Prince Edward Count Palatine, c.
126
13
04


For the Duke of Espernon
126
13
04


For the Prince of Tarent
126
13
04


For the Prince of Denmark
126
13
04


For Count Marchin
93
06
08



853
06
08



All which we humbly submit unto your Majesty's gracious determination.
Albemarle.
Lindsey.
Manchester.
Sandwich.




Some few days after, the Ex Colle. praef. E. W. G. Chancellor, accompanied with the Register and Gar|ter, attended the Soveraign, and fully represented and read unto him the Report above inserted, whereupon he was gratiously pleased to approve the same, and accordingly Ex Colle. praef. E. W. G. ordered the Chancellor to make payment of the several sums men|tioned in it, which he shortly after performed; among which, the Ib. 18. of No|vember following, Sir Edward Walker Garter received from him the Fees due to himself, as also those other due to the Officers of Arms, for their attendance at the Installation of the Knights-Strangers, mentioned in the said Report, amount|ing to the sum of 133 l. 6 s. 8 d. which he forthwith brought into the Office of Arms, and there Lib. Part in Offic. Arm. [4.] divided according to Custom.
Now, though the Soveraign hath discharged the Installation Fees due from Strangers, as appears before, yet did they besides, or their Proctors for them, always bestow particular Largesses and Rewards upon the Colledge, the Officers of the Order and of Arms, the Alms-Knights, and some others who attended and performed their duty at this great Solemnity; and in particular, Garter had anciently bestowed on him a rich Gown, to wear at the time of Installation, or, as of late, presented with some other thing of considerable value.
For it appears, that Maximilian King of the Romans, at his Installation an. 6. H. 7. gave unto him for his Largess Ex MS. ver. pergam. penes I. V. gen. f. 11. 100 Renish Guildings.
That Philip King of Castile (personally Installed at Windesor, an. 21. H. 7.) gave him besides a large Ibid. Gown of Cloth of Gold, lined with Black Damask, Ibid. 40 Crowns of Gold for a Doublet.
And Ferdinand Arch-Duke of Austria, installed by Proxie an. 16. H. 8. be|stowed on him a Ib. Crimson Velvet Gown furr'd with Luzarts, a Ex Collect. E. W. G. Cup of 22 l. va|lue, a 100 Rhenish Guilders, and 60 Crowns of the Sun.
The French King Francis the First, gave him a Ibid. Robe of Blue Velvet lined with Cloth of Silver, with Buttons of Gold enamelled, and 80 Crowns of the Sun.
Iames the Fifth King of Scotland, Ib. Gown of Black Velvet furr'd with Black Budge, with 16 pair of Aglets of Gold, an 100 Crowns of the Sun, and another Gown.
Lastly, Charles King of Sweden gave him one of those Gold Medals bestowed on the Knights-Companions at his Installation, but set about with three rows of large Faucet Diamonds, and at the hed an imperial Crown set also with Fau|cet Diamonds; it was hung in a Gold Chain of excellent and curious work|manship, and worn by Garter before his breast at the said Kings Installation: this rich Jewel and Chain cost 404 l.
To the Officers of Arms, Strangers were also liberal, as appears by the Lar|gesses given by several of them, or by their Proctors, besides their Installation Fees received from the Soveraign, viz.



Maximilian King of the Romans gave them
Ex MS. verust. per|gam. penes Io. Vincent. gen. 100 Guildings.


The King of Portugal 
Ex MS. verust. per|gam. penes Io. Vincent. gen. 30 Crowns.


Philip King of Castile 
Ex MS. verust. per|gam. penes Io. Vincent. gen. 100 Crowns.


Francis the French King 
Ex lib. Par|tition. in Offic. Armor. [1] fol. 19. 60 Crowns.


King Philip of Spain 
Ibid. f. 169. 38 l. 7 s. 0 d.


Emanuel Duke of Savoy 
Ib. f. 172. 10 l. 0 s. 0 d.


Adolph Duke of Holstien 
Ib. f. 220. 25 Crowns.


Charles the Ninth of France 
Ib. f. 272. 30 Crowns.


Francis Duke of Montmorency
Ib. f. 314. 40 Crowns.


Frederick Prince Palatine 
Ex lib. Par|tit. [2] fol. 177. b. 13 l. 6 s. 8 d.


And not only to Garter and Officers of Arms, but likewise to several others, did the Proctors bestow Gratuities, as doth appear from what Monsieur de Terce|lin Proctor to Francis the First of France, gave an. 19. H. 8.

To Garter for his Gown 
Ex Collect. praef. W. le N. Cl.60 Crowns.
To the Black-Rod 
6 Crowns.
Officers of Arms 
60 Crowns.
Gentlemen-Vshers, Guard, and other of the Chamber
20 Crowns.
Master of the Houshold, and other Officers of the Houshold
30 Crowns.
The two Sextons 
2 Crowns
Choristers
3 Crowns.
Vicars and Clarks 
6 Crowns.
Vergers of the Colledge 
8 Nobles

Besides it is evident from a Bill of particulars, which Prince Henry of Nassau (Brother to Maurice Prince of Orange) paid to Sir William Seagar, that the Alms-Knights, Trumpets, Drums, Fifes, and Musicians, received Gratuities also upon the foresaid account.




CHAP. XVIII. OF THE Grand Feast OF THE Order.

SECT. I. The Grand Feast, appointed to be annually celebrated on St. George's day.
AT the Institution of this most Noble Order, it was Ordained, That its high and solemn Festival (commonly called St. George's Feast) should be annually celebrated on the E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 9 H. 8. Stat. Art. 8. 23. day of April, or Saint George's day, in honor of that Saint made choice of for its peculiar Patron.
And it is very observable, that the Founders of several other Military Orders (whose Institutions bear later date than this of the Garter) setled also the An|niversary of their Festivals upon the Feast-day of their Patrons. Thus Philip Duke of Burgundy, upon his erection of the Order of the Golden Fleece, making choice of St. Andrew for its Patron, ordained the Grant Festival to be kept on St. Ordinances du tresnoble Ordre de la Toison d' Or Art. 22. Andrew's day. The like did Lewis the Eleventh of France, in appointing Stat. de l'Or|dre de Mons. St. Michael Art. 32. Michaelmas day for holding the Feast of the Order of St. Michael. So also the Solemnities of the Duke of Savoy's Order of the Annunciade, are annually held upon our Heylin's Geogr. Lib. 1. p. 138. Lady-day in Lent. And the Festival of the Duke of Burbons Order of Knights of our Lady, on the day of the Andr. Faoin in le Theat. d' Honneur, lib. 3. Conception of our Lady, being the 8. of December; in which kind more instances might be produced, were it needful.
Since then the Founders of Knightly Orders, have generally appointed the ce|lebration of their Solemnities, on the days set apart by the Church, for comme|moration of those particular Saints, whom they had pitched upon for Patrons; it will not be besides our subject to enquire, upon what grounds those days were advanced into Festivals for the honoring such Saints.
The Church saith Divin. Offic. Lib. 7. c. 1. nu. 1. Edit. Lugd. 1612. Durand, celebrates the Feasts of Saints for several causes; first by way of return of thanks to them for keeping a continual Feast for us, forasmuch as there is joy among the Angels and holy Souls, in regard of on penitent sinner. Secondly, because in honoring them, we are highly concern|ed our selves, their cause of Festivity being indeed ours; for charity makes all things common. A third reason he will have to be, that we may the better engage them to intercede for us. Fourthly, in imitation of them, since by their examples, we are the better incited to imitate their virtues. Fifthly, for con|firmation and advancement of our hopes, seeing mortal men, like our selves, advanced to that height of glory; whereupon we have the less cause to despair of the like, since the hand of the Lord is no way shortned. Sixthly, for the honor of the Divine Majesty; because in them we honor and exalt God him|self, who sanctified and glorified them. Seventhly, that upon the contempla|tion of their beauty and felicity, men may be weaned from their sins, and learn to contemn worldly things. But the eighth and principal for our present pur|pose is, because the keeping of the Anniversary Feasts of Saints, brings their actions and examples the better to our memory, for our profit and edification; not that they stand in need of our Prayers, being themselves perfectly happy, but that we should give thanks and honor to God for them.
Nor hath it been the practice only of later Ages, but even of the primitive Christians also, to make Anniversary Commemorations of deceased Martyrs, as ap|pears from Rodolph Hospinian, who saith, Hospin. de Origine Festo|rum Christia|norum, cap. 3. fol. 9. a. That the ancient Christians, as they had an affectionate care and respect to the Saints and Martyrs, while they were yet in the flesh, so neither were they unmindful of them after their decease; for on those days, whereon, by suffring Martyrdom they were deprived of this life, they meeting at their Sepulchres, celebrated their memorials; and this they did not only once, but every year, namely, as often as that day came about, whereon they suffred.
But to resume the prosecution of our present discourse; the next thing to be considered, is the Day whereon the Patron of this most Noble Order suffered Martyrdom, and which was thereupon designed to be his Anniversary Festival.


SECT. II. The Anniversary of St. George fixed by the Church unto the 23. of April.
THat the 23. day of April was the day whereon St. George suffred Mar|tyrdom, by beheading, appears from the Greek Hexamiter before his Com|memoration, among other Testimonies given us in that most elaborate Work, the Pag. 795. Titles of Honor. Therefore on that very day, both the Greek and Latine Church, from ancient time, appointed and observed the Natalis Sancti Georgii Martyris, in commemoration of the Passion of that famous and victorious Mar|tyr; as may be seen in the ancientest Martyrologies, remembred both by our learn|ed Tit. of Hon. p. 807. Selden and Doctor Hist. of St. George, part 2. c. 5. sect. 3. vide Bed. in Marty|olog. Heylin.
And on this day also was the Natalis of St. George observed by our Predeces|sors the Saxons, as appears by the old Saxon Martyrologie (remaining now in Tit. Honor, p. 81. Benet Colledge in Cambridge) whence may be also collected the estimation Saint George had gained, even in the Saxon times.
But that we may the better understand the acception of this word Natalis and Natalitium, in the matter of Martyrology, Durand tells us, That Rationale Lib. . c. 1. . 18. Natalis or Natalitium, is said to be the departure of Saints out of this life, as being then born to God, and a state of Glory, by a Nativity tending to eternal life. By which it plainly appears, that in the Saints Calender, the day of their Martyrdom or death,

hath been accounted their true Natalis, their Nativity or Birth-day, rather than that generally so accounted; namely, the time of their first coming into the world. And with this the forecited Hospinian agrees, affirming, Cap. 3. f. 9. That the Chri|tians of the primitive Church, appointed not the days of Martyrs Nativities to be celebrated as the Ethnicks used, but those of their death or suffring. To which ef|fect he cites St. Ambrose, and a little after adds, that those days, whereon Mar|tyrs resolutely underwent death for Christ's sake, they used to call their Ge|nethlia, their Natalia or Natalitia, by the testimony of Origen and Tertullian.
And this kind of second birth, is also known by several other names, as Fe|stum transitus, so called Durandus, loco citto. Because their souls departing from their bodies, pas through divers and unknown places, through the aiery, aetherial, and christalline Heaen, that at length they may come to the empyreal. It is called also Obitus, Durandus, loco citto. Because then the Angels come to meet the Soul. Sometimes it is termed Passio, because then the soul and body suffer most, as being violently separated one from the other.
The transitus of the blessed Virgin Mary is called her Assumption. Deposition, is properly belonging to St. Iohn the Evangelist, who entred alive into the place of Sepulture, and as it were deposited himself. Obdormition is the refreshment, of the Saints after sleep, because Saints in their glorified bodies, rise as it were newly awakened out of sleep. By all these several Names are the Festivals of the Saints celebrated, which plainly denote, the day of the second Birth or going out of the world, and not of the first or coming into the world.
And it is further observable, that the Church, among the many Saints, who have days appointed for their Commemoration, does not celebrate the Nativi|ties of any, but our blessed Saviour, and St. Iohn the Baptist: whereto those of the Romish perswasion have added that of the blessed Virgin Mary.


SECT. III. St. George's day made Festum duplex.
AFter that the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, had given encrease of ho|nors to this their Patron's estival, our Church began to take a greater re|gard to his day, because he was also esteemed amongst us, the Patron of our Na|tion, and therefore bestowed an Titles of Hon. p. 814. addition of honor thereupon.
For whereas it had anciently been accounted, only minus duplex, or, infe|rius duplex (as beside the Testimonies, both of our learned Selden and others, may also be deduced from the interdiction of the minora servilia opera upon this Saints day, by a Synod held at Oxford, in the year of our Lord 1222. cited by De Orig. Fest. Christ. C. 4. f. 17: a. Hospinian) it was petitioned in a Con|vocation, held under Archbishop Arundel, an. 1. H. 4. MS. in Offic. principal. Cantuar. vcat Arundel. part. 1. f. 53. b. Art. 2. that it might be observed and solemnized sicut caeterae Nationis suorum Patronorum facta colunt; which though it took no effect, yet after at the Constitutionem ha edidit Hen. Chicheley ad excitationem Regis Henrici Angliae quinti, in pares Normanniae tran|situm. Linwode in Glossa verbo ineffabilis Provincialis, Lib. 2. C Ineffabilis de Feriis. instance of King Henry the Fifth, this day was (in the Selden's Titles of Hono. p. 814. 3. year of his Reign) made MS. in Offic. Principal. Cntuar. vocat Chicheley, part. 2. f. 2. Festum duplex, ad modum majoris duplicis, by a Canon of the Con|vocation, of the Province of Canterbury: And so we find it noted to be observed, a long time after, in the Kalender, set before the Horae beatissimae Virginis Mariae, secundum usum Sarum, Printed at Paris, by Francis Regnault, anno Domini 1526. But this is found so noted, only in some of the Missals used here in England, for in the Roman Breviary and Missal, it appear to be but Semiduplex.
Now the better to explain, the above-mentioned distinction of Festa majora duplicia,  minora duplicia, Durand, as being very particular in this point, may fitly be consulted herein, who saith, Ratin. Div. Offic. lib. . c. 1. num. 31. vide etiam Gavant. Comment. in Rubricas Brev. Roman, Sect. 3. c. 2.3.  4. Quaedam festa dicuntur in totum

duplicia, quaedam simpliciter duplicia, quaedam semiduplicia, c.. Some Feasts are said to be totally double, some simply double, some half double: The totally or greater double are so called, because in them the Responsories, as well the grea|ter as the shorter, as also the Verses are sung by two, and because the Anti|phones, both at Mattins and Vespers are doubled; of this sort, are the Feasts of the Nativity of our Lord, of St. Stephen, of St. Iohn the Evangelists, Epiphany, Puri|fication, c.. The lesser double Feasts are the second and third Feriae before the Octaves of Easter and Penticost, the Commemoration of St. Paul, and in brief every Feast which is ordained to be celebrated double in all Churches, where|as the greater double Feast are kept in some particular Churches only. The half double Feasts are such wherein the Responsories are sung by two, but neither are they begun by two, nor are the Antiphones sung double, yet the Verses and short Responsories are said, and these are the Feasts of St. Andrew, Nicholas, Lu|cie, Thomas the Apostle, c..
And the reason of this variety observed in the celebration of these Feasts, is for that as St. Paul saith, 1 Cor. cap. 15. ver. 21. One Star difers from another in glory; so according to the degrees of merit (saith the same Loco jam citato. Durand) their praise is so much the more or less celebrated in these Feasts.
This division of Durand appears to be the same in effect, with that taken notice of by our learned Selden; where Tit. Hon. p. 816. Majora duplicia, answers to Duran|dus his duplicia in totum, the Minora, to the simpliciter duplicia, and the Inferiora to the Semiduplicia; only herein Selden notes this difference, that the grand and high Feast of all, as Christmas, Easter, and Penticost, c. are not compre|hended under the notion of Majora Duplicia, but by the title of Principaliora. And as for the Festival of our particular Patron St. George, however after-Custom had slackned that due honor which was decreed unto it, by the above mentioned Canon; yet how great a veneration it was thought worthy of, plain|ly appears, both by that part of the said Canon, wherein it is Decreed to be one of the Festa majora duplicia, and also by the reasons given at large for it, in the Preamble thereof, which are these. MS in Offic. Principal. Can|tuar. vocat. Chicheley part. 2. f. 2  f. 114. vide etiam Concil. Spel|mann. Tom. 2. p. 669. Vpon consideration therefore of this appoint|ment, proceeding from the favorable and bountiful mercy of our God and Saviour the faithful of the English Nation, although at all times obliged to worship God in all his Saints, yet as is testified by the general vote of the World, and the experience of grace given from above, the best interpreter of all things, are they more particularly bound to extol him with high acclamations, to sound forth his praises, and to give him veneration and special honors, in the perso of his most glorious Martyr Saint George, as Patron and Protector of the said Nation, since by his intercession, at we verily believe, not only the Military Power of the English Nation, is strengthen|ed, and made capable of repelling all hostile incursions, in the time of War, but also our Spiritual Militia, the flourishing estate of our Clergy, is under the tutelage of so great a Patron manifestly, fortified in the prosperity of a holy and peaceful estate.
To this may be added, the division of Feasts into Generalia, which are cal|led Solemnitates, and Particularia, which are peculiar to one Church only, one Parish or one Bishoprick, and also into Mobilia, such as are not limited to one certain day of the Month, as Easter-day, Whitsunday, c. and Fixa, such as con|stantly fall upon a certain day of the Month, as Christmas-day, Lady-day, and several others: which, as falling into this subject of Feasts, we thought fit to mention out of the before mentioned De Orig. Fest. Christian. c. 5. f. 19. a. Hospinian, rather for satisfaction to the curious, than as necessarily relating to the present discourse.



SECT. IV. The Place for celebrating the Grand Feast, assigned to Windesor Castle.
AND as King Edward the Third, Founder of this most Noble Order, had fixed the day of its Feast, to that of the Passion (or, according to the Church phrase, the Nativity) of his Patron; so as to the place, wherein to per|form its Solemnities, he made choice of that of his own Nativity, the Castle of H. 8. Stat. Art. 8. Froi|sard, l. 1. c. 100. Polid. Virgil. Angl. Hist. l. 19. p. 378. Windesor, and appointed the observation of this Grand Festival, in a solemn manner, and with due Ceremonies to be celebrated there, which for a long time after was inviolably observed, either upon the very day by the Church made sacred to St. George, or else upon some other appointed by Prorogation, not long after: for which way of Prorogation, allowance was given by the E. 3. Stat. Art. 9. H. 5. Stat. Art. 9. H. 8. Stat. Art. 4. Sta|tutes of the Order, and of which the Registers are full of instances.


SECT. V. St. George's day kept apart from the Grand Feast, and how then observed.
HOW this Noble Order spread its roots and flourished, from its first planta|tion to the time of King Henry the Fifth, we can give no account, since the Annals thereof are wanting unto his Reign; certain it is, that then it was of a considerable growth; but afterwards, the Civil Wars, towards the end of King Henry the Sixth's Reign, caused it to stand at a stay. Under the benevolent aspect of King Edward the Fourth, it seemed to recover; and whilst King Henry the Eighth reigned, to have attained a greater height than at any time before.
But though the several Branches of the Order received some augmentation, from the favourable influence of this last mentioned Soveraign, yet the principal, to wit, the Grand Festival, began to flag, by a removal of the observation of St. George's day from Windesor (the place particularly appointed for it) and a proroga|tory celebration of the Grand Feast to other times. By which means, the honor of that princely Seat, and the advantages accrewing by the performance of the So|lemnities there, were diverted to those other places, whereto the observation of St. George's day was translated. The Article of the Statutes causing this great alte|ration, and which clashed so much with the design of the first Institutor, may be seen in the See Henry the Eighth's Sta|tutes, Art. 4. Appendix, where it is manifest, that when the Soveraign saw oc|casion, to prorogue the celebration of the Grand Feast, he might legally do it; but when he did so, 'tis there also evident, that the day of St. George, was ne|vertheless ordained to be duly observed, singly by it self, in what place soever the Soveraign (if within this Realm) should then reside; Windesor hereby be|ing not excluded.
It further implies the sacred Rites and Offices to be performed, with sundry other concerns of the Order, for besides the particulars therein innumerated, we may observe thence this general clause, that what other urgent Affair soever (relating to the Order) should offer it self to be performed, the same might be treated of, and receive dispatches in the Chapter held, where the Soveraign then should be, as fully as if he were at Windesor Castle.
So that hence forward, all things began to be ordered, both on the Eve, the Day of St. George, and the Morrow after, with full as great state, all Affairs as le|gally dispatched, and all Ceremonies as magnificently performed (except that of Offring up of Atchievements, which is peculiar and local to the Chappel of St. George in Windesor Castle) as could be observed, at the Grand Festival it self.
And how (by virtue of this Article) and with that Ceremonies St. George's day was held, when the Grand Feast was prorogued to some further time, is evident, from a full and ample Precedent (an. 22. H. 8.) now remaining in the Office of Arms.
For albeit the Soveraign, with Lib. N. p. 258. thirteen Knights-Companions, were at Winde|sor, upon the 22.23. and 24. of April that year, yet did they at that time observe only the Feast day of St. George (with the Eve and Morrow after) but deferred (by Lib. N. p. 258. Order in Chapter) the celebration of the Grand Feast, unto the 8. day of May ensuing; the Memorial whereof follows.
MS, in Offic. Arm. [M. 17.] fol. 32. The King went not to the Chapter before the first Evensong, but im|mediately to his Stall (viz. in the Chappel of the Ibid. Soveraign's Lodgings in the Upper Ward of the Castle of Windesor, not in the Chappel Royal of St. George) The Bishop of London Lord Cutberde Tunstall elect of Duresme did the Divine Service, and at Magnificat he and the Dean first censed the Altar, and after the King; both the high Altar and the Altar which was made before the King, were richly garnished with Images and over garnishments of Gold, and Silver, and Gilt, c. The Even|song the King returned to his  and his Grace, and the Knights of the Order were served of the void, c. And on the Morn at 9. of the Clockto be at Matyns, which was done above the Ordinary, the King ordained in the honor of St. George, a right noble Procession, whereat was 35 Copes of rich Cloth of Gold; after the Procession the King went immediately to his Stall, and High Mass, and offered as ac|customed, That done; Dinner, and 4 of the greatest Estates sat at the kings boards end. And the residue sat all along at the two Tables all on the one side, as accustomed, and before Evensong the King went to his Closet to the Chapter, and appointed the Duke of Suffolk to be his Lieu|tenant at the Feast, which was appointed to be kept the eight day of May then ensuing, accompanied with the Earl of Rutland, the Lord Sandys Lord Chamberlain, Sir William Fitz Williams.
Memoramdum, That the low Evensongs that were said before the King. were of St. George. Also the first low Mass in the morning song by the Lord George Grey of Dorset; two oder Masses of the day, of the which Lord John Longland Bishop of Lincolne sang the third Mass, the fourth low Mass was of Recordare, and was appointed that the high Mass done, the Mass of Requiem should begin.
Thus here we have (1.) The attendance of the Knights-Companions upon the Soveraign. (2.) the Chapter, which accustomably was held on the Eve of the Feast, implied, by observing, that the Soveraign went not unto it. (3.) The Ceremo|nies at the first Vespers. (4.) The Morning Service on St. George's day. (5.) The Grand Procession. (6.) The Solemn Offring. (7.) The Grand Dinner. (8.) The Chapter held before the second Vespers. (9.) The day for celebrating the Grand Festival appointed. And (10.) The Mass of Requiem, on the morrow after St. George's day celebrated.



SECT. VI. The Grand Feast neglected by King Edward the Sixth.
BUT King Edward the Sixth assuming the Soveraignty of this Noble Order, the days became more gloomy, in as much as during his Reign, there was no Anniversary of St. George kept at Windesor, by a Grand Festival. Under what churlih Fate this noble place then suffered, we cannot guess, other than the common calamity of that Age, wherein most Ceremonies, solemn or splendid, either (chiefly such as related to Divine Services) came under the suspicion of being superstitious, if not idolatrous. Insomuch as at a Chapter held at Greene|wich, upon the MS. fol. pen. Rob. Com. Alib. p. 24. b. 22. day of April, in the second year of his Reign (an aboli|tion being intended of all such Ceremonies, as were not consonant to the King's Injuctions then lately prescribed) it was Ordained and Decreed, that MS. fol. pen. Rob. Com. Alib. p. 24. b. then and for ever from thenceforth (at the Feast of this most Noble Order) no other Ceremonies should be observed, than such as were appointed in the following Letter. Which was at that Chapter agreed upon, and a little before the next years Feast day of St. George, sent from the Lords of the Council to the Knights-Companions, attributing the whole procedure, to the great piety of the then So|veraign, and the care he took, that certain abuses and preposterous Ceremonies of the Church, should be reformed: Whereby the Solemnity, State and mag|nificence of this Grand Festival was very much eclipsed.

MS. 4. penes E.W.G. AFter our most hearty commendations; For as much as the Kings Highness hath appointed a most godly Reformation of divers abuses and rites in the Church, to a more convenient and decent Order, of the which some hath been used heretofore, in the most honorable and amicable Order of the Garter, and being not reformed, there should make a disagreeing from his Majesty's most godly proceedings. There|fore it is his Majesty's will and pleasure, by the advice of us the Lord Protector, and other his Highness Council, that all such things, as be not conformable and agreeing to his Majesty's Injunctions, Orders, or Reformations, now of late pre|scribed, should be also in that most Noble Order and the Ceremonies thereof lest undone, and reformed as hereafter followeth. First, that no Procession be made with going about the Church or Church-yard, but the Kings Majesty's Procession, lately set forth in English to be used. His Majesty and other Knights of that honora|ble Order sitting in their Stalls, at the entry such Reverence to be made to the King's Majesty only as was heretofore. The Offring to be in the Box for the Poor, without any other Reverence or kissing of any Paten or other thing, but only at the return due Reverence to the King's Majesty as was used before. The Mass of Requiem to be left undone, but yet both upon St. George's day, and the next day a Mass to be sung with great Reverence; in the which immediately after the words of Consecra|tion is said, the Priest shall say the Pater Noster, and so turn and communicate all, or so many of the Order or other, after they have done, as shall be disposed godly at the same time to receive the Communion, according to such order as is prescribed in his Highness Book of Communion, and without any other Rite or Ceremony after the said Communion to be used, except it be some godly Psalm or Hymn to be sung in English, and so to end the said Service. All Chapters and other Rites concern|ing the said Order, not being contrary to these, to remain as they have been pre|scribed and used, the which we have thought good to signifie unto you, that you may follow the same accordingly, From Greenwich the 20. of April 1548.

This Decree we observe, signified not less than a Prohibition to the holding the Grand Fest at Windesor (although it spoke not so plain) at least the neg|lect of its celebration there, whilst King Edward the Sixth lived, makes it to

seem so. And albeit towards the end of this Soveraign's Reign, some care was or seemed taken, for a permissive holding of the said Feast, either upon the day of St. George, or some other day appointed by Prorogation, yet was it with|out any regard had to the ancient and usual place, the Castle of Windesor. For when the An. 5.  6. Ed. 6. ca. 3. Act of Parliament passed,An. 5.  6. Ed. 6. ca. 3. commanding the days therein mentioned to be kept holy, and none other (whereby the celebration of many days be|sides, which in former time, by the Canons of our Church appointed to be kept holy, were prohibited, and among the rest the Feast day of St. George, it being not found among those Feast days at that time established) It was considered, That a Proviso and allowance should be entred in the aforesaid Act, for the celebration of this Feast, particularly by the Knights-Companions of this most Noble Order, in these words.
Provided always, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that it shall be lawfull to the Knights of the right honorable Order of the Garter, and to every of them, to keep and celebrate solemnly the Feast of their Or|der, commonly called St. George's Feast, yearly from henceforth the 22.23. and 24. days of April, and at such other time and times, as yearly shall be thought convenient, by the Kings Highness his Heirs and Suc|cessors, and the said Knights of the said honorable Order, or any of them, now being, or hereafter to be, any thing in this Act heretofore men|tioned to the contrary notwithstanding.
Which Act, although it suffred a An. 1. Mar. cap. 2. Repeal by Queen Mary, yet strands it at this day in force, being An. 1. Iac. R. cap. 25. revived by King Iames, his repealing of that Statute of the first of Queen Mary, Cap. 2.


SECT. VII. Removed from Windesor by Queen Elizabeth.
BUT that which gave the greatest and almost fatal blow, to the growing Honor of this no less famous than ancient Castle of Windesor, and severed the Patrons Festival from the Place, was a Decree made at a Chapter held at Whitehall, upon St. George's day an. 9. Eliz. with the consent of the Knights-Com|panions then present, being 12 in number (namely, the Earls of Arundel and Penbroke, the Lord Clinton, Marquess of Northampton, Lord Howard of Effing|ham, Earl of Sussex, Lord Loughborow, Viscount Mountague, Earls of Leicester, Northumberland, Warwick, and Lord Hunsdon) to the effect following
Lib. C. p. 54. That if on the Vigil and day of St. George, the Feast were not held at Winde|sor according to the usual Custom, it should nevertheless be sufficient, if the obser|vation thereof were kept in the same place, where the Soveraign should then happen to be, where also all the rest of the Knights-Companions were obliged to be present, no less than if the Feast had been to be celebrated at Windesor. And henceforward the glory which Windesor Castle had alone possest for some Ages, began to be distributed to other places, nay, so severe was the later part of this Decree, to the interest of so flourishing a place, that it welnigh extended to a prohibition of all other Celebrations there, since it also commanded, Ibid. That no other Solem|nity under the notion of St. George's Feast, should thenceforth be celebrated at Windesor, except upon occasion of the Installation of some illustrious personage, and then also, not without the leave and appointment of the Soveraign.
And to say truth, this Statutes was but too strictly observed, all the remain|der of her Reign; for we meet not with one Feast of St. George, held simply and

peculiarly as a Feast in honor of the Order's Patron at Windesor (unless you mi|stakingly account any of the Feasts of Installation for those of St. George, which for the most part were held at the charge and expence of the Knights Installed) until the first year of King Iames: But then the Soveraign (as yet in Scotland) taking notice that the MS. quart. penes W. le N. Cl. day of the Celebration of the Feast of St. George ap|proched, and his Affairs hindring him from the observation of the just day, be|cause he could not be so soon present, at any of his Houses of Residence, where the same was meet to be kept, he therefore thought good to defer the Cele|bration thereof for a time, until he could conveniently honor the same with his own presence. To that purpose, by Commission dated the MS. quart. penes W. le N. Cl. 5. of April in the first year of his Reign, he appointed Charles Lib. C. p. 147. vide etiam MS. pen. E. W. G. f. 12. Earl of Nottingham his Lieu|tenant, for the Proroguing thereof unto the 3. day of Iuly next ensuing, De|claring also, that on that day he intended to Lib. C. p. 147. vide etiam MS. pen. E. W. G. f. 12. keep the said Feast and Ceremo|nies personally at Windesor.
This Lib. C. p. 147. Commission being read (upon the Knights-Companions assembling at Whitehall, on St. George's Lib. C. p. 147. Eve following) they forthwith proceeded to Vespers, which being finished, all the Knights-Companions present went up to the Closet, and there Decreed, Ibid. That the foresaid Festival should be celebrated upon the day, which the Soveraign had appointed.
And the Soveraign arriving at Windesor the Ibid. p. 150. 25. day of Iune following, short|ly after constituted the said Earl of Nottingham his Lieutenant, by Commission bearing date the second day of Iuly following, thereby impowering him to per|form the Ceremonies of the Feast (which it seems himself could not personally observe as was intended, though then in the Castle) on the 2.3. and 4. days of the said Month, upon which days it was with all pomp and state solemnized.
And thus after a long interval did the honor of the Feast then return, which had this effect (towards the end of the same Soveraign's Reign, and in that of his Son and Successor King Charles the First) that it begat a re-union of the Feast and Place; whereby that ancient Fabrick, famous for the Institution of this most Noble Order, retrived the honor of having its Solemnities celebrated within its Walls.


SECT. VIII. Of Prorogation of the Grand Feast.
HAving thus noted, that from the beginning of King Henry the Eight's Reign, until of late years, the Grand Feast was seldom observed upon the precise day of St. George; and that the occasion how both day and Feast, came to be celebrated apart, took its rise from the indulgence of the Statutes, in point of Prorogation: we shall further observe, that this Prorogation is of two sorts, either absolute, as being enjoined by the Statutes of the Order, or else arbitrary at the Soveraign's pleasure, when for some reason he saw just occasion therefore.
To the first of these it is said,Prorogation by Statute. E. 3. Stat. Art. 9. If the Feast day of St. George shall happen within 15 days next after Easter day, it shall be E. 3. Stat. Art. 9. prorogued to the Sunday fortnight or 15. day next after Easter day, and the reason of this is there set down, viz. E. 3. Stat. Art. 9. That every of the Knights-Companions might have the opportunity of coming thereunto, without being constrained to ride upon any of those three holy days, immediately fol|lowing Easter day. The same rule for Prorogation, where there is a concur|rence of these two Feasts, is likewise enjoined in the Statutes of King Henry the Fifth, and King Henry the Eighth.
And we observe, that when the Grand Feast (in this case of Easter) hath been kept before the expiration of the said 15 days, the Knights-Companions then absent (to avoid the penances incurr'd for their non-attendance) have laid

hold of this following excuse, Lib. N. p. 171. That the ancient Statutes of the Order were vio|lated, in keeping the Feast within fifteen days after Easter; and this was so alledg|ed, when Sir Ibid. pag. 170. Iohn Denham (then also Lord Treasurer) held, as President, the Feast of St. George at Windesor, the Ibid. pag. 170. 24. of April. an. 8. H. 7.
Anciently, where the Register mentions the Grand Feast to be held at Winde|sor, beyond the day of St. George, we find upon Calculation, that Easter day (in those years) fell too near the 23. of April, to celebrate the Festival on, with|out breaking the Law, which was the real cause of those Prorogations: As for instance in the Lib. N. pag. 90. 13. Regist. Char|ac. fol. 24. 24. and Lib. N. p. 115. 35. of King Henry the Sixth, when Easter day fell upon the 17. of April, and consequently St. George's day within the following week. In like manner in the Ib. p. 106. 29. and Pag. 111. 32. of the said King's Reign, Easter day hapned yet neerer to St. George's day, in the one upon the 25. and in the other upon the 21. of April. And in all of these cases, care was taken to Prorogue the celebra|tion of the Grand Feast, until some further day in the Month of May, imme|diately following, as from the before cited places doth appear.
Again an. 11. H. 8. Ib. Pag. 208. Quia festa dies Divi Georgii Paschatis in vigilia contigit, because the Feast day of St. George hapned upon Easter Eve, therefore the Sove|raign summoned a Chapter to be held, upon the Ib. Pag. 208. Thursday before Easter day at Richmond, where it was then held; and although there is nothing spoken, as to the Prorogation of the Feast, or when it was to be celebrated, yet doubtless something there was to this purpose then enacted, in pursuance of the foresaid Statute; else, why should it there be noted with the word quia, if it were not out of respect to the Feast of Easter, and that thereupon the said Chapter was then called.
To this place may be referred a Commission of Lieutenancy, made to Thomas Earl of Arundel, for holding the Grand Feast at Windesor, upon the Lib. N. p. 179. 24. of May, an. 21. H. 7. (the Soveraign keeping the day of St. George that year at Cambridge) the Prorogation being grounded upon the falling of St. George's day, within the excepted 15 days of Easter, as appears by the then Soveraign's Letters of no|tice to the said Lieutenant; which for the antiquity thereof, as that it is a testimony of the punctual observance of the Statutes, we have inserted in the Num. CLIX. Appendix.
And as the Knights-Companions had prohibitions put upon the solemnization of their Feast, in case of its interfering with Easter; so had the Church of En|gland in their observation of the day of St. George. For by the Ordinall of the Church of Salisbury, published an. 1508. it appears to have been the usage of that Church, that when the Feast day of St. George fell upon Easter day or Easter Eve, the celebration thereof was then deferred to the 9. day or some other day of May, as the case required in their Ecclesiastical Discipline: And our learn|ed Selden observes it noted in the end of an old Manuscript Ordinal of the Pro|vince of York, Tit. Honor, p. 816. That when St. George's day hapned to fall upon Easter Eve, the celebration was anticipated, and cast into the 8. or 9. day preceding, or into the 16. or 17. days of April.
Hereunto may we subjoin, that in the Solemnities of the Order, there hath sometimes been an omission (in part or in all) of the Service and Office ap|pointed by the Church to be used upon the day of St. George, when it hapned near to Easter, as it was an. 22. H. 8. St. George's day falling upon MS. in Of|fic. Armor. [M. 17.] f. 32. Saturday in Easter-week (the Soveraign then at Windesor celebrating the MS. in Of|fic. Armor. [M. 17.] f. 32. day there, though the Grand Feast, was prorogued to the 8. of May following) wherefore the MS. in Of|fic. Armor. [M. 17.] f. 32. Ser|vice of the Feast of Easter and not of St. George was celebrated on the Vigil (in the MS. in Of|fic. Armor. [M. 17.] f. 32. Chappel above, in the upper Quadrangle next St. George's Hall, not in the Colledge) but the low Evensongs said before the Soveraign, were of St. George.
In like manner Lib. N. p. 296. an. 38. H. 8. Good Friday falling upon the 23. of April (the day used to be kept sacred to St. George) the Service together with the Ceremo|nies wont to be performed to the honor of God, and in memory of St. George, were prorogued to Sunday the Lib. N. p. 296. 3. of May, being Low-Sunday, and the Lib. vocat. Dalton, p. 128. Service of the day took place.
So reverend a regard was anciently had for the Feasts appointed by the

Church to be kept holy, and the Vigils thereof, as also to the Divine Service, or|dained to be celebrated thereon, that this Feast of St. George, was by King Henry the Fifth's Statutes expresly prohibited to be held, if through the Prorogations aforesaid, it should chance to fall out upon the Lib. N. p. 66. 24. and 25. days of April But in all other Rolls and Copies of these Statutes, that have come to our view, we find the 26. day of April added to this place, (and so afterwards in King Henry the Eighth's Statutes) which was very requisite, because otherwise the second Vespers of St. Mark, might from the first Vespers of St. George receive interruption.
With these, the like Prohibition was enjoined, if the Feast fell upon the H. 5. Stat. Art. 9. last of April, the first, second, third, and fourth of May, in honor of the double Feast of St. Philip and Iacob, and of the Feast of the Inven|tion of the Cross of our Lord Iesus Christ; for which cause in the 9. and 10. years of King Henry the Eighth, the celebration of the Grand Feast was prorogued to the 10. and 16. days of May at Windesor, which were the Sundays Lib. N. p. 205.  207. next fol|lowing the Feast of the Invention of the holy Cross, in those two years. So like|wise if it fell on the Feasts of the H. 5. Stat. Art. 9. Ascension, and Penticost.
Thus far in reference to these enumerated Festivals, did the Statutes of the Order provide; as also where the case might fall within the compass of any Idem, vide etiam H. 8. Stat. Art. 8. other solemn Feast ordained by the Church, when the first or second Vespers thereof might (through such Prorogations) be hindred or disturbed; which were for ought we find, until the time of our Reformation of Religion (begun by King Edward the Sixth) duly observed: But since upon passing the Act of Parliament before mentioned, for singling some few days, out of those many, that were before kept holy, there hath been no due observation given to these Injunctions, but that the Grand Feast of St. George, hath by Prorogation, been celebrated upon any of them indifferently, the Feast of Easter only ex|cepted. And in this case of Easter, after such time as the Statutes were new modelled by King Henry the Eighth, the time for Prorogation of the Grand Feast was left more arbitrary (so also when it fell out upon any Fish or Fasting-day) Ibid. even at the Soveraign's pleasure; and therefore since then (when the said two Feasts hapned to concur) the adjournments have pass'd but for some few days.
As for instance, St. George's day, an. 18. Eliz. fell upon Easter-Monday, and thereupon the Soveraign appointed a Chapter to be held in the Privy Chamber at Whitehall, on MS. penes G. O. Y. p. 123. Easter Eve, wherein it was Ordered: That the Feast of St. George should be adjourned, until Tuesday the MS. penes G. O. Y. p. 123. 24. of April (being Tuesday in Easter week) and by this appointment, the very day celebrated by the Church, for that of St. George, became the Eve to the Grand Feast, and was so observed by the Soveraign and Knights-Companions.
Of later times, viz. MS. penes E. W. G. f. 151. b. an. 12. Iac. R. when St. George's day fell upon MS. penes E. W. G. f. 151. b. Easter-Eve, the celebration thereof was deferred until MS. penes E. W. G. f. 151. b. Thursday then next following.
Lastly, his late Majesty of ever sacred memory, being a great restorer of the ancient Solemnities and Discipline of this Order, punctual even in circumstances of Honor, and extraordinary tender of infringing any of the Statutes, having prorogued the Feast of St. George from the Palmer's Iourn. p. 32  33. 8.9. and 10. days of February, in the 18. year of his Reign, to the Palmer's Iourn. p. 32.  33. 18.19. and 20. days of April following, at the City of York; and the time falling out to be within 15 days of Easter, although he might (by the power of King Henry the Eighth's Art. 8. Statutes, and those Prece|dents before recited) have kept the same upon the days designed: Neverthe|less without a particular Dispensation drawn and made authentick, by the Great Seal of the Order, and his own Royal Signature, would not proceed to the Ce|remonies of that celebration.
We come now to the second sort of Prorogations, Prorogation at pleasure which are meerly arbitrary, and wholly dependent upon the Soveraign's pleasure, yet warranted sufficient|ly from the words [Causa postulante] set down in the beginning of the Fourth Article of King Henry the Eighth's Statutes; as also by the great latitude given unto the Soveraigns of this most Noble Order, out of compliance with their ur|gent Affairs, in the 8. Article following, quo Supremus volet prorogabitur. But we observe, that long before the making this Statute, something of like nature

had been practised, and the Grand Feast prorogued at the pleasure of the Sove|raign (the day of St. George being nevertheless observed) albeit the Registers render not the cause: To manifest which, we shall instance in a few Examples. The first thing memorable in this kind (of which any Record is extant) is that an. 5. H. 5. when about the Lib. N. pag. 57. 18. of August (neer 4 Months after St. George's day) the Soveraign (then ingaged in War with France) having reduced to his obedience the not inconsiderable Town of Lib. N. pag. 57. Caen, and made the Duke of Cla|rence Governour thereof; Lib. N. pag. 57. took order as far as the present exigency of Affairs would permit, to have the Feast of St. George there celebrated, and with great solemnity created 15 Knights into the Order.
So Ex lib. vo|cat. Dalton. an. 22. E. 4. the Soveraign with the rest of the Knights-Companions, kept all the Solemnities of the Order in Ex lib. vo|cat. Dalton. St. Paul's Church London, and dined in the Bishop of London's Ex lib. vo|cat Dalton. Palace (at which time he received from the Pope a Ex lib. vo|cat. Dalton. Sword and Cap of Maintenance) and albeit the mention of St. George's day occur not expresly in the place, whence we have this account, nevertheless, observing both out of the Pag. 148. Black Book, and the Fol. 49. Registrum Chartaceum, that the Grand Feast, it self, was by the Lord Matrevers held at Windesor, within few days after St. George's day, that very year, viz. the 29. of April. Therefore these Solem|nities at St. Paul's, may most probably be thought to have been observed upon the very day of St. George; for they could not be celebrated in any part of the year following the aforesaid 29. of April, because the Grand Feast it self was then already past.
In like manner King Henry the Seventh, in the 20. year of his Reign, went on Lib. N. pag. 177. St. George's day in solemn Procession and very great State, to the forementioned Cathedral, yet notwithstanding on the 4. of May following, the Grand Feast was observed at Lib. N. pag. 177. Windesor, by the Earl of Lib. N. pag. 177. Arundel (deputed by the Soveraign) and four other of the Knights-Companions appointed for his Assistants.
Again, an. Regist. Chart. f. 53. b.  Lib. N. p. 204. 8. H. 8. the Soveraign being at Eltham on St. Regist. Chart. f. 53. b.  Lib. N. p. 204. George's day, it was in a Chapter there held, Decreed, That the accustomed celebration of the Feast of St. George, should be observed at Regist. Chart. f. 53. b.  Lib. N. p. 204. Windesor, upon Sunday next after Trinity Sunday, being the Regist. Chart. f. 53. b.  Lib. N. p. 204. 25. of May ensuing; and the Marquess Dorset was then also appointed Lieutenant to the Soveraign for holding thereof, and the Earl of Es|sex (in whose room the Lord Regist. Chart. f. 53. b.  Lib. N. p. 204. Poynings was afterwards substituted) with the Lords La Ware, Mountegle, and Lovell his Assistants.
And from this time it became annually customary, especially all the subsequent years of King Henry the Eighth's Reign, Queen Mary's, and unto the 9. of Queen Elizabeth, to keep the day of St. George, wheresoever the Soveraign at that time abode, which for the most part was at Greenewich, or Whitehall, on which day (as also on the Eve and morning after the day) the usual Solemnities were ob|served, and a noble Feast provided, as hath been said: But as to the celebra|tion of the Grand Festival it self, that was in one of the Chapters, held during the foresaid celebrations, and most commonly on St. George's day, adjourned unto some further time, and then solemnized at Windesor by Prorogation, not by the Soveraigns themselves, but by their Lieutenants and their Assistants, especi|ally deputed and appointed for that purpose.
But to proceed with the causes of Prorogation, which were either for some considerable reasons, or upon emergent occasions. An. 1. Mariae, the Soveraign ce|lebrating the day of St. George, at her Mannor of St. Lib. G. p. 7. Iames's, Philip then Prince of Spain, and Henry Earl of Sussex, were on the Ibid. p. 9. morrow after elected into the Order; whereupon it was also decreed, Ibid. p. 9. That the inauguration of these two Knights-Elect, should be prorogued until the Prince came over into England, which hapning upon the 21. day of Iuly following, the Grand Feast, together with that of the Elect-Knights Installations, were appointed to be celebrated together; to which purpose a Appendix, Num. CLX. Letter was afterwards sent unto the Knights-Companions for their repair thither, against the 5. of August then next following.
Again, an. Lib. C. p. 19. 3.  4. Ph.  Mar. at a Chapter held at Westminster upon the 22. of April, the Ibid. pt. 20. Feast of St. George (together with the Installation of three Knights at that time Elected) was appointed to be held at Windesor, on the Ibid. pt. 20. 9. day of

May following, and by a Chapter summoned at the same place, the Ib. p. 21. 3. of May be|fore the appointed day for keeping the Feast, the same was prorogued unto the Ib. p. 21. 5. of December following, Ib. p. 21. because of the manifold and urgent affairs of the King and Queen. But before that designed time, another Chapter was held at Saint Iames's, upon the Ibid. pag. 22. last day of October in the 4. and 5. years of their Reigns, wherein it was again prorogued unto the Ibid. pag. 22. first Sunday after Twelfth-day, viz. the 9. of Ianuary then following, Ibid. pag. 22. if by that time the King (who it seems was gone out of Flanders) should return into England; but there appearing afterwards no hopes of his coming over against that prefixed time, another Chapter was sum|moned and held at Greenewich the Ibid. pag. 22. 5. of Ianuary, wherein it was Decreed, Ibid. pag. 22. ur|gent Affairs requiring, that the said Feast should be further prorogued, unto the Ibid. pag. 22. 20. of February next coming, and then the Lieutenant and Assistants appointed to the first Prorogation, should celebrate this solemn Feast at Windesor, in man|ner as it was Decreed, the 22. of April preceding. Nevertheless, the Ibid. p. 23. sixth day of February after, in another Chapter, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions De|creed, to prorogue the last mentioned Prorogation unto Ibid. p. 23. St. George's day, then next following, Ibid. p. 23. Because both in respect of the meeting of the Parliament, and other Affairs of great importance, as also by reason of the War that was begun, the said Feast could not conveniently be before observed.
In like manner, an. 2. Eliz. upon the Ibid. pag. 33. 24. of April, it was Decreed, that on Sun|day the Ibid. pag. 33. 5. of May the Feast of St. George should be observed with the accustom|ed celebrations; but that morning in a Chapter held at Whitehall, Ibid. p. 34. for very high and important causes, was it prorogued until Sunday the 12. day of May imme|diately following, on which day it was solemnized at Windesor.
Again, King Iames having designed his Journey into Scotland (to begin the Ib. p. 189. 20 of March, an. 14. regni sui) he assembles a Chapter at Whitehall, the second day of that Month, and therein, by reason that for the cause aforesaid, Ib. p. 189. Saint George's Feast for the year ensuing, could not conveniently be kept on the ac|customed day and place, decreed to celebrate the same at Windesor the Ib. p. 189. 13. day of September next following, where it was accordingly observed.
So also for causes of another, but sadder nature, an. 17. Iac. R. viz. Queen Anne's Ib. p. 192. death, and the Soveraign's dangerous Ib. p. 192. sickness, which had brought him also neer to the gates of death, was the Grand Feast prorogued from St. George's day, to the Ib. p. 192. 26. of May in the same year, and then celebrated at Greenewich.
And an. 1. Car. 1. the Soveraign not thinking sit Lib. R. p. 26. for several causes, at that time to keep the Grand Feast, prorogued it from the Lib. R. p. 26. 22.23. and 24. days of April, unto the 16.17. and 18. of August following, thence again until the Ibid. pag. 28. 4.5. and 6. of October, and lastly to the 23. 24. and 25. of November in the same year, and then observed it at Ibid. pag. 28. Windesor.
Sometimes this Feast hath been put off, out of a respect unto the day, where|on it fell, as Ibid p. 17. an. 22. Iac. R. St. George's day then hapning upon a Friday, the Soveraign therefore prorogued it until the 26. 27. and 28. days of April, at which time it was celebrated at Windesor: And the authority unto which re|gard was had in this place, was that Clause in the 8. Article of King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, wherein the keeping of St. George's Feast was prohibited, if it fell upon any Lib. N. pag. 218. Fish or Fasting days.
So also Lib. Carol. p. 82. an. 22. Car. 2. it falling upon a Saturday, was prorogued to the 27. 28. and 29. days of April following.
And albeit in times past this Feast hath been, for the most part upon Proro|gations, observed upon a Sunday, yet of late in veneration to this day, it hath been likewise prohibited, as an. 2. Car. 1. St. George's day falling upon a MS. penes Ed. Faucon|bridge, gen. Sunday, thereupon the Solemnity was put off until MS. penes Ed. Faucon|bridge, gen. Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday fol|lowing, being the 26.27. and 28. of April, upon which days it was observed at MS. penes Ed. Faucon|bridge, gen. Whitehall. But where the MS. penes Ed. Faucon|bridge, gen. Eve hapned upon a Sunday (as it did the MS. penes Ed. Faucon|bridge, gen. next year after) there the Feast received no MS. penes Ed. Faucon|bridge, gen. Prorogation.
In the year of our Lord 1636. the Soveraign was moved, by reason of the Row's Iour|nal, p. 4. Contagion and Sickness, dispersed into several places of the Kingdom, and to avoid the danger of the concourse of much People, during the Infection aswell

for other great and important Affairs, to give several Prorogations to this Feast, from the 22.23. and 24. dys of April (being the usual days of this Solemnity) first to the Ibid. 8.9. and 10. days of Iuly following, then again to the 26.27. and 28. of September, and from that time unto the 13.14. and 15. of December, and lastly to the 17.18. and 19. of April in the 13. year of his Reign; upon which last appointed days it was solemnized at Ibid. Whitehall. Where on the Lib. R. p. 125. morrow af|ter the Feast, it being considered in a Chapter, that the day of St. George was neer at hand, and for other special reasons, the Soveraign was there pleased to defer the Celebration of the approaching Feast, unto the Lib. R. p. 125. 25.26. and 27. days of September ensuing: And on the 13. day of the said September, prorogued the Prorogation unto the Row's Iour|nal, p. 22. 2.3. and 4. of October next following, to Windesor, where it was accordingly observed.
Within few Months after, the Soveraign having determined to create the then Prince (now most happily the present Soveraign) a Knight, and to propose him in Election, as a Companion of this most Noble Society, did for the more conveni|ency of his Installation (the Ibid. p. 38. 25. of February, an. 13. Car. 1.) defer the cele|bration of the Grand Feast from the 22.23. and 24. days of April then coming on, to the 21.22. and 23. days of May, when the same was observed with high Solemnity. This being the third Grand Festival, which had been celebrated personally by the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, within the Revolution of one year, and something more, and to keep up the honor of Windesor Castle, two of them were solemnized within its Walls. And before the return of the next Anniversary of St. George, the Soveraign upon consultation had (in Palmer's Iournal pro an. 1639. p. 2. February, an. 14. Car. 1.) with divers of the Knights-Companions, about the Prorogation of the Feast, which was supposed could not (by reason of his impor|tant occasions to repair into the North) be celebrated at the usual time in the next ensuing April; thereupon he thought fit to adjourn the same, (which was done the Ibid. pag. 3. 26. of February aforesaid) unto the Ibid. pag. 3. 2.3. and 4. of Iuly next coming (York being the place the Soveraign thought most convenient to hold the Feast at) but afterwards being in his Camp neer Barwick, and taking into considera|tion, the impossibility of keeping the Feast at York upon the before designed days, and conferring with some of the Knights-Companions, that then attended on his person, he the Ibid. pag. 7. 22. of Iune, an. 15. Car. 1. adjourned the same until the Ibid. pag. 7. 8.9. and 10. of October following to Windesor, at which time it was Pag. 16. there celebrated.
After this, the troubles and tempest of War approaching, the Prorogations be|came more frequent, and such places appointed to hold the Feast in, as the So|veraign thought most convenient, or had occasion to reside at. Nevertheless the adjournments passed always regularly under the Great Seal of the Order, and the Soveraign's Sign Manual.


SECT. IX. Of Commissions for Prorogation.
WE have not met with any Precedent of Commissions for Prorogation of the Grand Feast of St. George, more ancient than that of the Append. Num. CLVIII. 11. of Decem|ber, an. 12. Car. 1. left us by Sir Thomas Rowe, wherein is notice taken of all the former adjournments of the Grand Feast, from St. George's day preceding until that time, with the reasons thereof, and chiefly upon consideration had of the then spreading Sickness, together with a command to the Knights-Companions and Officers of the Order, to attend upon the Soveraign on the new assigned days, viz. the 17.18. and 19 of April following, for the celebration of the said Feast.
As to the substance hereof, the succeeding Commissions do very neer agree, yet with some small difference; as first, the Preambles are general and run thus: Whereas upon special Reasons, and other important Affairs, c. except only that Commission issued the 25. of February An. 13. Car. 1. 1637. whose Preamble being fitted to the particular occasion, was this, Row's Iour|nal, p. 38. Whereas we have determined to create the Prince our eldest Son a Knight, and to propose him in Election, as a Companion of our most Noble Order, for the more conveniency of his Installation, we have thought fit to defer the celebration of the Feast of St. George, c.
But in the Commissions of Prorogation of the Grand Feasts, dated the Ibid. p. 16. 19. of April, and the Pag. 38. 25. of February, an. 19. Car. 1. the place appointed for Celebra|tion is omitted, which defect we find in the above mentioned Precedent also. Nevertheless, afterwards that material part came to be inserted, and first of all in that Commission of the 26. of February, an. 14. Car. 1. where the place (be|ing the City of York) is put into the body of the Commission. And when the late War drew on, and consequently the Soveraign could not so well ascertain the place beforehand, because of his continual and uncertain motion, accord|ing as occasion and advantages offered themselves: Then we observe, that the Grand Feast was appointed to be kept at any such place, as (when the time ap|pointed by Prorogation was neer expired) should seem to the Soveraign most convenient. But from the body of the Commissions, the nomination of Place, afterwards slided downwards into the close, and shewed it self in that part, where the Injunction was given, for the Knights-Companions and Officers to at|tend upon the days before appointed, being expressed either thus, Com. 20. Apr. an 18. Ca. 1. Wheresoever we shall then be, c. or else thus, 13 Feb. 18.2. Apr. 19.  20. Ian. 20. Car. 1. at such Places as we shall timely appoint, c. which later way of signification was first used in Commissions issued forth, after the Soveraign came to setle at Oxford.
Now the most ordinary course, preparatory to the issuing forth such Com|missions of Prorogation, hath been by the Soveraign's Declaration in Chapter, or otherwise the signification of his pleasure, to the Chancellor of the Order at any other time, who thereupon drew up the Commission, and presented it to the Soveraign, for his Sign Manual, and then affixed thereunto the Great Seal of the Order. Nevertheless, where the Chancellor was not at hand, to receive the commands for adjournment, immediately from the Soveraign, we find his plea|sure in this particular, was then signified to him by some other hand, with command to summon the Knights-Companions and Officers accordingly. For so was it done by Sir Row's Iour|nal, p. 22. Francis Windebanke, Knight, one of the Principal Secre|taries of State, by his Letters from Oatlands, directed to Sir Thomas Row, dated the 11. of September, an. 13. Car. 1. for Prorogation of the Grand Feast, from the 25. of September then neer at hand, unto the 2.3. and 4. of October following.
And as all the preceding Adjournments of the Grand Feast, have been either Decreed in Chapter, or directed immediately from the Soveraign: So have we also seen a Precedent that hath impowered a Lieutenant, to prorogue the same, nevertheless to the time and place before appointed by the Soveraign, and men|tioned in the Commission of Lieutenancy. And this was a Commission directed to Charles Earl of Nottingham, an. MS. quart. pe|nes W. le N. Cl. 1. Iac. R. wherein, after the Soveraign had pre|mised the impediments, which hindred him from his personal observation of the said Feast, upon the prefixed day then neer approaching, he thereby made choice of the said Earl to be his Lieutenant, and impowered him to assemble in Chapter, upon the Vigil of St. George, such of the Knights-Companions, as might be con|veniently gotten together, and then and there to intimate unto them the great causes that withheld him from keeping the Feast at the set time, and by virtue of the said Commission to defer the same until the 3. of Iuly following. Fur|thermore charging and requiring all the Knights-Companions not to fail to be present at that day, wheresoever the same should happen to be, to perform and celebrate with him the said Feast, according to the laudable Orders and Insti|tutions of the Order. And lastly, he required the said Lieutenant to give warn|ing of his pleasure to all other Knights-Companions, who should not be present at the Chapter by him assembled.



SECT. X. That the Grand Feast ought to be celebrated once every Year.
AND though Prorogations of the Grand Feast have been occasionally made use of, upon the several and important reasons above discoursed of, and sometimes a necessity hath fallen out to appoint two, three, or four of them in a year, by proroguing the Prorogations; yet is no such Adjournment legally to be enlarged beyond the next St. George's day ensuing, because that every year, that is, once before the revolution of the year determine (the year in this case en|tring upon St. George's day) the Grand Feast ought to be solemnized. For so we see it was not only ordained at the E. 3. Stat. Art. 9. Institution of the Order, but confirmed by the succeeding H. 5. Stat. Art. 9. H. 8. Stat. Art. 3. Statutes. And where our Historians take notice of the Grand Feast, they speak the same thing, to wit, That it ought Froisard. l. 1. c. 100.  Po|lid. Virg. Aug. Hist. lib. 10. p. 378. annually to be observ|ed; Hence it is frequently called in the Registers, Annua Festivitas, Solennitas annua, Celebritas annua, Epulum quotannis, Convivium quotannis, and the like.
Of late times an occasion hapned, which brght this Clause of the Statutes into a solemn debate in Chapter, which for the result thereof became very re|markable: And the Order thereupon drawn up, being full and positive, not only as to the occasion, but also as to the circumstances, and determination, may not unfitly come in here.

Ex ipso Au|togr. pen. Iac. Palmer nuper Cacell. At a Chapter held in Whitehall the 26. day of February 1640. Present.
The Soveraign.
The Earl of Penbroke and Mont|gomery.
The Earl of Salisbury.
The Earl of Holland.
The Earl of Lindesey.
The Prince.
The Earl of Arundel and Surrey.
The Earl of Dorset.
The Earl of Berkshire.
The Lord Marquess Hamilton.


The Duke of Lenox.
The Chancellor.
Garter.

The Soveraign proposed unto the Knights of the Order, that having pro|rogued the Celebration of the Feast of St. George from time to time, unto the first, second, and third of March, so near unto Lent, that if the Feast were not held on those days, it could not be held within the year, because the 23. of April for the next year did fall upon Good-Friday, and so conse|quently must have been kept in Lent for this Year, or not at all: And con|sidering the great and important Affairs of the Parliament, he moved this Question, Whether if there were no Feast kept this year, it would be any ble|mish unto the Honor of the Order, or not? And whether he might not di|spence with the Statute, and defer it until the next Year? requiring the Knights and Companions to consult and to give their opinions therein: The result whereof was, that though they did all confess an absolute power to di|spence in the Soveraign, yet some of the Knights proposed unto him, that seeing from the Institution until this day, there was not found any year where|in the Feast was wholly omitted, but that some of his Ancestors, though en|gaged in War beyond the Seas, either solemnized the Feast in their own pre|sence, or by Commission in England, which was averr'd by the Chancellor

to be both the fundamental Statute and constant practice. They humbly besought the Soveraign, not to begin to make a breach in that constant order, which hath been so long and uninterruptedly continued; whereupon it was resolved by general Vote, that the Feast should be celebrated upon those afore appointed days in the last Prorogation.
By which determination it sufficiently appears, of what concernment the then Soveraign and Knights-Companions, conceived it to the Honor of the Order, and observation of the Statutes, for the Grand Feast to be celebrated once with|in the year. Besides we may observe, that it was not thought expedient to be dispensed with, albeit the weight of important Affairs were justly alledged to ballance the Law, and ground a further Prorogation. Nay, rather than the Sta|tutes should suffer violation, the said Feast was Palmer  Iourn. p. 29. accordingly solemnized on the said first, second, and third days of March, although so straitned in time, that there was not above two days space, to make preparation and provision for the doing of it.
But within a few years after, the unhappy distractions had prevailed so far, that the Soveraign was necessitated to assume his power of dispensation in this particular, and by continued annual Prorogations from the 22.23. and 24. days of April, an. 18. of his Reign (being then at York) to defer the Solem|nity from year to year; so that during the remainder of his Reign, this Grand Celebration had never the fortune to be again observed.
And here the glory of this solemn Feast began first to set with us, unto which succeeded a long night: But blessed be God we have lived to behold it rise again, and seen the Royal Soveraign and most Illustrious Knights-Com|panions fill those too long vacant Stalls, and late languishing Fabrick with wonted lustre.




CHAP. XIX. OF Preparations FOR THE Grand Feast OF THE ORDER.

SECT. I. Of Letters giving notice of the Time and Place.
TOwards the setting forth and celebration of this Grand Festival, there are several things to be prepared beforehand, chiefly such as are usual and of course; nevertheless among these we shall have opportunity, now and then, to touch upon some things extraordi|nary, where the occasion hath invited the Soveraign, to give any additional lustre to the state and glory of the Feast.
The things therefore to be prepared of course, are (1.) Letters directed to all the Knights-Companions and Officers of the Order, resident within the Kingdom; to give them notice of the time and place, when and where the Feast is to be cele|brated. (2.) Letters of Dispensation to such Knights-Companions as the Soveraign shall please to excuse from their attendance at the Feast. (3.) Commissions of Lieutenancy (and sometimes of Assistance) when the Soveraign cannot personally solemnize the same. (4.) Warrants for the Removal of Atchievments, if at this time there be any such occasion. (5.) Scutcheons and Stiles to be set upon the back of each Knight-Companion's Stall, if the Feast be held elsewhere than at Wdesor. (6.) The Chappel to be decently adorned. (7.) the Great Hall (or  place where the Grand Dinner is to be prepared) to be likewise very no| nished. And (8.) lastly, Officers to be appointed (besides those of the Or| and of Arms) who are to give peculiar attendance upon the Soveraign at  Grand Solemnity.
As touching the first of these particulars, the Chancellor of the Order is to at|nd the Soveraign, in convenient time before the approach of St. George's day,

to know his pleasure, whether he will hold the Grand Feast on that day or otherwise prorogue the Solemnities to some further time, and whether it shall be celebrated at Windesor, Whitehall, or what other place.
If the Soveraign shall be induced to Prorogue the Feast from St. George's day to some further time, then is the Chancellor to draw up a Commission to that pur|pose, of which we have discourst in the preceding Sect. 9. Chapter. After this, Letters issued out, anciently under the Soveraign's Sign Manual, both to his Lieutenant (when he held not the Feast in Person) as also to each of the Knights-Compa|nions, giving them notice of the time and place; some of which are placed to the Num. CLIX.  CIX. Appendix; but of late, the Chancellor hath been appointed to dispatch these Letters of notice in his Num CLXI.  CLXII. own name.
But whether the Feast be held upon the day of St. George, or on any other day by Prorogation, the Soveraign's pleasure was usually known so long before the appointed time, that these circular Letters sent from the Chancellor, issued out, sometimes Ex Collect. W. le N Cl. six, Row's Iour|nal, p. 16. five, Ib. p. 5  20. four, Ib p. 39. three, two or Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Pal|mer. one Month at least, before the assigned day. And in cases where Prorogations have been yet further adjourn|ed, care hath been taken to issue out new Commissions in like convenient time before the old were expired; as may be observed in the cases of adjournments mentioned in the last Chapter, that so those Knights-Companions, who are most remote from Court, may have sufficient time to prepare, either for attendance at the day assigned, or upon just occasion procure the favour of Letters of Di|spensation for absence: And further, that the absent Knights may thereby take notice of the day set, because such are obliged to hold the Feast in their own Houses at the same time.
Besides, the Letters directed to the Knights-Companions, the Chancellor is like|wise to write his Letters to each of the Append. Num. CLXIII. Officers of the Order, to give them the like notice.


SECT. II. of Dispensations for not attending at the Grand Feast.
IT having been complained of, by the Chancellor of the Order, and taken no|tice of by the Soveraign, and Knights-Companions, in a Chapter held at the Ce|lebration of the Grand Feast, at Whitehall the 18. of April, an. 13. Car. 1. Rowe's Iourn p. 10. de eti|am Lib. R. p. 119. That of late years, divers Knights-Companions of this most Noble Order, had neglected both their attendance upon the Soveraign at the Feast of St. George, or to send under their Seals of Arms, their probable Excuses, and Petitions, for License and Dispensation, contrary to the most ancient Statutes and their duty: It was therefore then among many other things Ordered and Decreed, Rowe's Iourn p. 10. de eti|am Lib. R. p. 119. That from thenceforth every Knight of the Order, should be bound to attend upon the usual days, or such as should be assigned by Prorogation. But in case of Sickness, or other important business, by reason whereof they might have cause to be excused, they should send under their Seals of Arms to the Chancellor, the reasons of their desire for leave of absence, twenty days at least before the usual or assigned time, to be pre|sented by him to the Soveraign; and whosoever should neglect so to do, except in sudden accidents, should not be dispensed with, but incur the penalty of the Statutes.
And it is evident, that this way of enjoining the Knights-Companions, to send the cause of that impediment, which should hinder their said attendance, un|der their Seals of Arms, hath been very ancient; for the Black Book records an Order in Chapter, held at the Grand Feast, an. 1. H. 6. Lib. N. pag. 79. to this very purpose; it further enjoining, that Lib. N. pag. 79. when such absent Knights were present at the next Feast, they should be obliged then to render the reason, why they should not undergo the penalty of their former absence, since the Statutes enjoin it.
In pursuance of the before mentioned Decree of the 18. of April, Sir Thomas Rowe, then Chancellor, added to those his Letters, dated the 18. day of May 1637. and directed to the Knights-Companions under the Seal of the Order (which signified, that for special reasons and other important Affairs (in a Chap|ter held at Whitehall, on the 19. of April in the foresaid year) the Soveraign had prorogued the Grand Feast, from the 22.23. and 24. days of April, an. 14. Car. 1. to the 25.26. and 27. of September then next ensuing) this following Postcript.
Row's Iourn. pag. 20. According to two Acts made in Chapter, in the presence of the Soveraign, the 18. of April 1637. concerning the neglect of the Knights and Compani|ons of the most Noble Order of the Garter, in their attendance upon his Ma|jesty at the Feast of St. George, and a command expresly received, to signi|fie so much to your Lordship: I have sent to your Lordship, the true Copy of the See Chap. 22. Sect. 4. Acts themselves; it being resolved in case of omission of your lawful and timely excuse, under your Seal of Arms, and in occasion of absence, of keep|ing the Solemnity in your own house, that no dispensation shall be given, but your Lordship shall incur the penalties of the ancient Statutes, which are; You Videsis E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 10. H. 8. Stat. Art. 9. shall not be admitted to the Chapter, nor to your Seat the next year; but shall stand before it as do the Choristers: In Procession you shall march before, and not in your place among the Knights, and shall Offer last; and that this Penance being done, you shall come before the Seat of the Soveraign, and ask absolution; but if two years successively your Lordship shall omit your atten|dance and timely suit for Dispensation, you shall pay Twenty Marks, and that sum be doubled for every year of such omission, until you be reconciled, and pardoned by the Soveraign; whereof I beseech your Lordship to take knowledge.
It afterwards appears, by an Palmer's Iourn. pro an. 1639. p. 61. Order past in Chapter, of the 9. of October, an. 15. Car. 1. that this early notice to be given, from such of the Knights-Compa|nions, as upon the causes before mentioned should be absent, was appointed in favour chiefly of the Palmer's Iourn. pro an. 1639. p. 61. Officers of the Soveraign's Houshold, who (by know|ing in due time, who should be absent and who not) Palmer's Iourn. pro an. 1639. p. 61. might make timely and certain provision for the said Feast.
Upon notice sent by the Chancellor to the Knights-Companions as aforesaid, if any of them should happen to be sick, weak, infirm, or have any other lawful impediment or occasion, which might justly hinder or excuse their repair to the Court, and attendance at the Feast; they may acquaint the Chancellor there|with; whose duty it is to represent the same to the Soveraign, and thereupon to procure his Letters of Dispensation for their absence, if the Soveraign be so pleased.
Which Letters are to be conveyed by Garter, or carried by whomsoever he shall appoint; for which there was a Fee by the Mile allowed him, by the fol|lowing Order, past at a meeting held by the Knights-Commissioners, for regu|lating things relating to the Order, the first of October an. 13. Car. 1.
Row's Iourn. pag. 37. Whereas it having anciently been the Office of Garter King of Arms, to disperse and send Letters for Prorogation, Dispensation, and other Com|mands of the Soveraign, unto the Knights absent from the Court, which in many cases must be chargeable, it was this day Ordered, That if he should send any Act of favour or Dispensation to any Knight absent from his Majesty's Court, or four Miles from the City of London; he to whom such Dispensa|tion should be sent, should pay to his Servant or Messenger, for every days Tra|vel, as much as is allowed and paid to any other Messenger of his Majesty's House or Chamber.
Variety of occasions and accidents, as grounds to move the Soveraign, and inducements to obtain his Dispensation, we have seen in several Letters sent to Sir Tho. Row, when Chancellor, upon the before mentioned Injunction. Decreed an. 13. Car. 1. and always the causes have been inserted in the Preambles of the Dispensations, some of which are to be seen in the Numb. CLXIV. CLXV. CLXVI.  CLXVII. Appendix.



SECT. III. Of Commissions of Lieutenancy and Assistance.
TOuching the third particular, namely, the preparing Commissions of Lieu|tenancy, in such cases where the Soveraign cannot personally celebrate the Feast; as also Commissions for those, whom he thinks fit to appoint for his As|sistants; we shall transfer the Discourse thereof from hence to that head in the Sect. 5. next Chapter, under which we shall speak of the constituting a Lieutenant; and only note here, that the Chancellor is to draw up these Commissions, and attend the Soveraign for his hand, and afterwards to pass them under the Lib. R. p. 120. Great Seal of the Order.


SECT. IV. Warrant for the removal of Atchievements.
IF there be occasion for the removal of any of the Knights-Companions At|chievements, at the Grand Feast (which hath seldom hapned, unless an In|stallation were at the same time celebrated) then doth the Chancellor obtain the Soveraign's Warrant, directed to Garter, for the doing thereof: Concerning which (as also the cause and reason of such removal) we have already, and at large discoursed, among the Chap. II Sect. 6. Preparations to be made for the Personal Installa|tion of a Knight-Companion; that place being most proper, in regard the remo|val of them doth chiefly concern that Ceremony.


SECT. V. Scutcheons of Arms and Stiles.
HEretofore when the Celebrations of St. George's day were kept at any other place besides Windesor-Castle, it was thought most necessary to provide large Paper Scutcheons; wherein were marshalled the Arms and Quarterings of the Soveraign and each Knight-Companion, in Metal and Colour, encompassed with a Garter; and thereon Crowns, Caps, or Coronets peculiar to each Dignity, with their Stiles and Titles fairly printed underneath (but without Crests or Sup|porters) to be set on the back side of their Stalls, on the Eve of the Feast: But the Soveraign's Arms were impaled with those of St. George, over which an Im|perial Crown was placed, and these (in defect of the Plates and Banners, set over their Stalls in the Choire of St. George's Chappel at Windesor) did serve for dire|ctions to the Knights-Companions, that by the view of them, they might the more readily and certainly know their proper Stalls.
We have not met with any memorial of this usage, that reacheth higher than an. 21. H. 7. when the Soveraign holding the day of St. George at Cambridge, Ex ipso Autogr Kings Colledge Chappel was furnished with Scutcheons of the Knights-Companions Arms; but to shew the use was ancient, there is this note put into the memorial,

[as was yearly accustomed.] An. 22. H. 8. the Soveraign being at Windesor on the Eve of St. George, MS. in Offic. Arm. [H. 17.] p. 32. appointed the Service of the Church to be celebrated in his MS. in Offic. Arm. [H. 17.] p. 32. Chappel, in the upper Quadrangle of Windesor Castle; and there being present with him 13 Knights-Companions, MS. in Offic. Arm. [H. 17.] p. 32. each of them had set over their heads a Scut|cheon of their Arms.
This manner of adorning the Stalls was afterwards solemnly established, and enlarged to absent Knights, by an Order of Chapter held at Greenewich, an. Lib. N. p. 302. 3. E. 6. wherein by the Soveraign and Knights-Companions it was agreed, Lib. N. p. 302. That from thenceforth, every Stall upon St. George's Eve, should have an Escotcheon of the Arms of them which were absent, as well as those that were present, at their several costs and charges.
But this cannot be understood of the Stalls situate in the Chappel of St. George at Windesor; for besides, that we have met with no ancient account of any such custom in that place, we find a memorial rather implying the contrary, when Queen Elizabeth, in the 6. year of her Reign, held the Feast of St. George upon its proper day at Windesor Castle; namely, MS. fol penes W. D. N. f. 14. That there was no Scutcheons of the Knights-Companions Arms set up there, but only the Plates: And without all doubt, had it been the usage to fix Scutcheons in the Choire of that Chappel, as at other places, they would not at that time especially have been omitted, be|cause then the Soveraign appeared upon an extraordinary occasion, and where many things were added to heighten the glory of that Grand Feast, by reason the Ib. f. 15. b. Peace between England and France was to be proclaimed at this Festival, in the presence of the French Ambassador; and was accordingly done with great Solemnity on St. George's day in the morning, at the East entrance into the lower Ward of the Castle, at the top of the Hill towards St. George's Chappel; and to which place the Soveraign Ib. f. 15. b. in her whole Habit of the Order (the French Am|bassador being neer her) with the five Officers of the Order, and Knights-Compani|ons before her, and before them the Officers of Arms and Trumpets, proceeded in a stately and well ordered Cavalcade; and after Clarenceux King of Arms had Ib. f. 15. b. ended the Proclamation, they continued the Proceeding thence to the Chappel, in the same state and order.
As to the practice and constant usage of setting up Scutcheons of Arms, since an. 3. E. 6. and at such time as St. George's day was held elsewhere than at Winde|sor, we have seen variety of Testimonies.
The care of ordering and providing of which belonged to Garter, but the Soveraign of the Order was at the charge (notwithstanding the said Order, an. 3. E. 6.) which heretofore Append. Num. CLXVIII. CLXIX  CLXX. we see was paid out of the Treasury in the Exchequer; and since the establishment of 1200. l. per an. (setled by the late Soveraign King Charles the First, to discharge the ordinary and extraordinary expences of the Order) the allowance issued See Sir Iames Pal|mer's Accounts. thence, and was paid by the Chancellor of the Order. But now the charge is placed upon Garter, he having an allowance therefore in|cluded in the augmentation of his Pension, an. 15. Car. 2.
We find Privy-Seals to have issued as high as the Ex Collect. praef. W. le N. Cl. 15. of Queen Elizabeth, for the annual allowance of 7 l. Scutcheons, employed for the use aforesaid, and that the price sometime before, was much about that rate; for the three and twenty Scutcheons, provided against St. George's Feast, an. 1  2. Ph.  Mar. came to Apend. Numb. CLXVIII. 6 l. 1 s. 8 d. and those five and twenty set up the following year, to Apend. Numb. CLXVIII. 6 l. 11 s. 8. d. some difference then also being in the work, which inhanced the price, viz. those provided for Princes at Apend. Numb. CLXVIII. 6 s. 8 d. a piece, and each of the rest at Apend. Numb. CLXVIII. 5. s.
The Soveraign, the Prince of Wales, and Stranger Kings and Princes, have ac|customably had, at these times, Majesty Scutcheons set up over each of their Stalls, but the rest of the Knights-Companions Lodging Scutcheons only; and we have seen an account of Collect. praef. W. le N. Cl. four Majesty Scutcheons, prepared for every St. George's Feast, from 1613. to 1619. to wit, one for the Soveraign, another for the King of Den|mark, a third for the Prince of Wales, and a fourth for Frederick Count Pala|tine of the Rhyne, at 6 s. 8 d. a piece; but so many Knights-Companions as attend|ed the Soveraign at those Feasts, had each a Collect. praef. W. le N. Cl. Lodging Scutcheon at 2 s. 6 d.
From the marshalling of Arms, quartered in the Knights-Companions Scutche|ons, and ordering their Stiles (printed always in French) there are several things, no less useful than worthy observation: for,
First, though the Plates of Arms and Quarterings, fixed in each Knights-Com|panions Stall at Windesor, continue there without alteration, or very seldom changed from that order, wherein they were marshalled at the time of their In|stallation; yet these Scutcheons and Stiles annually set up, do admit of frequent alteration, as there is occasion; either by adding more Quarterings, altering the Stiles, or amending any thing that is amiss. For instance,
Whereas the Duke of Savoy before 5. Eliz. bore MS. fol. penes W. D. N. f. 9. a. Gules a Cross Argent, it was then altered into MS. fol. penes W. D. N. f. 9. a. 5 Coats, that is to say, in the first quarter Westpahli, Saxe moderne, and Angrie, in the second Chablais, in the third Aouste, the fourth as the first, and over all, in the middle, the foresaid Scutcheon of Savoy.
When the Lord Hunsdon was installed, an. 3. Eliz. he had Ibid. . 6. . 12 Coats of Arms, thus marshalled in his Plate, 4, 4, and 4, the first Carey, the second Spencer, the third Somerset, the fourth Bullen, the fifth Ormond, the sixth Hoo, the seventh Rochford, the eighth Seyntomer, the ninth Malmains, the tenth Wichingham, the eleventh St. Leger, and the twelfth Hangford: But an. 7. Eliz. his Scutcheon re|ceived an addition of Ib. f. 19. a. four other Coats, viz. Beauchamp, Warwick, Berkley, and Gerard, and these were inserted next to Somerset, the third Coat in his said Plate.
But on the contrary, where Ambrose Earl of Warwick had Ib. f. 13. b. 21 Coats put into his Plate, an. 5. Eliz. and they marshalled in this order, 5.5.5. and 6. namely, 1. Sutton. 2. Paganell. 3. Grey of Ruthin. 4. Hastings. 5. Quincy. 6. Malpas. 7. Somery. 8. Valence. 9. Talbott. 10. Warwick. 11. Beauchamp. 12. Berkley. 13. Lisle. 14. Gerard. 15. Guilford. 16. Houlden. 17. West. 18. and 19. quarterly de la Ware and Cantilupe. 20. Mortimere of Wigmore. and 21. Greely: at the Feast of St. George held at Whitehall, an. 9. Eliz. his Scutcheon contained but Ib. f. 27. a. 16. viz. 4.4.4. and 4. namely, 1. Sutton. 2. Paganell. 3. Somery. 4. Malpas. 5. Grey of Ruthin. 6. Hastings. 7. Valence. 8. Ferrers. 9. Quincy. 10. Chester. 11. Talbot. 12 Beau|champ. 13. Warwick. 14. Berkley. 15. Gerard. and 16. Lisle. So that here was seven Coats taken out of the former, namely, Guilford, Holden, West de la Ware and Cantilupe quarterly, Mortimere and Greely, and two added, viz. Ferrars and Chester.
But the greatest and most frequent variations are in the Stiles and Titles of Ho|nor, set under the Scutcheons, and these relate unto, and are occasioned princi|pally from their attaining or resigning of Offices or Dignities.
We find that the Stile set under the Scutcheon of Ferdinand the Emperor, at St. George's Feast, an. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar. was as followeth,
Autogr. penes praef. W. le N. Cl. Du tres-hault tres-excellent  tres-puissant Prince, Ferdinand par la grace de Dieu Roy des Romaines, de Hungarie,  Bohemie, Archiduc d' Austrie, Duc de Bourgoigne, c. Chevalier du tresnoble Ordre de la Iarretiere.
But an. 5. Eliz. in the said Emperors Stile, the Titles of MS. fol. penes praef. W. D. N. fol. 9. King of Hungary and Bohemia were left out, because Maximilian his Son, had a little before obtained (and at that time enjoyed) both those Kingdoms.
In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, the Stiles of Philip King of Spain (who while Queen Mary lived was Co-Soveraign of this most Noble Order) run thus,
Autogr. penes praef W. le N. Cl. Du tres-hault tres-excellent  tres-puissant Prince, Philip par la grace de Dieu, Roy d' Espaigne, des Deux Cicels,  Ierusalem, Arch-Duc d' Austriae, Duc de Bourgoigne, Millan,  Brabant, Comte de Hapsburge, Flanders, and Tyroll; Chevalier du tres-noble Order de la Iarretiere.
But at the Feasts of St. George, an. 28.29. and 30. Eliz. the Title of Catholick Prince was also given him, viz. Sir Will. Nee MS. of . Du tres-hault tres-excellent tres-puissant  Ca|tholique Prince Philip, c.
And till an. 26. Eliz. we observe the Title Sir Will. Nee MS. of . des Deux Cicils were continued to him; but Sir Will. Nee MS. of . an. 28. Eliz. and so forward, the word Deux was omitted,

nevertheless Ibid. an. 36. Eliz. that word is again added; but withall we find this marginal note entred over against the said Stile, Ibid. This was forbidden to be set up at Greenwich, the 22. of April, an. 1594.
If we proceed with a few instances, relating to Knights-Subjects, we shall find that among them, there hath hapned the most frequent alterations, and almost every year some additions or omissions.
In the Duke of Norfolk's Stile, an. 3. Eliz. the MS. fol. penes praef. W. D. N. f. 2. Lieutenantship of the North was omitted. In the Earl of Rutlands, at the same Feast, MS. fol. penes praef. W. D. N. f. 2. President of the Coun|cil in the North, was added. The Marquess of Winchester, an. . Eliz. caused the Title of Ib. fol. 2. b. Bron of St. Iohn to be omitted, because his eldest Son, then bore that honor. In like manner was the Title of Ib. fol. 2. b. Lord Strange left out of the Earl of Derby's Stile, an. 4. Eliz. in regard his Son was then so called, and a Baron of Parliament. As to these and such like particulars, a multitude of Examples might be cited, but let these suffice.
We shall close this point, with this further observation; That where a Stran|ger-Elect, hath received the Habit and Ensigns of the Order (though not instal|led he hath been allowed the honor, of having a Scutcheon of his Arms set on the back of that Stall designed for him, on the Eve of St. George, next after such his Investiture: an instance whereof we have in the French King Ib. f. 19. a. Charles the Ninth, an. 7. Eliz. the Lord Hunsdon having took his journey into France, in May before, with the Habit of the Order, and therewith invested the said King. But on the contrary it is observed to our hand, that the Emperor Maximilian, having been Ibid. fol. 26. b. Elected the 24. of April, an. 8. Eliz. had not any Scutcheon placed in his Stall the next St. George's Feast; and the reason is there given, Ibid. fol. 26. b. because he had not as then received the Habit and Ensigns of the Order.


SECT. VI. Of adorning the Chappel.
THE Chappel where the Divine Services are to be celebrated at this Grand Feast, whether it be that of St. George's at Windesor, or the Soveraign's at Whitehall, or elsewhere, in what place soever the Soveraign is pleased to keep the day of St. George, is usually set forth and adorned with peculiar and most rich Furniture; the care and oversight whereof at Windesor, is committed to the Dean of the Colledge, but at other places, to the Dean of the Chappel at Whitehall.
The Altar, as the principal place in the House of God, hath been thought worthy (in all times and Churches, where decency and reverence have been retained) of the richest and most costly furniture; and in particular, this in St. George's Chappel at Windesor, from time to time, by the addition of pious Benefactors hath been adorned with Vessels, sumptuous both for materials and workmanship: How plentifully it was stored an. 8. R. 2. (which was within 36 years after the Institution of this most Noble Order) with Plate, Iewels, and other Church Ornaments, is evident from an Inventory, of all the rich Furniture of the Chappel, then taken by Walter Almaly, the second Custos (or Dean) there.
But a great part of these, and other succeeding Contributions towards the Furniture, both of the high Altar and this sacred Chappel, were in the MS. penes Peregr. Ho|y de Bi|sham in Com. Berks at. 2.3. and 5. years of King Edward the Sixth, sold by the mutual consent of the Dean and Canons, for the sum of MS. penes Peregr. Ho|y de Bi|sham in Com. Berks at. 1489 l. 8 s. 0 d. (besides Copes, Vestments, Cloths of Arras, Altar-Cloaths, Albes, Frontlets, and other Ornaments, which they distributed among themselves) alledging a necessity so to do, for MS. penes Peregr. Ho|y de Bi|sham in Com. Berks at. defraying the building of some part of the Castle Wall, taking down the high Altar, paying the Tenths

and Subsidies of the inferiour Officers of the Colledge, bringing Water to their Houses, the charges of Visitations, and loss by the fall of Money: taking them|selves only to be owners and disposers thereof, by virtue of the first Article in the Statutes of Foundation of the Colledge.
What was left (being but a small portion in comparison of what was there, when one Ibid. Mr. Henley took an Inventory of them an. 36. H. 8. appears from an Inventory taken the Ibid. 16. of Iuly 1552. by Sir Philip Hoby, Sir Maurice Berkly, Mr. Tho. Welden, and Mr. Iohn Norrys, Commissioners impowered by the King to survey the Iewels, Plate, and Ornaments of all kinds, within the Colledge of Winde|sor; as also to take an Ibid. account from the Dean and Canons of what things had been sold, alienated, distributed, or made away since their first coming to the said Colledge.
We find very little of Plate or other Ornaments, since this time, bestowed up|on this Chappel, until King Iames of blessed memory became Soverign of this most Noble Order. But he taking into his pious thoughts the nakedness of this Altar, and considering how decently sacred Vtensils would become the Service of God, made some convenient provision for the adorning thereof, which at length was best resolved on and effected, by the free Contributions of the Knights-Companions themselves.
For at a Chapter held at Whitehall, April 23. an. 16. Iac. R. it was Decreed, That every of the Knights-Companions (as well those already of the Order, as such afterwards admitted into it) should give to the use of the Altar, in the said Chappel, a Lib. C. p. 191. piece of Plate, of the value of 20 l. at the least. And it is evident that whatever had been done in former times, for the greater Ornament of this Chappel, was by a general contribution, of the Soveraign and Knights-Compani|ons, whose Benevolences were always correspondent to their several Degrees: For thus were the contributions ordered, for the erection of the Lib. N. p. 118. Statue of Saint George on Horseback, an. 36. H. 6. and for finishing the Ibid. p. 204. Rood-loft, and Lanthorn of the Chappel, an. 8. H. 8.
Lib. R. p. 30.This was again proposed by the late pious Soveraign, at another Chapter held at Windesor the Ibid. p. 29. 24. of November, an. 1. Car. 1. and agreed unto by all the Knights-Companions present, the reverend Epicopus Lndinensi li|berrim susce|pit se siniliter tanundem daurum. Ib. p. 30. Doctor Land, then Bishop of Lon|don (who at that Feast officiated in the absence of the Prelate, and a zealous pro|moter of all pious designs) freely and liberally undertaking to bestow a piece of Plate of the like value.
But it seems, notwithstanding all this ready concurrence, the work went on but slowly; for in a Chapter held at Windesor, the Ibid. p. 41. 24. of September an. 4. Car. 1. the Feast of St. George being then celebrated there, the want of the designed Plate being signified, it was therein further Decreed, Lib. R. p. 43. That all the prsent instal|led Knights, should take care before the following Feast of St. George (and all other within a year after their Election) to send every one of them 20. l. at the least to the Dean of Windesor, to be bestowed in Plate, for the use of the Altar. And the Lib. R. p. 43. Sove|raign being humbly intreated by the Knights-Companions, that He himself (in way of example to all) would bestow some gift, most readily and willingly condescended.
This pious Decree was again confirmed at a Chapter held at Windesor the Lib. R. p. 63. 6 of October an. 6. Car. 1. and Numb. CLXXI. Commissionary Letters therewithall ordered to issue out forthwith, under the Seal of the Order; whereby the Dean and Canons of Winde|sor were not only impowered, but commanded, either by themselves or their Deputy, to demand and receive the sums of Money, so decreed to be paid to the use aforesaid; not only from the Knights-Companions then living, but also from those who died after the 24. of November an. Dom. 1625.
And that we may observe, the zeal towards this religious design slept not with the Soveraign, on the Lib. R. p. 70 13. of February following, he gave the said Dean order to demand Ib. p. 72. 100 l. out of the Privy-Purse, as his own free gift; which was paid the next morning, being Ib. p. 72. an eternal monument of his Kingly piety and devotion.
And that it might appear what was given, by whom, and how bestowed, to|wards the furnishing of the Altar, it was also appointed, that a short Ib. p. 72. Historical

account of these sacred Offrings and Gifts, should be made and preserved in the Chapter-house at Windesor.
The Book designed for this purpose is now with his Majesty, being a large thin Folio in Vellom, wearing this Title.

 
Memoriae Veritati, Virtuti Sacrum,
Altare liberae Capellae Regiae Sancti Georgii Martyris, infra Castrum Regale Windesoriense,
Amplissimis donariis, Deo Opt. Max. per Augustissmum Su|premum,  Honoratissimos Commilitones Nobilissimi Or|dinis ( Periscelide dicatis) recentr adauctum.
Describit humilimus Ordinis illius Servus Scriba C. Wren Decanus Windesoriensis, An. Dom. 1637.
It contains the Orders made in Chapter the 24. of November 1625. the 24. of Septemb. 1628. the 6. of Octob. 1630. with the Commissionary Letters which there|upon issued, and the Order of the 13. of February following, together with the Names of all the Knights-Companions present at each Chapter.
After these follow the Arms and Quarerings, very fairly limn'd in Metal and Colour, within a Garter, over each a Coronet sutable to the dignity of the per|son, and underneath are entred the Stiles of all the Knights-Companions, who were of the Order an. 1625. or admitted after, to the time of making the Book; as also the sum which each Knight paid to the Register. But as to any account of Plate provided upon the Soveraign and succeeding Knights-Compa|nions Contributions, there is none, though probably intended, to fill up the many blank leaves that followed.
The Ib. p. 68 first that presented his Offring; was Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey, Earl Marshal of England, therein giving the rest a noble example, by a delivery of his 20 l. into the hands of the Dean of Windesor: So that a competent sum be|ing afterwards collected, and the money decreed by King Henry the Eighth to An. 32. H. 8. Lib. N. p. 284. pious uses, instead of celebrating the Obits of deceased Knights Ex Collect. D. Chr. Wren. nuper Ordi|nis Regist. added there|unto by Order of Chapter, all was wholly employed towards Plate for the fore|said Altar.
To hasten the payment of these Contributions, the Dean and Canons depu|ted William Ryley, then Blue Mantle Pursuivant, afterward Lancaster Herald at Arms, to collect the Moneys to be raised, both upon the Order of the 6. of Octo|ber an. 6. Car. 1. and also upon the Obits; and for his pains therein he was al|lowed See Sir Iames Pal|mer's accounts for Obit Mo|ney 2 s. in the Pound.
But notwithstanding all his diligence and sollicitation, it appeared to the Chap|ter held at Windesor, the Lib. R. p. 86. 6. of November an. 9. Car. 1. that there were several of the Knights-Companions; and the Executors of others yet in arrear, and to the end the same might be speedily collected, there was set (in the said Chapter) a penalty in the nature of a nomine poenae, of Lib. R. p. 86. twenty shillings a Month, to be le|vied upon those, who should longer delay the payment thereof.
And now at length (a considerable sum having been collected) the work be|gan to be set on foot, and the Workman made choice of, was one Christian Van Vianan of Vtrect, a man excellently skill'd in chasing of Plate: and to give him due praise in this undertaking, he discovered a rare ingenuity and happy fancy, as the skilful did judge while the Plate was in being, and the designs of each piece yet to be seen (among the present Soveraign's rare collection of Draughts and Sketches) can sufficiently manifest.
The agreement with him, made by the forementioned Rw's Iourn. p. 21. Earl Marshal, Sir Fran|cis Windebanke, and Sir Francis Crane, then Chancellor of this most Noble Order, was at 12. s. the Ounce: Whereupon (24. Apr. an. 10. Car. 1.) the Soveraign gave command under the Signet of the Order, to pay unto him Lib. R. p. 97. 600 l. by way of im|press, towards making the Plate, after the receipt of which, he forthwith di|sposed himself to the work.
And before the Month of Iune 1637, he had finished and made ready for the use of the Altar, nine pieces of Plate, which the Ex Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Pmer Cancell. vide porro Row's Iurn. p. 21. 3. of Iuly following, were de|livered into the Chapter-house at Windesor, Sir Thomas Rowe then Chancellor, Do|ctor Stokes Lieutenant for the Dean, Doctor Some, Doctor Elly, and Doctor Col|lens then Canons of the said Colledge, being present; the particulars whereof with their weight here follows.



ounce.
d. weight


Ex Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Pmer Cancell. vide porro Row's Iurn. p. 21. Two little Candlesticks, chased and gilt, for Wax Candles
92
06


Two Chalices, with four Patens 
113
1


Two great Candlesticks neat, for Tapers 
553
15


These thr Basn conta|ed the whole History of Christ, in cha|sed work. Two little Basons 
251
15


One great Bason 
210
00



1220
17



l.
s.


The value at 12 s. the Ounce came to 
732
10


Besides nine Cases 
9
10



742
00


Of which he received by way of Lib R p. 97. impress
600
00


The rest, being 
142
00


was paid unto him by Doctor Stokes, the foresaid 3. of Iuly.




But notwithstanding all the foresaid care taken by the then Soveraign, to pro|mote the work; and a subsequent Order passed in Chapter the Row's Iourn p. 13. 18. of April an. 13. Car. 1. commanding the Chancellor to signifie the Soveraign's commands, for due payment of the Obits, and other sums due according to the Statutes, yet were some of the Knights so visibly backward in their payments, That, at a Chapter held the Lib. R. p. 133. 14. of Iune following, when the first parcel of Plate before mentioned was fi|nished (an account being given by the Chancellor to the Soveraign and Knights-Companions of Lib. R. p. 133. 784 l. received upon the two Orders aforesaid, and that 774 l. thereof had been disbursed) there appeared to be Lib. R. p. 133. 389 l. not undemanded, but unpaid; and which the Lib. R. p. 133. Dean of Windesor could not receive, some of the Knights-Companions Row's Iourn. p. 27. deferring, and others refusing, c. Litera ad Cancell. May 24.1637. although there had not wanted diligence both in taking several journies, and giving many sollicitous attendances at London.
This Affair being thus represented to the Soveraign and Knights-Companions present in Chapter, their names being also read over who were in arrear, it was thereupon Ordered, Lib. R. p. 133. That the Chancellor should write in the Soveraign's name a peremptory Letter to every Knight-Companion, so behind in payment, to command present satisfaction, and signifie in case of omission the Soveraign's dis|pleasure, which very much hastned the bringing in of the Arrears, a Copy of which Letter here follows.

My Lord,
I Am commanded to put your Lordship in mind of two Statutes of the most Noble Order of the Garter,Row's Iourn. p. 31. whereof you are a Knight and Companion, the first being one of the Foundation, that every Earl should pay 50 s. to the Treasury in Windesor,

for pious uses, upon the death of any Knight and Brother of the Order; and that the money being unpaid one whole year, should be increased one third part, as a Fine, or mulct; the other made in a Chapter the sixteenth year of King James of blessed memory, and confirmed by three several Acts, of the first, fourth, and sixth years of his Majesty now happily reigning, That as well all the Knights of the Order then living, as all that should be chosen and admitted then after, should give and pa. 20 l. to the use and ornament of the Altar, and Chappel of Saint George in Windesor; according to which Constitutions, there having lately been made divers pieces of rich Plate, presented, and consecrated in that Chappel, to the neer value of 800 l. the Dean of Windesor, and Register of the Order, being by Statute Collector of such moneys received and disbursed, did bring in his full account unto his Majesty, the Soveraign and the Knights of the Order, at the Solemnity of the Feast of Saint George for this year, held by prorogation upon the 2.3. and 4. of October; upon the view whereof your Lordship being found behind, and not having paid the sums ex|pressed in the inclosed paper, with the Reasons how they did grow due, taken out of his accompt in writing, it was resolved in full Chapter, and registred among the Acts of the Order, that those several sums should be called for, and collected before the next Feast. In pursuance whereof, I then received command from his Majesty, with the approbation and consent of all the Knights then assembled, to signifie to your Lordship, under the Signet of the Order the Soveraign Will, That you make present payment of your arrearages, and to deliver it unto the bearer hereof, who is appoint|ed Collector for this service; which if your Lordship shall delay, or refuse to do, be|ing only the observance of the Statutes, to which you are obliged, both in honor and by your Oath; I have also express order to return your answer, and to signifie to you the displeasure of his Majesty, of all which respects I am confident your Lordship will be most tender. And so I humbly take my leave.
Your Lordships in all due observance Tho. Rowe.
St. Martyns-Lane
9. Nov. 1637.

And yet notwithstanding all these Injunctions, in the List of the Knights-Companions, who ought to have paid, the See Sir Iames Pal|mor's account. Earls of Somerset, Sussex, and Marr, were at last returned insolvent.
All this Plate was Vasa argen|tea tertium deaurata, Ope|ris vere Dae|dalci. treble gilt, and thereon were the Scripture Histories rare|ly well designed and chased; and especially the great Bason, and the Covers of two Books; hereafter mentioned; for I find the said Van Vianan See his Ac|compts. complaining, that he was a great loser, at the rate agreed upon; so much and so good work had he bestowed on them above the rest.
Upon the Row's Iourn. p. 22. 22. day of Iuly, after the delivery of this Plate into the Chapter|house, order was given by the Soveraign to the Chancellor, to remove and carry the afore recited parcels, to Croyden or Lambeth (wither the Dean of Windesor, or some of the Prebends should also go) there to be consecrated by his Grace Doctor Land, the then Archbishop of Canterbury; and from thence, they to see it returned, and safely delivered into the Treasury of the Dean and Chapter of Windesor. But they went not thither according to the appointment; for this so|lemn and sacred action was deferred till the next Feast of St. George, celebrated at Windesor; wherein at a Chapter held the 2. of October in the year aforesaid, the said Plate was ordered to be Ibid. p. 24. offered the next morning at the Altar, and there to be consecrated to God and his Service for ever, by the Prelate of the Order.
And because the whole Ceremony was performed with great veneration, and all due reverence, his late Majesty being a high promoter of Ecclesiastical de|cency and holy discipline; we think fit to present it here at large.
On the 3. day of the said Month of October, being the Feast day (held by Pro|rogation at Windesor-Castle) in the time of the Row's Iourn. p. 24. vide R. p. 128. Second Service, at the Versicle, Let your light so shine before men, c. Walter Bishop of Winchester, then Prelate, stand|ing before the middle of the Altar, read certain select Verses out of the Old Tes|tament, concerning the dedication of Solomons Temple, and the Riches thereof,

the first of which was taken from the 35. Chapter of Exodus ver. 4. the second being the 21. vers of the same Chapter; and the third taken out of the second Chapter of St. Matthew's Gospel verse 11. and afterwards fitted himself for the Offring.
At which time, the Soveraign descended from his Throne, as in the manner of Offring, and thrice bowed down towards the Altar, Ibid. worshiping and adoring God in the middle of the Choire, and so past to the Degrees of the Altar; where humbly kneeling, did present and offer to God, the before mentioned great Ba|son, devoutly saying, Ibid. Part of thy bounty to us, O Lord Almighty, I offer to thee and to thy Service.
The Offring was forthwith received by the Prelate, and set upon the Altar; which done, every one of the Knights-Companions present (after the example of this holy King) in their due ranks and single, did offer his piece of dedi|cated Plate,  with the same words, and in like manner.
And that their ordinary Offring of Gold and Silver might not be interrupted or omitted; all the Knights-Companions at the time of offring the Plate,  made the same in another Bason, held by one of the Prebends.
Every of these holy Vessels being thus offred, and decently placed upon the Altar, the Prelate with his hand touched every piece severally, Lib. R. p. 129. as on God's part receiving them; and after made the following Prayers of Consecration and Benediction.
O Lord God, Heavenly Father, we thy most humble servants do ear|nestly entreat thee, that thou wilt graciously vouchsafe to accept these sa|cred Offrings, by th hands of our most gracious Soveraign Lord King Charles, and the most honorable Companions, which are here present de|dicated to thee. Grant me beseech thee, and cause, that whatsoever is this day offered unto thee, may be preserved from all profane use, and may for ever abide consecrated to thy service, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Let us bless thee our most glorious Lord God, for that it hath pleased thee to put into the heart of our most gracious Lord Charles, and of these Princes, to dedicate these oblations to thy service. Regard we beseech thee, from the Highest Heavens, and power out thy blessings upon the head of his most gracious Majesty: Bless him in his Royal Person, in hi most gracious Queen Mary, in the most illustrious Prince Charles, and in all the rest of the Branches of the Royal Stock. Bless we pray thee, all those whose donations offered to thee, we have here this day re|ceived: Let thy blessing fall down (as the dew of Heaven) upon them, and upon their posterities, and upon all things which they have from thee; and grant that by the holy and debout use of these things, which are here offered, the glory of thy name may ever he proclaimed, and thy Majesty may by these our due observances be exalted, through Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
These sacred Ceremonies being Ib. p. 130. compleated, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions marched to the great Hall to Dinner.
But to make some further addition to the Glory of this Altar, his Majesty that now is, at the time of his Installation into this most Noble Order (being the 22. of May 1638. Palmer's Iourn p. 17. offered two large gilt Water-pots, chaced with Histories also, weighing 387 Ounces 10 penny weight, wrought all by the hand of that ingeni|ous Artist, the before mentioned Christian Van Vianan, which amounting (at 12 s. the Ounce) to the sum of 232 l. 10 s. besides 2 l. 16 s. for the Cases, and his jour|ney to Windesor, in to 235 l. 6 s. Od. was paid by Sir. Tho. Row's Ac|counts. Warrant from the Soveraign, dated the 20. of November, 1638.
These sacred Vessels were afterwards delivered by Palmer's Iourn. p. 17. Indenture, one part re|maining with the Chancellor, and the other with the Dean and Chapter of Winde|sor, to be kept for the service of the Altar.
And yet the bounty of this pious Soveraign, King Charles the Martyr, rested not here; he thought the Altar was not with all these sufficiently furnished, and therefore finding, by an Ib. p. 28. Account rendered by the Chancellor in Chapter, the 23. of May 1638. that there had been collected (upon the afore-mentioned Letter of the 9. of November 1637. sent from the Chancellor) 137 l. 4 s. more, to the end it might be also employed, in further addition towards this so pious a work, and so religious a design;Ex Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Palmer the said Money was by Sir Philip Palmer, then De|puty Chancellor, immediately given to the said Christian Van Vianan, by way of impress, for the providing of more Plate for the use also of the said Altar; and the 25. of March following, a Penes praef. Iac. Palmer. Warrant issued under the Soveraign's hand, and Signet of the Order, for the advancing 200 l. more to the said Van Vianan, for finishing this additional Plate, bespoken by the Soveraign, as aforesaid; which sum was paid unto him, the See Vianans Acquit. 27. of March following.
The Plate made upon the last advance, was two great Candlesticks, weighing together See Vianans Accounts. 471 Ounces; on the foot of the one, was excellently chaced, the Histories of Christ's preaching in the Mount; and on the other, those of the lost Groat and Sheep. Two Covers for Books, both weighing 233 Ounces; the one for a Bible, contained the Histories of Moses and the Tables, David and the Ark on the one side, and on the other, Christs preaching on the Mount, the sending of the Holy Ghost, and St. Paul falling from his Horse. The otr Cover was for the Common-Prayer; having the Angel of Incense on the one si and the King healing the Evil, the manner of our Preaching and Christning on the other: and two great Flaggons, whereon were the Histories of Christ's Agony and Passion, weighing 268 Ounces; all being Silver gilt.
And now if we sum up the number, weight, and value of all the before men|tioned parcels of Plate, wrought by the said Van Vianan, for the service of the Altar, we shall find them to be 17. pieces, weighing 3580 Ounces, 7 Penny weight, and amounting (with some other small Charges) to the sum of 1564 l. 6 s.
These last mentioned Parcels were finished against the Feast of St. George held at Windesor, the Palm. Iourn. pro an. 1639. p. 16. 8.9. and 10. days of October 1639. upon the last day of which Feast, in the time of the Second Service, the Knights-Companions descended from their Stalls, and Ibid. p. 63. Offred the same at the Altar; and thereupon, after the usual manner, and with the accustomed words, were they consecrated by the Prelate of the Order; and the Ex. Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Palmer. 19. of November following, delivered to the custody of the Dean and Canons of Windesor.
And doubtless, this pious King would have bestowed much more in honor of this sacred place, had not the late unhappy times drawn on; an Age indeed so wicked, that the most solemn dedication to God, could not protect these holy Vessels from prophane hands; for a Generation rose up, who would have us think, they did God good service, when they stript his Church, of all that the piety of our Ancestors, for his sake, had endowed it with: and among other sacred places, this Chappel of St. George received not the least share of misfortune.
For on the 23. of October 1642. (Sir Iohn Seyton having that day seized on Windesor Castle, for the Parliament) one Ex Autog. penes D. Chr. Wren per. Ord. Regist. Captain Fog came immediately to the Colledge, and demanded the Keys of the Treasury; but not finding the three Key-Keepers, he caused a Smith to make strong Bars of Iron, who with them brake down the stone jaums, forced open two doors, and Ex Autog. penes D. Chr. Wren per. Ord. Regist. carried thence all the afore|said rich chased and other Plate, made sacred and set apart for the service of God; (except two double gilt Chalices weighing 62 Ounces, and two double gilt Fla|gons, weighing 98 Ounces one half) an action to be stigmatized with an inde|lible Brand!
Ex alio Autogr. penes praef. D. Chr. Wren. About the end of May following (not long before the Recess of the Colledge) Collonel Ven, then Governor of Windesor Castle for the Parliament, was instant with the Dean of Windesor, and the Officers there, that he might see, what Goods were in the Chapter-house and Vestiaries; which having viewed, he within a few days after demanded all the Keys, and kept them; saying, Ex alio Autogr. penes praef. D. Chr. Wren. The Charge of them, as well as of the Castle, lay on him, and he would keep them. How he afterwards di|sposed of the Ornaments and rich Goods, hitherto safely deposited there, for

holy uses, and service of the Chappel, I cannot tell; but this I can assure, that the Inventory following, is a perfect transcript, from the Copy thereof made by the hand of Doctor Chr. Wren, the late reverend and worthy Dean, out of the Col|ledge Book, and by him delivered to me, of all the particulars, Collonel Ven so possest himself of.

A Memorial of the Goods and Monuments belonging to the King's Majesty's Free Chappel and Treasury at Windesor.
Imprimis, 6 Long Cushens of Cloth of (wire) Gold, fringed and tasseled sutably.
Item, 2 other long Cushens of Cloth of Gold, interwoven with tufted Flowers of Crimson Velvet fringed, and tasseled sutably.
Item, One other long Cushen of Cloth of Gold, backt with Blue wrought Velvet, fringed and tasseled, Gold and Blue.
Item, 4 Long Cushens of rich wrought Velvet, Blue, fringed and tasselled sutably.
Item, 8 Cushens of wrought Velvet Azure, upon a yellow ground bottomed sutably.
Item, The Hangings of the head of the Choire, 12 foot deep, of Crimson Velvet and Gold.
Item, The great Bible ruled, covered with Purple Velvet, with thick Silver bosses double gilt, strung with Blue Ribband, fringed with Gold.
Item, Another large Bible imbossed.
Item, 13 Rich Copes, embroidered and wrought in Gold.
Item, 2 Rich Copes of Wire-Gold.
Item, A Pulpet-Cloth and long Cushen of Crimson tusted Velvet, interwoven with Gold.
Item, Another larger Pulpet-Cloth, Crimson Damask, interwoven thick with Flowers de Lis, Portcullices, Roses, and Crowns of Gold.
Item, The Blue Velvet Robe of Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, embroi|dered with the Garter, Pearl and Gold, with the strings and Tassels sutable, Blue and Gold.
Item, 4 Other rich Robes of Purple Velvet, with like Embroideries, Strings, and Tassels.
Item, 2 Large Pieces of Cloth of Gold, never used (designed for State Cloths) given out of the Wardrobe to the Colledge.
Item, A large Carpet of Wire-Gold, for the Communion Table.
Item, A large Cushen of the same suit.
Item, The Cloth of State of rich Baudekin, over the Kings Seat, and at the back.
Item, Another of Crimson and Gold Velvet, checquered.
Item, A great Brass pendant Candlestick, with 12 Branches.
Item, One lesser, with 6 Branches.
Item, 6 Great Brass spouts, to quench Fires.
Item, 12 Leather-Buckets.
Item, The great Brass Bason, given by the Founder, with a foot to it for Christnings.
Item, 2 Fair standing Brass Candlesticks, double gilt.
Item, One Brass Lamp, to hang in the body of the Church.
Item, The great Brass Desk in the middle of the Chappel, with the Bible in two Volumes, on each side fairly bound and embossed.
Item, 13 Seats of the Poor-Knights, lined with Scarlet, c.
Besides all the long Wainscot Pews moveable, serving at the Sermons and Di|vinity Lectures, thrice in the week.
Item, 19 Wainscot Seats, with Ballisters, c.

But no less pious than his Predecessors, hath the present Soveraign manifested himself, who finding (shortly after his happy Restauration) that through the licentious barbarism of the late times, the sacred Vtensils formerly dedicated to

the use of the Altar, had been sacrilegiously plundred, and being religiously earnest to set again on foot, so laudable a way of provision, for supply of all things necessary to its service and ornament, upon the Lib. Carol. pag. 32,  33. Petition of the Dean and Canons of Windesor, exhibited in Chapter held at Whitehall the 20. of Iune, did with the cheerful and ready consent of the Knights-Companions, revive the foresaid Decrees, for raising the like sums of money, both from Himself, and the present and future Knights-Companions, which by virtue of the foresaid Decrees had been formerly collected.
Hereupon, his Lib. Carol. pag. 32,  33. Highness Iames Duke of York, bestowed a fair piece of Plate of 100 l. value, and the Lib. Carol. pag. 32,  33. Earl of Southampton gave not only what the Statutes required, but half as much more, towards the Plate designed to be bought with the rest of the Knights-Companions Money. And to enable Dr. Brune Ryves the now Dean of Windesor, to collect and receive, not only from the rest of the pre|sent Knights-Companions, but all other, witin one year after their Election, the sum of 20 l. a piece, and thereof to give an account at the following Chapter, and so successively of slackness or failer if any should be, the Soveraign in Novem|ber following, issued out his Warrant unto him, under the Sign Manual and the Signet of the Order.
How the money hereby collected was bestowed, as also what other Plate was added to the Furniture of the said Altar, by some other piously disposed persons, will appear by the following Inventory, taken by Dr. Browne Chanter, and Dr. Evans Steward of the Colledge, the 20 of Iuly 1667. and from them transmitted to my hand.

A pair of plain gift Flaggons, bought with the money collected from the Knights-Companions, weighing 150 Ounces.
A pair of wrought Flaggons, with great Bellies, having the Figure of St. George on Horseback on their Covers, the rest all Feather-work, bought with the Knights money, weighing 414 Ounces.
One plain small Bason, wrought and gilt only in the middle of it, weighing 25 Ounces and one half.
A pair of plain gift Chalices and Covers, bought also with the Knights money, both weighing 163 Ounces and one quarter.
A large embost Bason, with the Figure of Mary Magdalen, washing our Savi|ours Feet, weighing 198 Ounces.
A pair of large Taper Candlesticks embost, with Nozles to them, weighing 264 Ounces.
These Chandlesticks and Bason were obtained of her Highness Princess Mary about November 1660. by Dr. Brown, but she dying before the following Christmas, the charge (being 233 l. odd money) lay upon the Colledge.
A pair of large Basons gilt and embossed with the History of Christ, at his last Supper upon one; and on the other, of Christ blessing the young Children coming to him, being obtained by Dr. Brown of her Highness the Dutchess of York 1661. both weighing 305 Ounces.
A plain gilt Corporas, the gift of Sir Richard Fanshaw, weighing 24 Ounces.
A double gilt Chalice and Cover, with a broad Foot, having a Cross on the Cover, and another on the foot; the gift of the Lady Mary Heveningham, weighing 33 Ounces.

We see in the foregoing Inventory, taken 1643. that formerly there was be|longing to the Altar a large Carpet of Wyre-Gold, this we find mentioned in the Inventories taken the 4. of February, an. 43. Eliz. the 9. of November, an. 17. Iac. R. and the 12. of December 1638, an. 14. Car. 1. and being seized on by Collonel Ven, as aforesaid, is now supplied in a Covering, given by the present Soveraign, consisting of seven panes of Cloth of Gold, and purple Velvet, with a fair broad Gold Fringe towards the Front, and a narrow Gold Fringe on the two sides. There is now also two Diaper Table-Cloths, Diamond work, made

to lye upon the Altar, and two fine Holland Cloths, with great Buttons and red Crosses in the middle, to cover the consecrated Elements, in the time of the Communion.
If we should pass hence to the ancient Ornaments of the Chappel, we shall find them many and rich, even so early as See the Inven|tory of em ta|ken by Wlter Almaly. an. 8. R. 2. but because their particular mention will better suit with the larger Discourse, we intend upon the Chappel it self, we shall refer it to that work, and here remember only these two, name|ly the Image of our Lady, and Equestrian Statue of St. George.
There is notice taken of an (MS. vet. penes Sil. Taylor gen. fol. 159. Image of the blessed Virg Mary, given to this Chappel by King Henry the Fifth, in the first year of his Reign, which weighed 117 pound Troy weight. He liking the workmanship, caused (MS. vet. penes Sil. Taylor gen. fol. 159. Iohn Cause a skilful Dutch Goldsmith, to give some additional ornament thereto; after which, it then weighed Troy weight 165 pound and one quarter; and this Image, in the (MS. vet. penes Sil. Taylor gen. fol. 159. 9. year of his Reign, he commanded to be set up in St. George's Chappel, there to remain for ever.
As to the other, there is an Order of Chapter, an., 36. H. 8. entred in the Pag. 118. Black-Book, by which it appears, that the Soveraign and Knights-Companions. (to increase the honor of their Patron) agreed to raise money and employ it towards making his Pag. 118. Statue sitting on Horseback; the Soveraign's proportion of this contribution was 5 l. every Duke gave 2 l. an Earl 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. a Baron 1 l. and a Batchellor Knight 13 s. 4 d. These two being thus mentioned, we need in|sert no more here, seeing that Inventory taken an. 8. R. 2. and the others since, will afford plenty of such like rich and excellent pieces of work, which here|tofore belonged to this sacred place.
The East wall of the Chappel is now adorned with 22 panes of Cloth of Gold and Purple Damask, the gift of the present Soveraign: But those in the late So|veraign's Reign were of Crimson Velvet and Gold. In the middle of these Hangings over the Altar, have been heretofore placed very rich Altar-Cloths, concerning some of which, we have met with a Memorial, which informs us, that it pleased the late Soveraign, in a Chapter held at Windesor the Lib. R. p. 88. 6. of No|vember an. 9. Car. 1. to give command, that two little pieces of Arras Hang|ings, then hanging over the Altar (in one of which was wrought the Lib. R. p. 88. Picture of St. George on Horseback, and on the other, of the Assumption of the Lib. R. p. 88. blessed Virgin) should be preserved in such places where the Dean and his Lieutenant should think be for the use of the said Altar at the Grand Feast, and other Festivals of the Order: Hereupon they were Lord Cham|berlains Book of Warrants, ab an. 1634. ad an. 1641. p. 56. fetched from Windesor, to set over the Altar in the Chappel at Whitehall, an. 11. Car. 1. the Feast of St. George being then celebrated there.
There are now two other pieces of Arras, which are appointed to that use; the one hath the Pictures of Christs and his Disciples at Supper; given by the late Right Reverend Father in God Bryan Lord Bishop of Winchester, Prelate of the Order; the other, of Christ and the two Disciples at Emmans, wrought af|ter Titian's Original, given by the right Honorable, the Lady Mordant, Wife to the Lord Mordant, late Constable of Windesor.
As to the Soveraign's Royal Stall, it hath in all times had over it a rich Canopy, the back and forepairs adorned with materials of the same sute, with a long Velvet Cushen before, to lay his Books on, another shorter for his Seat, and a third to kneel on. The Canopy prepared against the Grand Feast, an. 13. Car. 2. and which now adorns it, is made of two panes of Purple Velvet, and one of Cloth of Gold, having a broad Gold Fringe at the bottom, a narrow one at the top, and an inner Valance of the same, with a Purple Silk Fringe; the back and fore piece is of three panes also, one of Gold, the other two of Purple Velvet, with a narrow Gold Fringe about it. The three Cushens are of Purple Velvet, garnished with Gold Fringe, and Tassels of Silk and Gold.
Each of the Knights-Companions Stalls, are also furnished with the like number of Cushens.
Lastly, The Pulpit is hung with Crimson Damask, inwrought with small Flowers of Gold, Portcullices, Flowers de Lis and Roses, all crowned; this

Pulpe-Cloth was preserved from the ravenous hands of Collonel Ven, and now restored to its former use.
It may be judged how other of the Soveraign's Chappels, wherein the solemn Services at the Grand Feast were celebrated, besides this of St. George at Winde|sor, have been set forth and adorned, by one or two Examples in that kind; for MS. in Of|fic. Arm. M. 17 fol. 3. an. 22. H. 8. though the Soveraign held the Feast of St. George at Windesor, yet on the Evening, he went not to St. George's Chappel, but heard Divine Service in the Chappel above in the upper Quadrangle (at the West end of St. George's Hall) which MS. in Of|fic. Arm. M. 17 fol. 3. Chappel was hanged on both sides, a rich Cloth of State set up, and a haut pas of a foot high for the Soveraign, as also a little foot pace, 13 inches broad, and 7 inches high for him to kneel at. The MS. in Of|fic. Arm. M. 17 fol. 3. High Altar and that set before the Soveraign, were richly garnished with Images and other Ornaments of Gold and Silver gilt, c.
We also find, that at the Feast of St. George held at Whitehall, MS. penes W. D. N. f. 9. b. vide etiam MS. f. 20. an. 5. Eliz. the MS. penes W. D. N. f. 9. b. vide etiam MS. f. 20. Chappel was hung with Cloth of Gold, and the Stalls both before and behind with Cloth of Tissue, set with Scutcheons at their back. The Soveraign's Royal Stall was adorned with a Cloth of State, and furnished with Cushens, as were the Emperor's, the French King's, and the Soveraign's Lieutenant's. But Ibid. f. 20. an. 7. Eliz. all the Stalls of the same Choire were hung with Carpets, both before and behind.
At the Feast held there an. 19. Car. 2. the Chappel was hung with the rich Hang|ings of Silk and Gold, wherein the twelve Months were with excellent skill described. The Altar was furnished with chased gilt Plate, viz. one large Bson in the middle, and two less on either side, two fair Candlesticks with unlighted Tapes, and two large Water-Pots; on the lower rank was set another Bason, four Flaggons and two Service-Books, covered with like gilt Plate; and lastly, the So|veraign's Stall had the rich Furniture of Cloth of Gold and Purple Velvet fetcht from Windesor to adorn it.



SECT. VII. The furnishing of St. George's Hall.
THE care of making ready and furnishing St. George's Hall (or other Room, either there or elsewhere, set apart for the Grand Dinner) is committed partly to the Gentleman-Vsher of the Black-Rod, and partly to the Soveraign's Surveyor General of his Works.
The Surveyor-General, upon directions given him by Warrant from the Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold, causeth a Floor to be raised at the upper end of the Hall, whereunto is an ascent of three steps, and thereon he raiseth a Table 12 Foot long, and 3 foot and a half broad for the Soveraign to dine at. On the left hand of this Table, is set a Cupboard for Plate, and a side Table for Glasses, c. to serve the Soveraign's Table, as occasion shall require. Upon the upper|most step of the raised Floor, is set a strong Rail with Banisters cross the Hall, to keep off the Croud from the Soveraign's Table, that so the Officers appointed to attend thereat, may with more liberty perform their several Duties and Services.
On the right hand of the Soveraign's State, and below the Rails, are Tables placed for the Knights-Companions to dine at, which sometimes hath been but MS. in Offic- Armor [M. 17] f. 28. one Table, continued to the lower end of the Hall, with a long Form on the back side; but of late the same space hath been taken up, and furnished with se|veral small Tables; those set up an. 23. Car. 2. were 6 foot long, and 4 and a half broad, and set at two Foot distance, each from the other. At the Grand Feast

held at Whitehall, Lib. R. p. . an. 8. Car. 1. the Tables for the KnightsCompanions were (like the Soveraign's) fenced in with Rails; within which the Waiters only being ad|mitted, the Dishes of Meat and the Banquet, were thereby handsomly freed from the troublesome (yet usual) croud and rapine of the people; the like hath been done at all times since, with Bars to open and shut against every Table.
Opposite to these, between the Hall Windows, are set so many side Tables, each 5 foot long, and 2 and a half broad, all raised in with Bars, as are the Ta|bles provided for the Knights-Companions; so that each of theirs hath a side Ta|ble, furnished with Plate, Glasses, Wine, Beer, c. to serve it.
The Hall being thus far prepared, the Black-Rod receives the Lord Chamber|lain's Warrant, for taking into his Custody such rich and costly Furniture, both for the Soveraign's State, and hanging the Hall, as is thought worthy to contri|bute to the honor of this Festival. The Stte, placed at the upper end of the Hall before the Soveraign's Table, is usually the richest; the Hanging of the bst sort: and such were the four pieces of Arras, wherein were wrought the Histo|ry of St. George, bought by Lib. vot. Cot . p. in Offic. Mag Gadrob. f. . b. King Henry the Sixth. The Story of Abraham and Lot (most curious for design and workmanship, most costly for Silk and Gol) with the rich Lor Chan berlayn's R of Warrants from 1634. o 1641. p. 16. State, Chair, Cushens, and Stools belonging to the Queen's Privy|Chamber, did adorn the Presence-Chamber at the Feast held at Whitehall, an. 11. Car. 1. And the same Hanging were made use of in the Banqueting House there, an. 19. Car. 2.
And in case the appearance at Windesor, of the Nobility and great Perso|nages, with their Trains, be extraordinary, then doth the Soveraign, upon such an occasion, direct his Letters to the Dean and Prebends, desiring them to give way, that the Black-Rod may survey their Houses, and therein appoint Lodg|ings for so many as may be entertained there; and thus was it done, upon the coming hither of the Emperor Sigismond, Lib. N. Pag. 57. an. 7. H. 5: for the Soveraign being desirous that their Servants and Attendants, as well as others of his own Retinue, might be in all respects handsomly accommodated, and because the Priviledge was granted to the Dean and Canons, in the Charter of 27. E. 3. That no person, of what state or condition soever, might upon any colour lodge or tarry in their Houses without their consent; he thereupon wrote his Appendix N. CLXXII. Letter to them, thereby desiring liberty and allowance, for the Black-Rod to take up Lodgings in their Houses, in such an extraordinary case; yet withal sig|nified, it was not his intention, that under colour of this they should be so charg|ed for the future.
In A Book en|tituled St. Georg's Feast, in the Lord Chamber|layns Office. May an. 23. Car. 2. a little before the Grand Feast was held at Windesor, there fell out some dispute between the Gentlemen-Vshers daily Waiters, and the Knight-Harbenger, who should appoint Lodgings in the Dean and Prebends Houses, for any of the Knights-Companions, or other persons of quality of the Court. The A Book en|tituled St. Georg's Feast, in the Lord Chamber|layns Office. Knight Harbenger, alledged that by his Patent he ought to assign Lodgings for all persons, that are not lodged in the King's Palace, and that the Gentlemen-Vshers have nothing to do either without the King's House, or with those who are not the King's Houshold-Servants, as some of the Knights-Compani|ons are not. But after much discourse on both sides, before the Lord Cham|berlain of the Houshold, which occasioned a further enquiry into the matter, the only person for this Affair, appeared to be the A Book en|tituled St. Georg's Feast, in the Lord Chamber|layns Office. Gentleman-Vsher of the Black-Rod, who is an Officer of the Order within the Colledge, and whose Predecessor carried the before mentioned Letter from King Henry the Fifth, to the Dean and Canons; besides he is one, whom they have since willingly admitted of in such occasions, and consequently not been invaded by a strange Officer, and there|upon were the A Book en|tituled St. Georg's Feast, in the Lord Chamber|layns Office. pretensions of the Knight-Harbinger set aside.



SECT. VIII. Officers and Servants appointed to attend at the Grand Feast.
THE Names of those Noblemen, which the Soveraign appoints to the prin|cipal Offices of this Grand Feast, are put into a List, signed by the Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold, and delivered to the Black-Rod, who is to give them notice some convenient time before the Feast begin, that thereupon they may fit themselves to perform the duty of their several places.


Lord Cham|berlains Book of Warrants, from 1634, to 1641. pag. 256. A List of those Lords that gave at|tendance at the Grand-Feast, an. 14. Car. 2. when the present So|veraign was Installed.
A List of those Lords that attend|ed the Soveraign, at St. George's Feast held at Windesor the 8. of October, an. 15. Car. 1.


For the Sword.
For the Sword.


Earl of Northampton.
Earl of Denbigh.


The Great Bason.
The Great Bason.


Earl of Bedford.
Earl of Denbigh.


Earl of Hertford.
Earl of Monmouth.


Earl of Clare.
Lord Edward Howard.


Earl of St. Albons.
Lord Herbert of Cardiff.


Lord Herbert of Ragland.
The Cupbearer.


The Cupbearer.
Lord Herbert of Cardiff.


Earl of Essex.
The Carver.


The Carver.
Lord Wharton.


Earl of Carlisle.
The Sewer.


The Sewer.
Lord Grandison.


Earl of Dover.
The Surnap.


The Surnap.
Lord Edward Howard.


Earl of Elgin.
The Ewer.


The Ewer.
Lord Slego.


Earl of Devonshire.
The Train.


The Train.
Duke of Buckingham.


Lord Russel.
Earl of Oxford.


Lord Herbert.
Lord Buckhurst.


Lord Cranborne.



The Gentlemen of the Soveraign's Privy-Chamber, who bear the Canopy, are those that are at the time of the Feast in waiting; and these that follow perfor|med that service at the Feast held in October, an. 15. Car. 1.

Ibid. p. 340. Mr. Gilbert North.
Mr. John Carey.
Mr. John Frecheville.
Captain John Tyringham.
Mr. Edward Tyringham.
Sir Peter Kellegrew.
Mr. Henry Wentworth.
Sir William Berkeley.
Sir Henry Bruce.
Sir Richard Young.
Sir Robert Winde.
Sir John Weldram.

Besides these, several other of the Soveraign's Officers and Servants have no|tice from the Lord Chamberlain, to give their particular attendance at the Grand Feast, and of what quality they usually are, will appear by the List of those ap|pointed to attend at Windesor the 29. of May, an. 23. Car. 2.

A Book inti|tuled St. George's Feast in the Lord Chamberlains Office. Lord Chamberlain, and Servants.
Mr. Vice-Chamberlain.
Groom of the Stool.
Gentlemen of the Bedchamber.
Bedchamber-men.
Privy-Purse.
Secretaries of State.
Secretaries of Scotland.
Gentlemen-Vshers of the Privy-Chamber.
12 Gentlemen of the Privy-Chamber in waiting
4 Gentlemen-Vshers daily Waiters.
2 Carvers.
2 Cupbearers.
2 Sewers.
8 Quarter-Waiters, Gentlemen-Vshers.
2 Pages of the Presence.
2 Chaplains.
2 Esquires of the Body.
2 Physicians.
2 Apothecaries.
2 Chyrurgeons.
4 Serjeants at Arms.
Mrs. Sempstress and Landress to his Majesty.
8 Sewers of the Chamber.
4 Grooms of the Chamber.
Pages of the Back-Stairs.
14 Lords to attend his Majesty.
Captain of the Guards.
Officers of the Guard.
Officers of the Robes.
Yeomen of the Guard.
2 Grooms of the Privy-Chamber.
3 Masters of the Tents.
Groom-Porter.
Master of the Ceremonies.
Marshal of the Ceremonies.
Aid of the Ceremonies.
Removing Wardrobe.
Iewel-house.
Gentlemen of the Chappel.
Musicians.
5 Messengers.
Yeomen of the Bows and Guns.
16 Trumpeters.
Captain Cook, and the Children of the Chappel.
Serjeant-Trumpeter.
Drum-Major, 4 Drummers and a Fife.

St. Alban.




CHAP. XX. THE ORDER OF THE Ceremonies ON THE Eve OF THE Grand Feast.

SECT. I. Of the beginning of the Grand Feast.
HAving in the precedent Chapter spoken somewhat of the Institution of the Grand Festival, which the Statutes of this most Noble Order have fixed to the day of St. George; we come now to treat of its Celebration, with the Ceremonies performed throughout this great Solemnity, devised to set forth and illustrate the glory thereof: In the observation of which, both the first Institutor, and all succeeding Sove|raigns have shewn the utmost of their provision and care: well knowing, that what is once slightly observed, will soon fall into disesteem, if not contempt. And here, what first occurs to our consideration, are the Day, the Hour, and the Place, when and where the Soveraign and Knights-Companions are to meet, in or|der to the beginning of the Feast.
As to the first, although St. George's day (or such other day as the Soveraign shall please to nominate and appoint, by Prorogation in lieu thereof) be indeed the principal and Grand day of the Feast, yet does the Feast take commence|ment upon the Eve, and determines not until the third day following; and so the whole Solemnity takes up, inclusively, three days.
And this is clear from several Articles of the Statutes, wherein the course of the Ceremonies, to be observed at this Grand Solemnity, are set down; whether performed on the Eve, the Feast-day, or the Morrow after: And these three days together did the Soveraigns hold the Grand Feast, whether they personally

celebrated the same, or deputed other of the Knights-Companions to that Em|ployment, the Clause in the Commissions of Deputation, limiting their power, either in general, during the time of the Feast; or in particular, upon the dy of St. George, the day going before, and that following, viz. the last day of the Feast. In like manner, when in succeeding times, Commissions of Prorogation of the Grand Feast were made use of, we find the three days continuance of the east to be particularly mentioned in the body of those Commissions, namely, the day wherein (by such appointment) the Feast was to begin, the Grand day it self, and the day whereon it ended.
The directions given in the Statutes, for the order and course of this Solem|nity, to begin with the Eve, run hus, E. 3. Stat. Art. 9. Every year, upon St. George's Eve, shall be an assembly or meeting of all the Knights-Companions of the Order, at Winde|sor Castle, c. and the same is positively enjoined by all other H. 5. Stat. Art. 9. H. 8. Stat. Art. 3. Bodies of the Statutes.
And as the Grand Feast is generally, and for the most part, said to take com|mencement, An. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 22, 25,  2. H. 6.  1. Mar.  9, 11, 13, 20, 29, 30, 31, 33,  34. Eliz. in Vigilia Sancti Georgii, or, as it is otherwise exprest in the An. 23. H 6. Black Book, in Vigilia future celebritatis, or, An. 14,  15. Eliz. Vigiliis Divi Georgii, or, An. 2  4 Iac. R. in Vigilia Festi: So hath the time of this preceding day several other denominations given unto it in the same Register, as An. 17, 18,  19. Eliz. Vesperi ante diem Sancti Georgii, An. 43. Eliz. in Vesperiis Georgianis, An. 42. Eliz.  3, 14,  15, Iac. R. in Vesperiis Festi, An. 38. Eliz. in Vesperiis Commitionum, and other whiles An. 3, 8, 12, 32. Eliz. Pri|die Divi Georgii, An. 27. H. 6. Pridie Georgianae Solemnitatis, An 38,  39. Eliz. Pridie Festi, An. 6. Eliz. Pridie feria|rum Divi Georgii, and sometimes An. 18,  20. Iac. R. Pervigilia, and lastly in plain English, An. 5. E. 6. St. George's Even. All which signifie one and the same thing, and are but various names given to the Evening of the day foregoing, either that of St. George, or that whereon the Grand Feast is appointed to be held by Prorogation.
Thus we see, the Founder began his Solemnity upon the Eve of the Feast day; which doubtless was in conformity to the Custom of the Church, who made the Vigils and Eves part of the ensuing Festivals, and as Ushers to the Grand So|lemnities. And because the meaning of the word, and first occasion of observ|ing also the Eves of Solemn Days, or great Feasts, by the Church, may haply be to many unknown; it will be here proper enough, to give a touch upon the ori|ginal of this Custom.
Hospinian handling this particular, in his Book De origine Festorum Christia|norum, draweth the antiquity of Vigils out of the Epistle of Plinius secundus and the authority of Ecclesiastical Writers, from the Apostles times, and the next succeeding Age; for saith he, Cap. 7. fol. 25. b. In the Apostles days, and sometime after, when the Christians durst not appear in publick, because of the continual snares, Treache|ries, and persecution of Tyrants, and Enemies of their Religion; they were forced to meet in the night time, and early before day, for the exercise of their devotion. And in the first Church after the times of the Apostles, when they stood not in fear of any persecution, they Cap. 7. fol. 25. b. watched and fasted in their Churches all the week before Easter, or Passion-week; but especially on the Eve of the Resurrection; whence grew the Custom, both for Christian men and Women, to Cap. 7. fol. 25. b. watch and fast on the Eves of great Solemnities, in their Churches; and at the Sepulchres of Saints and Martyrs.
And Durand gives a reason, why these meetings were called Vigils, Rationale div. Offic. lib. 6. cap. 7. Nu. 8. Edit. Lugd. 1612. because anciently in the principal Feasts two Nocturnal Offices were performed [probably Watching and Praying] for the People which came to the Feasts, watcht all night in the Churches, spending their time in the praises of God.
But as the best things may be abused, even Virtue and Religion it self, so it hapned in this religious duty, as Hospinian thus further relates, Loco supra citato. That forasmuch as in process of time, these Nocturnal Watchings occasioned much wickedness, there|fore were the Women forbidden access thereto; Can. 35. Ell|bertine Conci|lii:. because under pretence of Prayer, great abuses were oftentimes committed.
Whence it came, that these kinds of Vigils, as Loco supra citato. Durand affirms, were also at length prohibited; which prohibition received confirmation from Hospin. d Orig. Fest Christ. cap. 7. pag. 26.  Pope In|nocent the Third, in the year of our Lord 1210. and in the room thereof Iejunia, or Fasts, were appointed. Hospin. d Orig. Fest Christ. cap. 7. pag. 26.  Nevertheless those sorts of Fasts still retained the name of Vigils, as most properly implying the Duty originally enjoined. And

Durand further informs us, that this Institution was also called Dispensatio, Loco sup cit. because the Fast was put in the place of the Vigil.
And yet to shew the antiquity of Vigils, it appears that, before Christia|nity, the ancient Greeks and Romans had the same kind of preparations, to some of their grand or solemn Feasts; and particularly at the Dioscor. lib. 1. cap. 136. , or Feast of Ceres. I. Ionston de Fest. Hebr.  Grec. pag. 93. Vratislawe ex|cus. an. 1660. For, three days before this Feast, the Women were to abstain from all manner of Venery, to which end they strewed Agnus castus, and such Herbs, under their Beds, as Loco sup. cit. Dioscorides, speaking of that Herb, testifieth. Nat. Hist. lib. 24. cap. 6. Plin also saith the same; and much to that purpose, the Scholiast of Nicander, I. Ionst. loc. sup. citato. and on the third day they fasted; and this kind of profestum, Prolog. Aulul. Plautus plainly calls Vi|gilae where he saith,

Prolog. Aulul.Is adolescentis illius est avunculus
Qui illam stupravit noctu Cereris vigiliis.


And this the Uncle is of that young man
Who her by night at Ceres Vigils ravisht.

In the Hopin. de Orig. Fest. Christ. f. 26. a. Temples of Isis and Aesculapius, the like nocturnal Vigils were also ce|lebrated: Analogous to which were those Hop. de Fe|stis Iud.  Ethnic. fol. 158. b. Nocturnal Rites of Cotytto, kept by the Corinthians, mentioned by Suidas, Hesychius, and Lib. 1. Satyr 2. Iuvenal.

Talia secreta coluerunt Orgia taeda,
Cecropiam soliti Baptae lassare Cotytto.


Sir Rob. Stapleton's Translation. At Athens such the Baptists Orgies were,
When they their publick Torches did advance, And tir'd out their Cotytto in a Dance.
 Which likewise for the same kind of abuses above mentioned, were condemned by several, chiefly by Eupolis, an ancient Comoedian in his Baptae, as the noctur|nal of Bacchus by In Bacchi Euripides.

 To Womens honors dangerous and unsafe.
And for this cause were the Vigils many times Hospin. de Orig. Fest. Christ. p. 26. a. prohibited by the wisest of the Ancients, though Heathens, among whom Romulus was one, who made a Law, that no night Vigils should be kept in any Temple at Rome. An account of their wicked and beastly Ceremonies used in the Nights, and why they were like|wise afterwards banished out of Rome and Italy, may be seen at large in Lib. 39 sub. finem. Livy.
But to proceed to the second Point, the Hour; as the Eve was appointed by the Founder, for the commencement of the Anniversary of this Grand Feast, so to make the time yet more certain, the Statutes express the exact Hour of meeting, for beginning the Solemnities, to be at the Hour of Tierce, which in many other places is called Lib. N. p. 74, 82, 142,  218. Regr. Chartac. fol. 9. g. Hora tertiarum. But this seemed not sufficient, to express clear enough, the meaning of a Law, wherein the punishment for late coming was en|joined, and by the strength of which, the penalty might be levied; and there|fore in a Chapter held at Windesor, upon the Lib. N. pag. 142. 10. day of May, an. 17. E. 4. A scruple being raised among the Knights-Companions then assembled, concerning the Exposition of these words Lib. N. pag. 142. Hora tertiarum, the day before the Feast; whe|ther it were intended at three a Clock in the Afternoon, or at the Hour of the Church, accustomably used after Prime, before Noon. Lib. N. pag. 142. Because it seemed most agreeable to the Statute, and to the reason of the Statute, and to the penalty there enjoined that it should be taken for the, Hour after Prime before Noon; it was determined, that thereforth it should inviolably be so observed.
The Fol. 46. Registrum Chartaceum recordeth the same interpretation of the words; and to let us see that this was immediately put in practice, in it there is entred

down the Names of those Knights-Companions, present in the Chapterhouse with the Soveraign, both in the Morning and Evening of the said 10. day of May (being the Eve of the Feast of St. George) that is to say Ibid. before Noon, Thomas Marquess Dorset, William Earl of Arundel, Henry Earl of Essex, Anthony Earl Rivers, Iohn Lord Scrope, Thomas Lord Mantravers, Iohn Lord Dudley, and Sir Iohn Astley; and in the Ibid. Afternoon, the Prince, George Duke of Clarence, Richard Duke of York, Iames Earl Douglas, Iohn Lord Howard, Sir William Parre, Walter Lord Ferrars, and Sir Thomas Montgomery.
Another instance of which Practice, we again meet with, an. Lib. N. pag. 166. 3. H. 7. on the Eve of the Grand Feast, held by Prorogation at Windesor; where the Soveraign (in regard of the arrival of several Ambassadors there, and treating about the Affairs concerning which they came) Lib. N. pag. 166. put off the usual Chapter until Noon. Whence it evidently appears, that the custom at this time also, was to begin the Solemnity in the Morning, and then to hold a Chapter as the first thing; which although (for the reasons before mentioned) the Soveraign though fit to defer until Noon; nevertheless, he commanded in the mean time, that the Lib. N. pag. 166. Earl of Shrewsbury should be installed, which was accordingly performed at the Mass of the Virgin Mary.
As to the express acception therefore of the Hora tertia, so far as it relates to the entrance upon our Grand Festival, and how neer the same, expounded and practised as above, agrees with that hour of Tierce, celebrated by the Church, and reckoned as one of the Canonical Hours, set apart for Divine Worship; may best be deduced from what is discoursed at large by Lib. 3. cap. 3, 4, 5. c. Durant, de Ritibus Ec|clesiae Catholicae, and by Lib. 5. Cap. 2 3, 4, c. Durand in his aforesaid Rationale, speaking both of them concerning the Canonical hours of the Church, which though agreed on by both to be the same in effect, are by Durant most positively delivered, to be se|ven in Number, viz. Matutinae laudes, or Mattins, the Prima Hora, or Prime, the Hora tertia, the Hora sexta, the Hora nona, Vespers, and the Completorium, besides the Nocturnum Officium, the Office for Nights; which is also divided into four Vigils, the Conticinium, Gallicinium, Intempestum, and Antelucinium; which se|veral hours, after what manner they divided the day, it is pertinent to our pur|pose to enquire, since from thence may be collected, what time of the day was their hour of Tierce, seeming to be the same (determined by King Edward the Fourth, as aforesaid) in some respect.
And though these Authors do not very punctually determine the course of these Hours, yet it may well enough be implied, that since their Mattins was performed about break of day, and their Prime, by consequence, at 6 a Clock in the morning, the hour of Tierce was most probably 9 a Clock in the Morn|ing, and so the rest at 3 hours distance one after the other; and this determina|tion is clearly confirmed by my late worthy friend Mr. Somner, in his Saxon Dictionary, from an old Birthfrithus Ramesiensis MS. verbo Kyppiole. Saxon Author, whose words, he having cited in that Language, thus renders; Sacram horam diei (veterum) tertiam (nostram) autem Nonam ante meridiem, Archiepiscopi cum Clero sestiva celebrant bilaritate: The Archbishop with the Clergie, celebrate with feasting and mirth, the sacred hour of the day, which among the Ancients was the Third, but with us the Ninth hour, before Noon. This Hora tertia, or hour of Tierce, was by our Ancestors the English-Saxons, called , as we find in venerable Bedes History of the Church of England, Lib. 4. c. 22.  i.e.  Ter|tia Horae quando Missae fieri solebant; and so is it rendred by the said Mr. Somner, Dict. Sax. Lat. Anglicum verbo . , Tempus ante meridianum, hora diei veterum tertia, nostra nona, the Forenoon, the third hour of the day, that is nine of the Clock with us. So in like manner is it used in an old Manuscript of the holy Festivals of the Church, composed in meeter about the Reign of King Edward the First, in the life of St. Brandon.
Penes Sil. Taylour gen. fol. 72. This Fowles long es her Matyns; wel right tho it was time,
And of the Sauter sede vers; and seithe also Prime,
And Undarne seithe, and Midday; and afterward seith non.
And ech tyde of the day longe as cristenemen scholde don.
Of the Third, Sixth, and Ninth Hours, Lib. de Iejun. adversus Phychic. c. 10. Tertullian takes notice, as the most re|markable in humane Affairs, for the division of the day, the distinction of bu|siness, and more peculiarly to be solemnized by Prayers and Divine Service; but especially of all the rest the Durantus de Rit. Eccl. Ca|thol. pag. 909. Hora Tertia, is by preheminence called the Gol|den hour, and in the Canon Law Canon. fin. di|stinct. 44.  concilio Mart. Papae, Can. 61.  65. Hora sacra, doubtless, as being most peculiarly dedicated to some celebration of Divine Service.
But notwithstanding the foresaid declared and decreed Exposition made by King Edward the Fourth, we find it an. II. H. 8. declared to be meant and in|tended for the hour of three in the Ab hor pri|marum Vespe|rarutn post meridiem. Lib. N. pag. 209. Afternoon; and when King Henry the Eighth came to model the Statutes of the Order, he in two several Articles, declares and expounds this Hora teria (which the English Version of those Statutes, renders the Hour of Tierce) to be Lib. N. pag. 216. Art. 3. Hora tertia post meridiem, three a Clock in the Afternoon; and in another Article of the same Statutes, Ex eod. Lib. p. 218. Hora tertiarum, id est Hora teria post meridiem; and elsewhere Lib. R. 107. Hora tertia Vespertina vel Pomeridiana, which Hour as it was then setled to be the punctual time for the Knights-Compa|nions meeting, to enter upon the Solemnity of the Feast, so hath it ever since continued unaltered, and usually observed.
Thirdly, the Place of Assembly, which, for the Soveraign and Knights-Compa|nions hath been in such of the Soveraign's Privy Lodgings, both at Windesor or elsewhere, as he hath appointed, and for the most part, either in the Lib. R. p. 5.94.107.  117. Privy, Ib. pag. 38. Rowes Iournal, p. 8. Palmers Iournal pro an. 1639. p. 16. See his large Iournal, p. 2.  29. Withdrawing, or Lib. C. pag. 194. Bedchambers. To this appointed Room do the Knights-Companions repair, to give their attendance on the Soveraign, first having invest|ed themselves in full Robes, either in their Collect. W. le N. Cl. own Lodgings, or some other con|venient Room at Court, where Lib. R. p. 5. Garter is to attend them, with notice of the ap|proaching hour.
The Knights-Companions being come to the Soveraign, so also the Officers of the Order, habited in their Mantles, and bearing in their hands the Symbols of their several Offices, they wait the Soveraign's being vested in his Robes, and until he pass into the Rowes Iour|nal, p. 23. Lib. R. pag. 126. Palmers Iour|nal pro anno 1639. pag. 16. and his large Iournal, p. 36. Presence-Chamber, or Lib. R. p. 5.  39. give beginning to the Feast, by open|ing the Chapter at this their meeting, before he go thither.
About the same time, the Provincial Kings, Heralds, and Pursuivants, wearing their Coats of the Soveraign's Arms, so also the Band of Pensioners, armed with their Pole-Axes, assemble in the Presence-Chamber; but the Prebends of the Col|ledge, vested in their Taffaty Mantles over their Surplices, and Alms-Knights in their Mantles and Surcoats, come no nearer than the Guard-Chamber. Lastly, the Servants and Attendants of the Knights-Companions meet without the Guard-Chamber door, whence spreading themselves down the Stairs, through the Stone Gallery, into the upper Ward of the Castle, or as far as their number will reach, all wait the Soveraign's coming forth into the Presence.
And here we think it needful (once for all) to inform our Reader, in regard not only the Feast-day of St. George, but the Grand Feast held in honor of the Order, hath been kept in several other places besides Windesor Castle, more espe|cially Whitehall, St. Iames's Greenwich, and York; that there are many Ceremo|nies and other particulars (hereafter falling under our discourse) which alter not with the Place, but appertain to the Festival, and are therefore to be ob|served every where alike; as for instance, the form of Proceeding, the manner of holding Chapters, the Ceremony of Offring Gold and Silver, the order of Elect|ing Knights-Companions, Swearing of Officers, and such like: But others there are precisely local and particular, as the Prebends and Alms-Knights, going in the Proceedings, the Offring up of Atchievements, c. to Windesor only; when therefore we speak of any of the former fort, which properly belong to the Feast, and not to the Place; it is to be understood, that as heretofore they have been, so now ought they to be performed in the celebrations thereof, whereso|ever solemnized.
For since the withdrawing of the Grand Feast from Windesor, some of the Of|ficers of Arms, curious in the observation of these Solemnities, performed in other places, have afforded us greater plenty of Memorials, relating to the ce|remonious part thereof, than any in former Ages did, while the same was

continued at Windesor, and therefore, when the true place where the instance lies, shall be also cited by us, we would not have our Reader mistakingly con|clude, that the Precedent urged, doth not full enough answer our purpose, un|less it had been also fetched from Windesor. But that in these cases, the Cere|mony or Example in such as is peculiar to the Feast, not the Place, where it is held; and ought to serve, and be used without alteration at any Place, where it shall please the Soveraign to keep the Grand Feast. And for those things ap|pertaining to each other place, where the Feast hath been observed, aswell as at Windesor Castle, we shall at all times note them with sufficient difference of place, as oft as we have occasion to draw them into Example.



SECT. II. Of setting the Proceeding in order.
IN setting forth the order of Proceeding to the Chapter-house on the Eve of the Grand Feast, We are to consider the Persons, who constitute and make up the same, together with the course observed in putting them in their due place and rank: In order to which, we shall pursue our wonted method, and as a fore-hand satisfaction, note down and make observation of what mate|rially relates thereunto, as we first meet with the Persons and Degrees that so they may afterwards become applicable (if need be) when the same thing returns again into our discourse.
The particulars whereof we shall handle in the order and series as they pro|ceed, whether it be in Bodies or Single, beginning with those of inferiour rank and so upwards and therein consider, first the Persons, who peculiarly and more immediately relate to this most Noble Order, and who customarily and of duty do, and are obliged to attend, to make up the ordinary and constant Proceedings; and secondly, such who have now and then been occasionally or accidentally received thereinto ad augendam pompam, or otherwise, in regard their employ|ments entitle them to a neer attandance upon the Soveraign at other times; both which sorts, we shall (as occasion is offered) again consider, either as among themselves, or in relation to the other Degrees who go in the Proceedings, next before or after them. And all this, to the end that the pretensions to prece|dency, among and between all Persons and Degrees herein concerned, may be the better made known and understood, and consequently without much difficulty be decided.
First then, we think fit for methods sake, to begin with those of the lowest rank and quality, namely the Servants and Attendants of the Knights-Compa|nions; and thence rise upwards with the next higher Degree, according to the rule and right of precedency.
We are to consider therefore, that in times past the Knights-Companions ap|peared at the Grand Feast, attended with a goodly and numerous Train; but that having been removed from Windesor to other places, (as hath been before remembred) much of this glory was laid aside: Nevertheless, within a few years after that King Iames became Soveraign of this most Noble Order, the lustre of Attendants began to revive; for we find it entred upon the Register, in the 4-year of his Reign, Lib. C. p. 163. That the ancient Custom, which for some years had been in|termitted, wherein, at the Solemnity of this Feast, all the Knights-Companions were wont to go attended, each with a large Train; was recalled and brought back again into use.
Which height of gallantry, made splendid in the number of Attendants, and richness of their Apparel, within ten years after grew up to such excess, or rather exorbitancy, that it stood in need of a restraint, wherefore The Soveraign

by the unanimous advice of the Knights-Companions, Ordained, Decreed, and Commanded, Ibid. p. 189. That every one of the Knights-Companions of the Order, should have to attend upon his person, at the yearly solemnization of the Feast of the Or|der, 50 persons, and no more: The reason whereof we find elsewhere noted to be, MS. pen E. W. G. fol. 153. for saving of charge, and avoiding of emulation. But in the beginning of his late Majesty's Reign of ever blessed memory, the gallantry of Attendants, began again to encrease and augment, insomuch that at the Grand Feast held at Whitehall the 22, 23. and 24. of April an. 8. Car. I. we find it observed, Lib. R. p. 77. That the Knights-Companions came forth attended, each with a Train of Servants very richly clad.
But to return, and enter upon the Proceeding; to the end the Servants and Attendants of the Knights-Companions may be exactly marshalled, the Vsher of the Hall (whose Collect. W. le N. Cl. duty it is to rank them) ought to call for a Lift from Garter, of such Knight-Companions as are to be present at the Grand Feast, noted with their several places in the Proceeding, for his better directions, in assigning the Attendants their due places, the order whereof is thus: First, the Ibidem. junior Knights Attendants, proceed one before another, on the left hand upon whose right hands the second eldest Knight's Attendants go in equal rank with them; for this we observe to have been the general rule; where the Knights-Compa|nions proceed in pairs, their Attendants go together; those belonging to the senior Knight of the two, on the right hand, and to the junior upon their left. But the order is otherwise, where any of the Knights-Companions proceed sin|gle and alone (which often falls out, as shall be noted in its due place) for then the Attendants belonging to that single Knight, go two and two, on both sides the way, opposite one against another.
But when the Grand Feast is celebrated at Whitehall, there the Ibidem. Knights-Companions Attendants are marshalled by the said Vsher, on both sides the pas|sage, from the outward door of the Guard-Chamber down into the Hall, taking up all the room as far as the old Chappel; and because here they do not proceed in regard of the shortness of the processional way, but only make a stand for the Proceeding to pass through them, they are ranked in a way different from that used at Windesor; nevertheless relating more especially to the order observed by their Masters: which method, in the Soveraign's Proceeding to the Chappel, at the before mentioned Feast, held at Whitehall an. 8. Car. I. we find thus de|scribed, Ibid. The eldest Knights-Companions Servants, were ranked on the right hand of the passage, the chiefest of them neerest unto the old Chappel door; and the second Knight (being Companion to the eldest) his Attendants stood on the left side, the chiefest of them also next to the said old Chappel door. And in case the eldest Knights Fellow or Companion be not present in this Proceeding, then the eldest Knights Servants ought to be placed opposite one against another, up|on each side of the said old Chappel door: The like order is to be taken in mar|shalling the Servants of the other Knights of this most Noble Order, whose Com|panions are then absent.
Secondly, the order of Proceeding amongst the Alms-Knights (who an. 1. Car. 1. had MS. pen Edw. Faucon|bridge gen. two Waiters of the Soveraign's Hall, in their-Livery Coats, bearing white Rods in their hands, to proceed before them) is in general two and two toge|ther; the junior in place formost on the left hand, and his next senior on his right. And if sickness, or other lawful impediment, chance to hinder one or more of them, from going in the Proceeding, his junior is advanced into his place, and consequently all the other juniors do in like manner alter their pla|ces, and advance, to the end the superior place be still-supplied, according to the right rule of marshalling the singles that compose a gross Body; but in this case, if their Number that attend happen to be odd, the Governor of the Alms-Knights goeth last of all, and alone.
Thirdly, the Verger of the Colledge hath his place next Collect. W. le N. Cl. after the Alms-Knights, and immediately before the Prebends of the Colledge; who being habited in a Gown, beareth a Silver Verge, the Ensign of his Office. Nevertheless, hereto|fore when the Prehends went not in the Proceeding, on the Eve of the Grand Feast, the Verger proceeded first of all, MS. pen. W. D. N. f. 15. a. before the Alms-Knights, for so was it

observed on the Eve of St. George at Windesor, an. Ibid. 6. Eliz. and in this manner we see it exprest, in the Proceeding set forth by Marcus Gerchard.
Fourthly, under the general Rule, relating to the Alms-Knights, are compre|hended the Prehends of the Colledge, the Pursuivants, Heralds, and Provincial Kings; insomuch, that where either of the said Kings are absent, the Ex Collect.. praefat. W. le N. Cl. senior Herald is ad|vanced, and goeth in breast on the left hand of him who is then present: So al|so where any of the Heralds are wanting, his next junior ascendeth into his place, whereby it sometimes falls out, that the senior Pursuivant is joined to the left hand of the junior Herald. And if through these defects and absence, the num|ber of the Officers of Arms be odd, then (with this difference in the foresaid rule observed among the Alms-Knights) the youngest Pursuivant goeth single by himself.
Touching the right of precedency, between the Officers of Arms and Prebends of the Colledge, in proceeding before the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, we find there hath been heretofore not only some question started, but the place contended for; insomuch that at the Installation of the Earls of Shrewsbury and Cumberland, an. 34. Eliz. the MS. penes G. O. Y. p. 106. Prebends took place, and upon the 24. of May, an. 39. Eliz. at the Installation of Thomas Lord Howard of Walden, and others, the Prebends again endeavoured to pass Ex Collect. Rob. C. Cl. fol. 33. between the Officers of Arms, and Officers of the Orders; but Charles Lord Howard of Effingham then Lieutenant to the So|veraign, delivered his opinion on the Ibid. 34. fol. behalf of the Officers of Arms, against the Prebends.
Yet did not this so settle the order of Precedency, or quiet the Prebends, but that the contention again broke out, an. 1. Iac. R. at the Installation of the Earls of Penbroke, Marr, Southampton, and Duke of Lenox which hapned on the Lib. C. pag. 151 ninth, not MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 151. a. second of Iuly, in the foresaid year) even to such a height, that the Prebends, Pursuivants, and Heralds contended in the Proceeding; but the controversie was on the next morning composed, by the Lord Admiral (then the Soveraign's Lieutenant) the Lord Treasurer, and the Earl of Worcester, and the order in proceeding thus setled; first, that the MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 151. a. Alms-Knights should go foremost, the Pursuivants next, then the Prebends, and then the Heralds and Kings of Arms. And this Order in Proceeding, was afterwards observed on the MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 151. a. 2I. of May an. 4. Iac. R. at the Installation of the Earl of Salisbury, and Viscount Bindon, as also the MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 151. a. 19. of May an. 6. of the same King, at the In|stallation of the Earls of Dunbar, and Montgomery.
Howbeit an. 9. Iac. R. and so afterwards, we do not find the Pursuivants men|tioned in the Proceeding by particular name, nor otherwise, than in this follow|ing order, viz. Alms-Knights, Prebends, Heralds, c. but it may be presumed that the Pursuivants then joined again in Body with the Heralds, (though for some years before divided from them, by the interposition of the Prebends) aswel as the Provincial Kings, and all of them under the Title of An. 9. Iac. R. Heralds, and sometimes 14.  15. Iac. R. Officers of Arms.
And though at the Grand Feast held by Prorogation, on Sunday the Lib. C. pag. 190. 14. of Sep|tember, in the said 15. year of King Iames, it is noted, that the Prince (being then the Soveraign's Lieutenant) proceeded to Morning Service on the Feast day, with the Lib. C. pag. 190. Alms-Knights, Heralds, Prebends, and Officers of the Order before him; from which manner of expression, it may perchance be supposed, that the Heralds went at that time next after the Alms-Knights, and before the Pre|hends nevertheless, MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 154. b. elsewhere we find them on the Eve of the foresaid Feast ranked in this following order.

The Alms-Knights.
The Prebends.
The Officers of Arms.
The Knights of the Order, c.

And doubtless, they proceeded in the same order to the Chappel on the next morning, notwithstanding what is before said to the contrary, those expressions

being interwoven with the general account given of the Ceremonies of the whole Festival, and more subject to mistake, where the Relation of the Pro|ceeding is carried on in a continued Discourse, than where ranked (as is before exhibited) in particular lines, and in the order and form of a Proceeding: Be|sides, we no where meet with any Order or Decree, nulling the foresaid de|termination, made an. 1. Iac. R. which placeth the Prebends before the Heralds. Finally, to give an end to the disputes in this point, we find, that upon the Eve of the Feast, held at Windesor the 23.24. and 25. of November an. 1. Car. 1. the MS. penes Edw. Faucon|bridge. Prebends proceeded next before the Pursuivants, and the Pursuivants immedi|ately before the Heralds and Provincial Kings; that is to say, all the Officers of Arms (except Garter, whose place is elsewhere) proceeded in one entire Body together; which order we find to be the same in all Proceedings after, that we have met with, and was so observed at the Grand Feast held at Windesor Lib. Carol. pag. 39. an. 13. Car. 2. and ever since. But to proceed,
All the before mentioned Attendants wait in their several stations, till the hour of Tierce, when the Soveraign (having the Knights-Companions and Officers of the Order before him, and his Train carried up) passeth towards the Presence Chambers; notice of whose coming being given, the Band of Pensioners make the accustomed Guard and Passage, along the Presence-Chamber, the seniors stand|ing towards the Lobby door; within which Guard, on either side, do the Offi|cers of Arms place themselves: Upon the same warning, the Yeomen of the Guard clear a like passage from the Presence-Chamber door, along the Guard-Chamber, unto its outward door, for the Proceeding to pass through.
At the Soveraign's approach, one of the Gentlemen-Vshers attending with the Sword of State (the point resting upon the ground) delivereth it to such one of the Nobility (not being a Knight of the Order) whom the Soveraign, as an hono|rary favour, hath before nominated, to bear it from thence before him in all the Proceedings of the Feast; during which action the Knights-Companions proceed forward, and being entred the Presence-Chamber, Collect. W. le N. Cl. flank on each side the State, with some small distance between them, and there make a stand. The Soveraign being also entred, passeth to the step before the State (the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Nobleman who bear|eth the Sword, and the five Officers of the Order, retiring a little on his right hand) and then turning himself towards the Knights-Companions, standeth there a while, until they have made their Sir Tho. Rowes Iourn. pag. 23. See also Sir Iames Palmers large Iourn. pag. 11.  his Iourn. pro an. 1639. pag. 16. Reverences unto him; which being per|formed, he re-saluteth the Knights-Companions by Sir Tho. Rowes Iourn. pag. 23. See also Sir Iames Palmers large Iourn. pag. 11.  his Iourn. pro an. 1639. pag. 16. putting off his Cap. This done, the Soveraign putteth his Cap on again, whereupon every of the Knights-Compa|nions put on theirs, and immediately rank themselves, according to their due place, on both sides the State.
For the right understanding whereof, we are in the fifth place to note, that the order and method wherein the Knights-Companions are ranked (if they be all present) is two and two together, the Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. junior formost on the left hand, for that is his place in all Proceedings. But where any of them be absent, the Rule is different from that appropriate to the before mentioned Degrees; for although it be recorded, that upon the Eve of the Grand Feast held at Windesor, an. 7. H. 5. The Knights-Companions, Lib. N. p. 58. went together in order into the Chapter-house and Choire. Yet this being exprest but in general terms, how it ought to be understood, will more fully appear, from the particular directions given for the order of the Knights-Companions proceedings in King Henry the Eighth's Statutes; where the Art. 2. Law directs each Knight-Companion to proceed alone, at such time as his Fellow (who possesseth the Stall opposite unto him) is absent; but the order of such Pro|ceeding will by a Scheme be made more evident.

The Proceeding of the Knights-Companions, present on the Eve of St. George, to the Closet at Whitehall, an. 3. Eliz.
MS. fol. pen. praesat. W.D.N.The Lord Hunsdon.
The Lord Robert Dudley.
The Lord Loughborow.
Void.
The Viscount Mountague.
The Earl of Shrewsbury.
The Earl of Sussex.
Void.
The Marquess of Northampton.
The Lord Clynton.
Void.
The Lord Howard of Effingham.
The Earl of Westmerland.
Void.
The Duke of Norfolk.
The Earl of Penbroke.

In this Proceeding there are four Knights-Companions who proceeded alone, first the Lord Hunsdon, then being the junior Knight, because the Lord Grey his Fellow on the right hand, was in this Proceeding absent, and consequently his Stall became Void. Secondly, the Earl of Westmerland, in regard the Earl of Rutland, his left hand Companion, was then also warting. Thirdly, the Mar|quess of Northampton, whose right hand Fellow, the Lord Pagit, was likewise absent: and lastly, the Earl of Penbroke, because the Stall opposite unto him was then void by the death of the Earl of Huntington.
And to avoid all questions and disputes, touching precedency of the Knights-Companions among themselves, at Feast, Installations, Chapters, or other occasio|nal meetings, relating to the Affairs of the Order, and to setle an indisputable rule for them to observe, it was in the 16. year of the said King Henry the Eighth Decreed, in affirmation and explanation of the foresaid Article of the Statutes, that Lib. N. p. 318 Each Knight-Companion should take place in Procession, Station, or sitting at the Table, thenceforward, as he had his Seat or Stall in the Choire, and not according to the degree of his birth or condition, unless the Soveraign were pleased that any should be made choice of, according to the Nobility of his Family, to sit at the end of his own Table, and perform any other thing by the by. And this is the Law, which setled the precedency among the Knights-Companions.
Sixthly, the manner of Proceeding among the Officers of the Order, differ|eth from all before spoken of; for, being five in number, the three inferiour Offi|cers (when they are all present) march in breast, and (of later times) in this following order: The Register in the middle, Garter on his right hand, and the Vsher of the Black-Rod on his left.
But we find the form and course of Proceeding among these three Officers, hath anciently been observed otherwise, and therein we meet with much diver|sity, as for instance; in the Proceeding of the Soveraign and Knights-Compani|ons, fairly limned and inserted in the Black-Book of the Order, at the beginning of the Acts of King Henry the Eighth's Reign, there Garter is placed in the mid|dle, having the Register on his right hand, and the Black-Rod on his left, (so also at the Installation of the Ex lib. vocat Dalton. pag 119. b. Lord Cromwell, an. 29. H. 8.) Nevertheless, in another Proceeding of the Soveraign, the Knights-Companions, the Officers of the Order, and the Alms-Knights, designed and etched by Mrcus Gerchrd See Ch. 21. Sect. 3. sub. finem. hereafter inserted; there the Register is put in the middle, Garter upon his right hand, and Black-Rod on his left, as is the order at this day. And in truth, all Relations de|scribed in writing, of the manner of Proceeding since (which hath come to our view) are in this point delivered very imperfect and promiscuous; having nei|ther distinction of the right hand man, or which of the foresaid three Officers went in the middle, to guide us with any certainty. For sometimes, when they come to speak of this very point (and here we take in what we find of proceed|ing upon other occasions, besides those used at the Grand Feast, in regard they ought to be alike in all) they thus deliver themselves. Then followed the Vsher, Garter, and the Register, as it is set down in the MS. fol. penes. W. D. N. 2.3.4.5.6. and 7. years of Queen Elizabeth: At other times thus, then went Garter, the Register, and Gentleman-Vsher, MS. in Offic. Arm. [L. 1. fol. 19. b.] an. 31. H. 8. MS. pen G.O.Y. fol. 87. 1. E. 6. and 1. Car. 1. and again thus, then the Register, Garter, and Black-Rod, as in the Collect. A. V. W. 5. and MS pen. praef. G. O. Y. f. 203. 34. of Queen Elizabeth, and the MS. penes E. W. G. 6. and MS. penes E. W. G. 15. of King Iames: And lastly thus, then Garter, Black-Rod, and the Register, as an. Collect. A. V. W. 16. Eliz. and MS. praef. pen. E. W. G. f. 147. 4. Iac. R. Other Examples there are which may be reduced to one or more of these heads, or the like uncertain manner of placing these three Officers; but these are the most obvious, and we need not be more particular. And seeing the errour, or at least inadvertency of the Relators, have left the matter so confused, we cannot confidently enough

say to what method such contrariety in ranking them heretofore can refer; in regard they agree not in position of place, nor doth that clear enough set forth where, how, or in what particular, the right appears due to the priority of their several Offices.
After these 3 Officers the two superior proceed together, the Prelate on the right hand and the Chancellor on the left; yet an. 11. H. 8. we find that Garter and Black-Rod proceeded MS.between the Prelate and the Sword, but the very same morning at the Grand Procession, the Prelate proceeded MS. in Offic. Armr. [M. 1.] pag. 26. b. next before the Sove|raign, affirming that was his room and place, and the other Officers of the Order went before him.
After the Officers of the Order follows the Sword, which is carried immedi|ately before the Soveraign. In the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, it was born on the Eves of St. George, solemnized at Whitehall by some of the Baronage, for instance, an. 3. Eliz. by the MS. penes W. D. N. Lord Wentworth, an. 5. Eliz. by the MS. penes W. D. N. Lord Scroop, an. 7. Eliz. by the MS. penes W. D. N. Lord Shandos, an. 9. by the Lord MS. penes W. D. N. Cobham, and an. 10. by the Lord Collect. W. le N. Cl. Herbert. But of later times, the employment hath been conferr'd upon persons of higher rank, as an. 4. Car. 1. upon the Earl of Collect. W. le N. Cl. Dover, an. 8. Car. 1. up|on the Earl of Collect. W. le N. Cl. Stanford, an. 9. Car. 1. upon the Earl of Collect. W. le N. Cl. Danby, and an. 13. Car. 2. upon the Lord Viscount Mordant, then Constable of the Castle of Windesor.
We are now arrived at the Soveraign's place in the Proceeding, E. 3. Stat. Art. 3. Et notandum quod superior Ordinis tempore Processionis in dicta Capella transibit retro totam socio|rum Comitivam; which though the Statute mentions here to be performed at the Grand Procession, yet doth it refer to all those times the Soveraign shall proceed to or from, no less than within the Chappel. And indeed this is the chief place in all Proceedings, Lib. N. p. 57.  lib. vocat. Dalton, p. 36. being retained by King Henry the Fifth, as Soveraign of the Order, when Sigismond the Emperor was in person with him at the celebration of the Feast of St. George at Windesor, an. 4. H. 5. In ancient time, the Soveraign (if he were at Windesor to celebrate the Grand Feast) proceeded to the Chappel in per|son, as well on the Eve as on the Feast-day: But Queen Elizabeth was the first, who went not to the Chappel on the Eve of the Feast, held in the MS. fol. pen. praef. W. D. N. f. 15. 6. year of her Reign (though present in Windesor-Castle) but deputed the Earl of MS. fol. pen praef. W. D. N. f. 15. Arundel for that purpose; unless we shall here except King Henry the Sixth, who by Lib. N. p. 111. reason of sickness on the Eve of the Feast, celebrated an. 32. of his Reign, was necessitated to make a Deputy in his stead, and thereupon appointed the Duke of Lib. N. p. 111. Buckingham, President of that Feast. The aforesaid omission of Queen Elizabeth at Windesor, and sometimes afterward, when the Grand Feast was observed at Whitehall, or Greenwich (first occasioned through her indisposition of health) as in the MS. pen. G. O. . pag. 114. 18. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. 25. 29. and 31. years of her Reign, gave afterwards the occasion to King Iames, who at those three Grand Feasts he celebrated at Windesor, in the 1. 15. and 21 years of his Reign, went not to the Chappel on the Eve, but deputed for the first MS. pen. praesat. E. W. G. fol. 151. a. Charles Earl of Nottingham, at the second the Lib. C. pag. 189. Prince, and at the third the Lib. R. p. 5. Earl of Worcester. The like deputation did his late Majesty of ever blessed memory, King Charles the First, give unto theIbid. p. 29. Earl of Worcester on the 23. of November, being the Eve of the Grand Feast, held by Prorogation an. primo reg|ni sui, who proceeded to the Chappel in his stead. But on the Ex. Collect. praef. W. le N. Cl. Eve of the Grand Feast, celebrated by Prorogation upon the 23. 24. and 25. days of September, an. 4. Car. 1. the ancient custom (for many years intermitted) was restored, and the Ex Collect. praef. W. le N. Cl. So|veraign (making no Lieutenant) proceeded to the Chappel, not only on that Eve, but duely observed the same Ceremony upon all Eves of the Grand Feast thence for|ward, in his own person. So did the present Soveraign in all the Grand Feasts held since his happy return. In those celebrations of the day of St. George, observed by Queen Elizabeth at Whitehal and Greenwich, before the 9. year of her Reign (wherein the Grand Feast was removed from Windesor) as also after that year, she went not on the Eves into the Choire to Vespers, but only to the Closet of the Chappel; whither she proceeded from the Chamber of Presence, with all usual state, though in her MS. fol. pen. praef. W. D. N. ordinary Apparel, and without the Robes of the Order, and where the cele|brated the first Chapter, accustomably held on the Eve, and there deputed her Lieu|tenant, who supplied her place in the Proceeding thence, and in the Choire, whilst the



A Proceeding of the Soveraigne, and Knights Companions, at the Feast of S. George. designed by Mard and set forth in the 20 yeare of Queene Elizabeth by Thomas Dawes sometime Rougecroix Purs 




remained in the Closet until Evening Prayers were finished; at which time the Lieu|tenant returning to the Closet, the whole Proceeding passed again before her, unto the Presence-Chamber. But throughout King Iames his Reign, we cannot collect, that the Soveraign went at all, either to the Closet, or into the Chappel, upon the Eves of St. George, (when the Feast was celebrated at either of the foresaid places) but rather held the first Chapter before Vespers, in some of the Privy-Lodgings, where he constituted his Lieutenant, who immediately went into the Presence-Chamber, and from thence proceeded to the Chappel, to Evening Prayers.
Before we pass further, it will be necessary to observe, that from the Presence-Chamber, called in the Statutes the E. 3. H. 5. Sta Art. 3. Great Chamber, and elsewhere, the Lib. in Offic. Armor. [M. 1] sol. 26. b. Cham|ber of Estate, or the Kings Dyning-Chamber, this first Proceeding to the Chapter-house, and all that follow during the Feast begin, and there take ending.
And now to close up the Ordinary Proceeding, the Band of Pensioners having stoodin the Presence-Chamber, and made a spacious Lane for the Proceeding to pass through, so soon as the Soveraign and the Attendants upon his Train, are passed by, they (with the Captain of their Band or his Lieutenant before them) immediately fall in, two and two, from each side of the way, after the Proceed|ing, the seniors first, and so accordingly in order; and follow thence the Sove|raign to the Chapter-house door: but at the Feast held Ex Colle. praesat. W. le N. Cl. an. 8. Car. 1. they went in guard, on Ex Colle. prasat. W. le N. Cl. each side the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, the Lord Goring their Lieutenant (for the Earl of Sussolk their Captain was absent) going in the head of them.
Having under these precedent heads spoken as much as we conceive needful, to usher in the ordinary and usual Proceeding, upon the Eve of the Grand Feast; we think fit to exhibit a Scheme thereof here.

The Attendants on the Knights-Companions.
Alms-Knights.
Verger of the Chapel.
Prebends of Windesor.
Officers of Arms.
Knights-Companions.

Black-Rod.
Register.
Garter.
Chancellor.
Prelate.
The Sword.

The Soveraign.
Train-bearers.
Captain of the Pensioners.
Pensioner.

To the foregoing Proceeding, we shall touch upon those persons of quality, who to encrease the pomp and state of it, have occasionally been received there|into; as also such, other eminent in place and degree, as (though their Offices do not particularly relate to this most Noble Order) have nevertheless been taken into the Proceeding, meerly by reason of their requisite attendance upon the Soveraign, in his Proceedings upon all other occasions.
On St. George's Eve an. 3. Eliz. the MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 2. old Ambassador of Sweden was present, and being accompanied by the Earl of Hertford, went in the Proceeding to the Closet at Whitehall. He had place assigned him next after the Train-bearers, and immediately before the Ladies Attendants upon the Soveraign; and the next morning, when the Soveraign proceeded to the Chappel, the MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 2. new Ambassador of Sweden went in the same place. So also the French Ambassador an. 6. Eliz. had place Ibid. fol. 17. . near the Soveraign, at her proceeding to Morning Service on the Feast-day at Windesor.
As to those admitted upon the account of their Offices, we observed Henry Earl of St. Albans, the present Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold (being not hitherto a Knight of the Order) was allowed place on the right hand of the So|veraign, somewhat behind, in the Proceeding to the Chappel, at the Grand Feast an. 23. Car. 2. and the Vice-Chamberlain on his left hand.
The Vice-Chamberlain (who in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign was taken in to assist at the bearing up the Soveraign's Train) went on the Collect. W. le N. Cl. left hand the Sword of State, on the Eves of St. George at Whitehall, an. Collect. W. le N. Cl. 3.  Collect. W. le N. Cl. 8. Car. 1. and 19. Car. 2.
The Dean of the Soveraign's Chappel at Whitehall, attends the Soveraign in the Proceedings thither, and the place he goes in is a Collect W. le N. Cl. little behind the Soveraign towards his left hand. Next the Dean goes the Collect W. le N. Cl. Clerk of the Closet; and then the Collect W. le N. Cl. Master of the Robes; so also of late one of the Masters of Requests, and then the Collect W. le N. Cl. Gentleman of the Robes.


SECT. III. Of Proceeding to the Chapter-house.
HAving treated at large under the precedent head, concerning the due rank and place of all those persons, that ordinarily or occasionally have gone in the Proceeding; wherein all saving the Soveraign and Knights-Companions pass bareheaded, we now pass to the Place whither the Proceeding is directed.
The first solemn action, that the Soveraign and Knights-Companions are obliged to perform, at the entrance upon the Grand Feast, is to celebrate a Chapter; and therefore it hath been most usual for them, to proceed from the Presence-Chamber, Lib. R. p. 23,  126. Rowes Iourna p. 23. See also Palmers Iourn. pro an. 1639. pag. 16. Every one in their due place and order; first to the Chapter-house, to consult of things of course, and next into the Choire, to hear Divine Service. And though it be not positively set down in the Statutes, which of these two shall precede, yet that the Chapter ought to be held before the first Vespers, is naturally enough to be deduced out of that branch of the Statutes, where the penances and penalties to be inflicted on such Knights-Companions, as come late to the Feast, are laid down. For there we find it provided, E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 10. H. 8. Stat. Art. 9. of the Knights-Companions appear not on the Eve, precisely at the hour of Tierce, they shall not be permitted for that time, either to enter into the Chapter, or to have voice in any thing done therein; and then (the Article proceeding with other penalties upon other defaults) it immediately follows; That if any of them come not before the beginning of Vespers, they shall not be allowed to enter into their Stalls. So that hence it is evident, that the course and order intended was, that the Soveraign and Knights-Companions should first celebrate a Chapter, therein to dispatch the business of the time; and after that broke up, then next proceed into the Choire to Vespers. Moreover, the general practice in all succeed|ing times (beginning with King Henry the Fifth's Reign) doth most fully demon|strate, that a Chapter was of custom held before the first Vespers; whereof we shall urge these following Examples in the point, as being recorded in the Re|gisters of the Order.
When Iohn Duke of Bedford, Deputy to the Soveraign, celebrated the Solem|nities of St. George at Windesor, an. 7. H. 5. he and the Knights-Companions pre|sent, at the designed hour, on the Eve, entred together into the Lib. N. p. 58. Chapter-house and Choire. Again an. 5. E. 4. the Lord Berners, the Soveraign's Lieutenant, and other Knights-Companions, Ibid. p. 129. met at Windesor, in an honorable equipage, for the ac|customed holding of Chapters, and the solemn celebration of Divine Service. An 7. Car. 1. Oct. 4. (after the celebrations of the Grand Feast began to be restored to Windesor) we find it recorded more fully to our purpose, viz. that Lib. R. p. 74. before Vespers, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions went first to the Chapter-house; but busi|ness being put off till the morrow, they all proceeded to the Choire. So an. 9. Car. 1. the Soveraign and Knights-Companions are said Lib. R. p. 84. first to go to the Chapter-house, and by and by it follows, as soon as they came to the Choire, c.
Lastly, we find there are recorded by Sir Thomas Wriothesley sometime Garter King of Arms, in an Pen. G. O. Y. old Velom Manuscript of his, the Chapters accustomably held, during the celebration of the Grand Feast, in the following order.


1. Upon the Even of St. George, before Evensong.
2. The next day, either before Matins or before the Grand Proession.
3. The same day also before Evensong.
4. And lastly on the next morning before the Mass of Requiem.

At all which times, Chapters have (for the most part since) been held by the Soveraign and Knights-Companions: and herein the Chancellor of the Order is not only to know the Soveraign's pleasure, but also whether he will hold any of them publickly in the Chapter-house, or privately in any Room of his Privy-Lodg|ings, or in the Closet, before the Proceeding pass to the Chappel.
As this ancient Custom of holding a Chapter on the Eve of the Grand Feast, was constantly observed, when celebrated without prorogation; so also hath a Chapter been in like manner held before Vespers on the Eve, at such time as the Feast-day of St. George only hath been observed, when (for any cause) the An|niversary of the Grand Feast received Prorogation; as for instance, an. 1. Mar. a Chapter was held at the Mannor of St. Iames's, on the Lib. C. pag. 7. Vigil of St. George, be|fore the first Vespers; whereunto is fixed this note, Lib. C. pag. 7. Vt moris est; and the Grand Feast for that year received Ibid. pag. 9. adjournment, until the coming of Philip then Prince (after King) of Spain. So an. 8. Eliz. the day of St. George being celebrated at Greenewich, it appears that a Chapter was holden there Pag. 50. on the Eve before Evening-Prayer; and the Grand Feast for that year prorogued to the first Pag. 52. Sunday after Trinity Sunday, to be kept at Windesor.
In like manner, though the celebrations of the Grand Feast were by Queen Elizabeth removed from Windesor, and observed at other places (as hath been before discoursed) yet this usual Custom of holding a Chapter on the Eve, was in such cases constantly practised; after which the Proceeding to Evening Prayer succeeded, as is manifest by these following Testimonies. An. 29. Eliz. After a relation entred in the Ibid. pag. 105. Blew-Book of the Order, of what had past in Chapter, held on the Eve of the Feast at Greenwich, it Ibid. pag. 105. there follows, that the Soveraign's Lieu|tenant and Knights-Companions proceeded to Evening Prayer. So also an. 39. Eliz. Ib. pag. 133. on the Eve of the Feast, the Lord Charles Howard, was by the Soveraign (in Chapter) constituted Lieutenant; which done, they in a solemn manner streight way went to Prayers. And the Pag. 136. next year, when in a Chapter called on the Eve of the Feast at Whitehall, after the Earl of Pag. 136. Shrewsbury had been made Lieutenant for the holding of that Feast, and other customary things dispatched therein, the Register notes, that Pag. 136. Vespers were solemnly celebrated.
And because the Processional-way to the Chapter-house, as also to the Chappel, both publick and private, as well at Windesor, as elsewhere, are fit to be known and remembred; we shall in the next place trace them out.
The publick Processional-way to the Chapter-house at Windesor,The Processio|nal way. used time out of mind, led from the Presence-Chamber, down through the Cloister, and the great Gate of the Kings Lodging, into the upper Ward of the Castle, thence through the middle Ward, and part of the lower, to and through the passage, between the East-end of the Chappel, and Tomb-house, and thence into the Chapter-house, situate at the North-East Corner of St. George's Chappel.
But sometimes the Soveraign hath thought sit, to wave this publick Processio|nal way, and pass along the private way, which leads from the King's Privy-Chamber, down the Stairs into the Terrace, viz. through Lib. R. p. 39,  61. that most stately Walk lying on the North side the Castle, and entring again at a door, heretofore made through a part of the Castle Wall, into one of the Canons Lodging adjoining to Winchester Tower (now made up) went thence through the Cloisters, into the Chapter-house; nevertheless proceeding in the order before shewed, as it was on the Eve of the Feasts, held in the Collect. W. le N. Cl. 4. MS. 7. and Ex Collect: praesat. 9. years of King Charles the First.
But when the Grand Feast was (heretofore) celebrated at Whitehall, the Chap|ter was usually held in the Soveraign's MS. fol. pen. W. D. N. fol. 7. b. 20, 26,  27. b.  intra Collect. W. le N. Cl. de an 2. Eliz. vid. etiam MS. f. pen G. O. Y. pag. 1. Closet, built over the entrance into the Chappel; and then the Processional way thither, lay from the Presence-Chamber in|to the Guard-Chamber, and through the Gallery, thence into the outward Clo|set, or Ante-camera, and so to the Soveraign's Closet.
But the Soveraigns of this most noble Order, or their Lieutenants, have not

always (though generally) proceeded upon the Eve of the Grand Feast, first to the Chapter-house, and thence into the Chappel; but sometimes gone immediate|ly into the Chappel, to Evening Prayer, without entring the Chapter-house at all: and at these times, the Processional way at Windesor, differed from the former only in this, that when the Procession arrived neer unto the forementioned pas|sage, at the East end of the Chappel, instead of entring thereat, it went on to the South door of the Chappel, and thence into the Choire, In like case, when the Soveraign went not to the great Closet at Whitehall, to hold the usual Chap|ter before Vespers, the publick processional way then led from the Presence-Chamber into the Guard-Chamber, and so down the great Stairs into the Hall, thence into the old Chappel, and lastly, in at the door of the new Chappel. And at Greenwich, from the MS. fol. pen. W. Dugdale Norr. Presence-Chamber down into the Hall, and thence into the Chappel. But these ways we take to be used at such time only, when the Soveraign hath held a Chapter in some of the Privy Lodgings, before the Proceeding set forward; which Chapter being ended, there was then no need of going to the Chapter-house or Closet, but immediately into the Choire.
And thus we find it to have been observed at Windesor, upon the Ibid. fol. 15. a. 22. day of April an. 6. Eliz. where after the Knights-Companions and Officers of the Order, were assembled in the Queen's Privy-Chamber, a Chapter was there called, and the Earl of Arundel constituted her Lieutenant for holding the Feast; at the breaking up whereof, the Proceeding began (the said Lieutenant supplying the place of the Soveraign) which passed along the publick processional way, direct|ly unto the Ibid. fol. 15. a. South door of the Chappel, where they entred, and went thence in|to the Choire, Ibid. fol. 15. a. without going to the Chapter-house at all.
So was it an. 20. Iac. R. at Whitehall, where the Prince had been con|stituted the Soveraign's Lieutenant in Chapter, Lib. R. p. 1. He and the Knights-Companions proceed to the Chappel to Evening Prayers, according to the Custom. So al|so upon the Lib. R. p. 29. 23. of November, an. 1. Car. 1. being the Eve of the Grand Feast, celebrated at Windesor by Prorogation, before the Proceeding began, a Chapter was held, wherein the Earl of Worcester was Lib. R. p. 29. constituted Lieutenant, and the So|veraign dispensed with the non-appearance of the absent Knights-Companions; af|ter which, the said Lieutenant, and the rest of the Knights-Companions, together with all the Officers of the Order, proceeded from the Presence-Chamber, imme|diately into the Lib. R. p. 29. Chappel, to hear Divine Service.
In like manner on the Lib. R. pag. 38. 23. day of September (the Eve of the Grand Feast) an. 4. Car. 1. a Chapter was called Lib. R. pag. 38. in the Soveraign's Bedchamber at Windesor, where the new Officers were sworn; and when that was ended, the Proceeding began to the Lib. R. p. 39. vide etiam Col|lect. W. le N. Cl.  Autogr. pen. Edw. Fau|conbridge. Chappel, and so into the Choire.
And lastly, 17. Apr. an. 13. Car. 1. at the Hour of Palmers Iourn. p. 8. Tierce in the Afternon, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions opened the Chapter in the Lib. R. p. 117. Privy-Chamber, and thence proceeded to the Chappel; this day being the Eve of the Feast, held by Prorogation for the 12. year of his Reign.
And although upon the Eve of the Grand-Feast an. Lib. R. p. 5. 21. Iac. R. after the So|veraign had held a Chapter in the Lib. R. p. 5. Privy-Chamber at Windesor, and thereat sworn Sir George Moor into the Office of Chancellor to this most Noble Order; the So|veraign's Lieutenant (the Lib. R. p. 5. Earl of Worcester) together with the Knights-Compa|nions, proceeded to the Chapter-house, and there held another Chapter; yet was not this second Chapter called for Affairs appertaining to the Grand Feast (they being dispatched in the Privy-Chamber before) but only in reference to the call|ing in, and investiture with the Surcoat, of Ibid. p. 6. Iames Marquess of Hamilton, who was that evening installed.
We shall close this head, with acquainting our Reader, that though the Pro|ceedings to the Chapter-house or Chappel on the Eve of the Feast, have most com|monly been on foot; nevertheless, now and then, upon an extraordinary occasion, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions have proceeded on Horseback; as an. 3. H. 7. the Grand Feast being then held by prorogation at Windesor, on MS. penes Arth. Cam. Anglesey, fol. 167. . Sunday fol|lowing the Feastday of St. George, at which time several MS. penes Arth. Cam. Anglesey, fol. 167. . Ambassadors being ar|rived here from Foreign Kings and Princes, they, and many of the Nobility of this

Kingdom, with the King's Council, the two Archbishops, the Bishops of Lincolne and Exceter, and the Chief Iustice of the Kings Bench repaired also thither.
On the Eve the Soveraign accompanied with the Knights-Companions in their Mantles, and the Gowns or Surcoats of the Livery of the Ibid. preceding year, rode from the upper Quadrangle down to the Colledge. The Queen and the Kings Mother, in like Ibid. Gowns of that Livery, rode in a Chair covered with a rich Cloth of Gold, drawn by six Coursers, harnised with the same Cloth of Gold, and 21 Ladies habited in Crimson Velvet, rode upon white Palfreys, their Sadles of Cloth of Gold, the Harness Goldsmiths work, with white Roses demy-trapper-wise. Sir Rogr Cotton Master of the Queens Horse, riding upon a Courser trapped with Goldsmiths work, led her Horse of State in his hand, being furnished with a Saddle of Cloth of Gold, and thereon three Crowns of Silver gilt, with Fimbres of the same Cloth hanging down to the Knees on both sides, and harnised with Goldsmiths work demy-trapper-wise: as soon as they alight|ed, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions proceeded to the Chapter-house, and thence to Evensong; which ended, they returned in the order they came.
King Henry the Eighth on the 28. of May in the 11. year of his Reign, MS. in Offic. Arm. [M. 17.] fol. 26. b. at a Clock in the Afternoon, with all the Knights-Companions in the Habit of the Order, proceeded from the Presence-Chamber in Windesor Castle, till they came to the Quadrangle, where they took their Horses, and rode according to their Stalls, not after their Estates, next before the King; MS. the reverend Father in God the Bishop of Winchester Prelate of the Order, wearing on him a Mantle of Morrey, with a Scutcheon of the Arms of St. George on the left shoulder, fol|lowing all other the Knights of the Garter, the Sword was born by the Earl of Westmerland next before the King, and Garter King of Arms, and Sir William Compton Vsher of the Black-Rod, went betwixt the Prelate and the Sword, and all Gentlemen and Knights, Barons and Earls before the Knights of the Garter, and thence rode to the Ex Lib. pra M. loco cit. middle door of the Chappel, and there alighted, and so proceeded without the Choire unto the Chapter-house.
Lastly, The Grand Feast being held at MS. fol. penes W. D. N. f. 15. a. Windesor, an. 6. Eliz. and the Earl of Arundel chosen the Soveraign's Lieutenant, MS. fol. penes W. D. N. f. 15. a. he and the Knights-Companions pro|ceeded on the Eve on Horseback, from the Soveraign's Lodgings in the Castle, to the South door of the Chappel, and after Evening Service returned in the same order.


SECT. IV. Of the opening of the Chapter.
THE Proceeding being arrived at the entrance into the Chappel, first the Attendants upon the Knights-Companions divide themselves as they enter, beginning at the outward door, and flank on each side the North Isle of the Chappel, and so forward towards the West door of the Choire, making a stand along the Isle for the Alms-Knights, Verger, Prebends, and Officers of Arms to pass through them, who go on towards the said West door; and when the junior Knights-Companions are entred into the Chappel, the Proceeding makes a stand, while all the Knights-Companions following turn aside on the right hand into the Chapter-house, next the Officers of the Order, and lastly the Soveraign; but the Nobleman that carries the Sword, the Train-bearers, Pen|sioners, c. stay without the Chapter-house door in the North Isle, none being admitted in but the Soveraign, the Knights-Companions, and the Officers of the Order; who being all entred, the door is shut by the Gentleman-Vsher of the Black-Rod, and every person severally takes his due place and station, where|upon the Chapter immediately opens.
As the Chapter-house is a place of publick Convention, wherein all the Af|fairs of the Order are transacted, having been made the more famous for those many Laws, Acts, and Decrees of Honor and Nobless, which have received life and confirmation therein: So doth it seem to challenge as great a regard in the order and method of setting out the Places of those Persons, who not only assem|ble to consult, but such as are admitted to give attendance, as doth the Proceed|ing thither. In what manner and order the Soveraign, Knights-Companions, and Officers of the Order are ranked at the holding of a Chapter, and during its con|tinuance, we shall find most fully and particularly described, in the order ob|served upon the 28. day of May, an. 11. H. 8. when the Soveraign and Knights-Companions most solemnly assembled in the Chapter-house at Windesor, to consult upon Reformation and Explanation of the Statutes of the Order.
First, the Soveraign upon his entrance, immediately Lib. M. 17. in Offic. Arm. pag. 16. proceeded to the midst of the North end of the Table (here called the Lib. M. 17. in Offic. Arm. pag. 16. Vestments board) whereat his Chair, Cushens, and Cloth of State had been prepared; next the Knights-Com|panions, whose Stalls in the Choire were on the Soveraign's side, took the right hand of the Table, and those of the Prince's side the left; then the Prelate of the Order came and stood at the corner of the Table, upon the Soveraign's right hand, the Register and Garter went down to the lower end, and stood there, whilst the Black-Rod kept the Chapter-house door on the inside.
And albeit the Chancellor of the Order be not here mentioned (as being not present at that time) yet his place in Chapter is on the Soveraign's left hand of the Table, at the upper end, in regard the nature of his Employment requires that he be neer the Soveraign.
It hath seldom hapned, but that upon opening of the Chapter, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, fell immediately upon debates relating to the business of the time: Nevertheless, upon some peculiar and greater emergencies, all such Affairs have been adjourned until the following Chapter, as it was an. Lib. R. p. 73. 7. Car. 1. the Feast for that year having been prorogued unto the Month of October, and it falling out to be very late, before the Soveraign and Knights-Companions arrived at the Chapter-house; after the Chapter was opened they proceeded no further, than to Ibid. R. p. 74. adjourn the discussion of Affairs, relating to the Order, until the next morning, which otherwise would have put off the celebration of Vespers beyond the canonical hour.
The like was done upon the Eve of the Grand Feast, an. Palmers large Iourn. pag. 12. 14. Car. 1. for after the Soveraign had entred the Chapter-house, and was set down under the State, the Chancellor offring to the Soveraign and Knights-Companions the business of the time, the Soveraign moved, Palmers large Iourn. pag. 12. in regard it was then late (besides the Ceremonies of the Princes Installation were to be performed at the ensuing Vespers) that the matters depending should be Palmers large Iourn. pag. 12. adjourned until the next Chapter; which being agreed upon, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions advanced to the Chappel in their accustomed order.


SECT. V. Transactions in the Chapter held before the first Vespers.
BUT now to proceed to the Affairs treated of and transacted in the Chapter, held before Vespers, on the Eve of the Grand Feast; which being opened as before is shewed, and no adjournment given thereunto: All things are then to be debated, consulted of, and provided for, which concern the Lib. C. p. 93. Honor and Dig|nity of this most Noble Order, and necessary conservation of the interest thereof; and among these, some particulars are ordinary, and of course, others extraordinary and occasional.
The matters of course (and indeed the proper business of the time) are first, swearing and admitting Officers; secondly, debating about the Knights-Compani|ons then absent, and either dispensing with, or inflicting penalties upon them; and thirdly, constituting or appointing an Officer, to carry on the state and so|lemnity of the Feast in the Soveraign's absence. But the other particulars, viz. those of extraordinary nature and occasional, cannot so well be brought within Rule, seeing they are things wholly accidental, whose contingency only be|gets a necessity of proposal or discussion, and besides are usually adjourned to the next days Chapter: therefore we have already touched upon them in their proper places, as we had occasion offered.
As to the first, 1. Swearing of Officers. we shall chiefly consider such Officers of the Order as happen to be nominated since the Chapter, immediately preceding the Grand Feast. And touching these, it hath been thought most proper, to introduce them soon after the Chapter is opened, that so (their respective Oaths having been administred unto them) they might be ready to perform the duty of their several places, during the session of the Chapter, and thence forward.
Thus on the Lib. R. pag. 5. Eve of the Grand Feast, solemnized at Wind for an. 21. Iac. R. the Soveraign appointed a Chapter to be held in the Privy-Chamber (before the Lieutenant's proceeding to the Chappel) whereat Lib. R. pag. 5. Sir George Moor was sworn Chancellor of the Order. In the same Chamber, an. Ibid. p. 38. 4. Car. 1. upon the 23. of September, being the Eve of the Grand Feast held by Prorogation (and before the Soveraign proceeded to Vespers) was Doctor Ibid. p. 39. Nele Bishop of Winchester sworn Prelate, Sir Ibid. p. 39. Francis Crane Chancellor, and Doctor Ibid. p. 39. Matthew Wren (late Bishop of Ely) Register, Moreover, in the Chapter held on the Lib. C. p. 85. Eve of the Feast, cele|brated at Whitehall an. Lib. C. p. 85. 23. Eliz. did Doctor Watson Bishop of Winchester make Oath, for his faithful Execution of the Prelates Office, as also Doctor Ibid. pag. 33. Thomas Cooper (his Successor in that See) who was admitted an. 26. Eliz. The like did Pag. 127. William Wickham, an. 37. of the same Queen: and in the same place, an. 40. Eliz. Pag. 136. Doctor Bilson also Bishop of Winchester, was sworn into this Office, at which time was Richard Conisby admitted Gentlemen-Vsher of the Black-Rod. In like manner Lib. R. pag. 107. an. 11. Car. 1. did Doctor Christopher Wren, (Brother and Suc|cessor in the Registers place, to the afore-mentioned Bishop of Ely) take his Oath, at a Chapter held in the Privy-Chamber at Whitehall, on the Eve of the Grand Feast there celebrated. Again Sir Francis Walshingham, and Sir Amias Paulet, were both sworn Chancellors, on the Eve of the Feast, kept at Greenwich, the one Lib. C. p. 75. an. 20 and the other Pag. 107. an. 30. of Queen Eliz. And lastly Pag. 194. an. 18. Iac. R. at the same place was the Bishop of Windchester sworn Prelate, the Bishop of Spalato Register, and Iames Maxwell Esq Black-Rod.
Yet hath it happened now and then, that some of the Officers of this Order, have been sworn at other times, to wit, at Chapters next ensuing their Nomi|nation or Choice, whether such have been held on the Eve of St. George, or on the Grand Feast-day, or otherwise called upon particular occasions; at which time nevertheless, the administration of the Oath hath been one of the first things done therein, for the reason before mentioned.
Those Officers, whom we have observed to have taken their Oaths on the Eve of St. George, that is to say, when only the day of St. George hath been solemnized, and the Grand Feast prorogued, were, first Owen Oglethorpe admitted Lib. C. p. 7. an. 1. Mariae, in a Chapter called at the Mannor-house of St. Iames. Second|ly, George Carew at Whitehall, Pag. 32. an. 2. Eliz. who immediately succeeded Iohn Boxhall, Successor to the said Oglethorpe, in that Office. Next Doctor Horne, Bishop of Winchester, called MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 2. b. an. 3. Eliz. into the Chapter, then sitting in the Queens great Closet at Whitehall, and there took the Prelates Oath.
Such Officers of the Order, as were sworn into their places, on the Grand Feast-day, are Sir Iohn Wooley Cahncellor, an. 31. Eliz. Lib. C. p. 112. before Morning Prayers; so Ibid. pag. 130. an. 38. Eliz. Sir Edward Dyer, and Doctor Robert Benet, who were admit|ted, the one Chancellor, and the other Register, Ibid. pag. 130. at a Chapter held before the first Morning Service, because they were not nominated before the beginning of the Celebrations on the Eve; but either the night following, or in the mor|ning immediately before their admittance.
Lastly, those who have taken their Oaths at Chapters, called for peculiar pur|poses, in the intervals of Feasts, were Ibid. p. 7. Sir William Peters, and Sir Thomas Rowe, both Chancellors, of the Order; the one at the first Chapter that Queen Mary cal|led, being the Ibid. pag. 5. 27. of Sept. an. 1. Mar. and the other at a Chapter celebrated at Windesor, upon the Lib. R. pag. 114.  115. 5. day of December, an. 12. Car. 1. As also Sir Iames Palmer, who, after the Execution of the Office of Deputy Chancellor, for the space of six years and an half, was upon the Palmers Iourn. pag. 58. 17. day of Ianuary, an. 20. Car. 1. sworn Chancellor, in a Chapter held at Oxford, at which time Sir Edward Walker Successor to Sir Henry St. George, in the place of Garter, was also sworn thereinto.
Dispencing with or inflic|ting of Pu|nishments.Touching the second Particular, debated in the foresaid Chapter, viz. the dispensing with, or punishing of absent Knights; we are herein to consider, that the Statutes of the Order injoyn, E. 3. Stat. Art. 9. all the Knights-Companions to be present at the Celebration of the Grand Feast; that is to say, E. 3. Stat. Art. 9. those who are then within the Kingdom, or elsewhere, Hen. 8. Stat. Art. 3. although the Service of St. George, according to the Rites of the Church, be not at all celebrated: as in some cases we have already instanced, where the Chap. 18. Sect. 8. Service of the day, whereon that of St. George hath fallen, as Good-Friday, c. and not that of St. George hath been preferred. But with this limitation; E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 9. H. 8. Stat. Art. 8. So that they be in a capacity, or may conveniently repair thither, and in particular at the beginning of the Feast, viz. the hour of Tierce on the Eve, as hath been before observed.
And therefore the next thing usually entred upon in the said Chapter, is for the Soveraign and Knights-Companions to take notice, whether any of the Fellowship make default of coming at the hour assigned for their meeting, as aforesaid: If so, then are such to be considered, under one of the three ge|neral heads following. First, Stranger Princes: secondly, Late Comers, who are by this time arrived at the Castle, or every minute expected; and thirdly, such as have given notice, that they cannot be present during the continuation of of the Feast: and in relation to Offenders of these three natures, Excuses of Course, verbal Apologies, or Letters of Excuse, are or may be offered, or pre|sented on their behalf; and in case they be approved and admitted, then the Penance, which by the Statutes ought otherwise to be inflicted, is remitted; all which ought to be recorded.
Stranger Prin|ces.As to Stranger Princes, their default of appearance is excused, upon their ne|cessary residence in their own Territories, and the management of their Affairs there: And of their Excuses of Course, and accustomed Dispensations, we have divers instances in the Registers of the Order, as an. 7. H. 5. where it is said, Lib. N. p. 58. That Strangers indeed who are not obliged to leave their own Dominion, but with their own consent, as the Kings of the Romans, Portugal, and Denmarks, were (according to the custom) for that reason excused.
So the following year, the Ibid. pag. 61.  68. same persons were out of affection and respect ex|cused, as busied in their own Affairs; Ibid. pag. 78. and, as afterwards, because they could not be spared from their own Kingdoms. In the first year of King Edward the Fourth, in reference to the Kings of Portugal and Denmark, and the Earl of Longueville, it is said, Ibid. p. 125. They were excused (as always before in the same case) upon the account of being Strangers. And lastly to the same effect of the King of the Romans, and Duke of Ferrara, an. 19. H. 7. Ibid. p. 176. They (because Strangers) were excused, as at all other times in the like case. The like expressions are entred almost an|nually in the Reigns of King Henry the Eighth, King Edward the Sixth, and downwards still upon the like occasions.
Late-Comers.As to Knights-Companions comprised under the second general Heads, viz. those who are tardy in their journey, or being come to the Castle, fall short of the hour, or of attending the Soveraign to the Chapter-house, either through ne|gligence, or want of timely notice, or other accident; the Penance set on them by the Statutes of Institution, is, E. 3. Stat. Art. 9. That they shall so far incur punishment from the Soveraign and Chapter for their offence, as not to be permitted, for that time, to enter into the Chapter, but shall tarry without at the door, and not have voice in any thing that shall happen to be done there, unless they can

alledge a just excuse, or render H. 8. Stat. Art. 9. such a sufficient cause, as the Soveraign or his Deputy shall approve of.
But we have observed few Defaulters in this kind, beside the Lord Bourchier, Lib. N. pag. 116. an. 35. H. 6. who being noted to come thither before Vespers, it seems to im|ply, that his appearance was short of the Hour enjoyned as aforesaid.
Concerning the third sort of Delinquents,Absent, during the whole Feast. being those Knights-Companions, who are not only absent at the Hour of Tierce, but likely to be so during the whole Feast; the Proceedings in the Chapter relating to them are either upon what is presented and offered, in excuse of their absence; or determined upon their neglect or default, of making Apology for it.
Where Excuses for absence are offered, they are either by Letters, or word of mouth; if by Letters, then are they sent either from the absent Knights them|selves, and directed to the See before Chap. 19. Sect. 2. Chancellor of the Order, or else from the Soveraign to his Lieutenant on their behalf, and both produced by the Chancellor. But it Excuses be made by word of mouth, then they are delivered, either by the So|veraign himself; or upon motion made, by some of the Knights-Companions pre|sent in Chapter.
In order to the first of these ways,Excuse by Letters. of presenting the absent Knights-Compa|nions excuses, we find the Custom of sending Letters to that purpose, to have been very ancient: For at the Grand Feast held at Windesor, by Humfry Duke of Gloucester, the Soveraign's Deputy, an. 8. H. 5. it appears that the Lord Powis his Lib. N. p. 61. Letter under his Hand and Seal (wherein he certified his present infirmity and indisposition of Body) was produced in Chapter. And the following year the Dukes of York, Norfolk, and Buckingham, with the Earls of Salisbury, Shrews|bury, and Penbroke, Viscount Bourchier, the Lord Rivers, and Sir Iohn Fastolf, being all absent from St. George's Feast, Ib. pag. 119. they declared the reason of their absence, by their Messenger. So an. 5. E. 4. we find that the Lord Beauchamp sent his Pag. 19 Ex|cusatory Letters, which were received. Again an. 19. of the same King, it is noted, Pag. 144. That all that were absent from this Solemnity, excused their absence by Let|ters to that purpose, signed and sealed with their Arms. And this hath been the use in following times, whereunto several Memorials entred in the late Soveraign's Reign concur; and among others, that an. 13. Car. 1. when on the Eve of the Grand Feast, held by Prorogation upon the 17.18. and 19. days of April, the Earls of Moulgrave, Lindesey, Suffolk, and Exceter, having Rowes Iournal, pag. 9. signified by Letters un|der their Seals of Arms, their several excuses of sickness and disability to attend, the Chancellor producing them in Chapter, they were dispensed with by the So|veraign. The like Excuses made by Palmers Iournal pro an. 1630 pag. 17. Letters were accepted from the Earls of Suffolk, Danby, and Lindesey, an. 15. of the same King.
There are entred in the Registers several Memorials of Letters,Letters from the Soveraign. sent from the Soveraign to his Deputy, when himself hath not been present in Chapter; where|in his excusing and pardoning the defaults of absent Knights-Companions hath been signified. As an. 22. H. 6. the Duke of Buckingham being Lieutenant, the Dukes of Gloucester and Exceter, with the Lord Hungerford, Lib. N. p. 94. were excused by the Soveraign's Letters. So an. 36. of the same King, Viscount Mountague being reckoned up amongst the absent Knights-Companions, the Register saith, Pag. 118. he was excused by the Soveraign's Letters. The Ibid. p. 142. like is noted of the Dukes of York and Gloucester, and six other Knights-Companions, absent from the Feast held an. 18. E. 4. the Lord Dudley being then the Soveraign's Lieutenant. And so an. Pag. 148. 21. E. 4. concerning other absent Knights-Companions. Moreover an. 18. H. 7. the Pag. 174. Soveraign (it being his pleasure to be absent) sent his Letters thereupon to the Earl of Darby his Deputy, to excuse also some others that were absent: So also in the Pag. 179. 21. Pag. 180. 22. and Pag. 186. 23. of the same King. But an. 20. H. 8. we find no less than MS. in Offic. Arm. [M. 17.] fol. 30. b. 17 Knights-Companions at one time, excused and pardoned for their absence, by the Soveraign's Letters sent unto the Marquess of Exceter, his Lieutenant for the Grand Feast kept at Windesor the 27. of May in the foresaid year, viz. three Dukes, six Earls, two Viscounts, five Barons, and one Knight Baneret.
And hitherto may be referr'd, what is spoken of the Dukes of Clarence and Gloucester, and six other Knights-Companions an. 14. E. 4. that their absence was

excused Lib. N. pag. 134. by the Soveraign's authority; the like expression is used in the case of the Earl of Ibid. p. 143. Northumberland, and others an. 19. of his Reign.
And from many Precedents, which we have seen, of Letters sent from the So|veraign, and directed to his Lieutenant to accept of Knights-Companions excuses, whose absence he had beforehand dispensed with; we observe those Dispensa|tions excused not the sending of their own particular Excuses; for it is evident they were also expected, and that such allowance of absence was not absolute, but in a manner conditional, the clause running thus. Appendix Num. CLXXIII. That you [the Soveraign's Deputy] allow these excuses, so far as they are consonant to reason. And in all other Letters of the same nature, a Clause to this effect hath been inserted, Num. CLXXIV.  CLXXV. That as the Soveraign thought good to advertise his Deputy, that for certain causes he had dispenced with their attendance for that time; so he willed him to accept their reasonable excuses in that behalf accordingly.
The Sove|raigns verbal Excuses in Chapter.Secondly, The absent Knights-Companions have had their Excuses frequently made by word of mouth, either of the Soveraign, or some other of the Knights-Companions present in Chapter. This favour of the Soveraign is either done by himself, when present in Chapter, or by giving order to his Lieutenant before the Feast begin.
In relation to what he hath personnaly done in this case, we have many Ex|amples; as an. 6. H. 6. the Lib. N. p. 84. Soveraign declared the reason of the Duke of Nor|folks absence. So on the Eve of the Feast kept at Windesor an. 26. H. 6. the Duke of York, the Earl of Salisbury, Viscount Beaumont, the Lords Hungerford, Wil|loughly, and Sir Iohn Fastolf were absent, Pag. 101. but excused by the Soveraign. Again, in a Chapter held on the Eve of the Grand Feast, celebrated at Windesor an. 36. H. 6. the Duke of York, Earl of Salisbury, and Viscount Bourchier, being absent, Pag. 117.were excused by the Soveraign's own moth: the Pag. 168. like is said on the behalf of the absent Knights, an. 3. H. 7. So an. 17. E. 4. on the Eve of the Feast held by Proro|gation, the Dukes of Gloucester, Buckingham, and Suffolk, with the Earl of Nor|thumberland at that time absent, Pag. 141 were excused by the Soveraign.
And to his Deputy be|fore.At other times, the Soveraign (not being present in Chapter) hath before hand verbally, (instead of Letters) given his Deputy or Lieutenant direction to excuse the absence of several of the Knights-Companions. Thus it was in the case of the Prince, the Earls of Surrey and Shrewsbury, and Lord Daubeny, who an. 19. H. 7. Lib. N. p. 176. were excused by the Soveraign, by word of mouth (to the Marquess of Dorset his Lieutenant) because they were then employed in his service. And as touching the Earls of Arundel, and Devonshire at the same time, the Register saith, the Lib. N. p. 176. So|veraign with his own mouth excused them to his Dputy. Whereto we may add what is recorded, an. 26. H. 8. Pag. 265. All others absent were by the Soveraign at that time excused (to the Duke of Richmond his Lieutenant) by word of mouth, and after|wards by his Letters.
Excuses made by Knights Companions. Of the latter sort, to wit, such as have been excused, upon the motion made by some of the other Knights-Companions present in Chapter, we find that on the Vigil of St. George an. 1. H. 6. Humfrey Duke of Gloucester being then the Sove|raign's Deputy, Sir William Harington's absence Lib. N. pag. 74. was excused by the Chancellor, at that time Sir Lib. N. pag. 74. Iohn Robessart, one of the Knights-Companions. So an. 2. H. 6. Pag. 76. The Deputy took upon him the Earl of Warwick's excuse.
But ere we proceed any further, it will not be amiss here to observe, what effect the Excuses, presented on the behalf of absent Knights, have usually pro|duced; in reference whereunto we find the just and reasonable, favourably ad|mitted, some suspended, and divers disallowed.
Excuses al|lowed, and in what cases.Excuses easily allowed, were first Sickness (for those of the Knights-Compa|nions who have either been sick, far spent with age, or intent upon publick Af|fairs, have readily obtained excuse) which we meet with in the Examples of the Lib. N. p. 61. Lord Powis an. 8. H. 5. the Pag. 76. Duke of Exceter, an. 2. H. 6. Pag. 85. Sir Thomas Erpingham an. 6. H. 6. as also the Pag. 136. Lord Dudley an. 15. E. 4. And of later times the Lib. C. p. 97. Earl of Bedford, an. 26. Eliz. Ibid. p. 107. Viscount Mountague, and the Earl of Warwick in the 30. of the same Queen, with many others.
Secondly, The not recovery of Wounds received in the Soveraigns Service; for

such was the condition of Sir William Harington, an. 7. H. 5. whom we see ex|cused Lib. N. p. 58. for his illness, occasioned from the Wounds, then lately received at the Siege of Roan and elsewhere.
Thirdly, Impotency and old age; for which cause the Lib. N. p. 58. Lord Burnell, an. 7. . 5. at the last mentioned Chapter, the Earls of Li. c. p. 112. Shrewsbury and Warwik, and Lord Burghley an. 31. Eliz. and the Lib. R. pag. 126. Earl of Moulgrave, an. 13. Car. 1. So also the Earl of Ex praef. lib. N. p. 9.  78 Westmerland, an. 2.  3. H. 6. and the Earl of Lib. R. p. 126. Suffolk an. 13. Car. 1. for the Rowes Iourn. pag. 24. weakness of his Limbs; were all of them excused for absence at those seve|ral Feasts.
Fourthly, imployment in the Soveraigns service; either abroad or at home: Of the first sort was the case of Sir Robert Vmfrevile, excused an. 7. H. 5. Lib. N. p. 58. because he had been sent towards Scotland, to defend the Borders. So the Lord Scroop engaged in the like Service, Lib. C. pag. 107. an. 30. Eliz. his absence was immediately excused. As was that of the Duke of Bedford and the Lord Talot, an. 6. H. 6. Lib. N. pag. 84.  85. both be|ing employed in the Wars of France, whilst the Grand Feast was celebrated at Windesor. Again, the Earl of Ibid. p. 103. Salisbury and Lord Faucombridge had such ano|ther Apology, an. 28. H. 6. And lastly, the Earl of Essex an. 41. Eliz. Lib. C. p. 137. who ac|cording to his Commission, was endeavouring to subdue by Arms the Irish Rebels; and therefore deservedly excused.
Of the second sort of employment, to wit, at home, was that of the Earls of Shrewsbury, and Hungtington, an. Ibid. pag. 81. 22.  Pag. 97. 26. Eliz. the first of whom was taken up in the managery of certain Affairs enjoined him by the Soveraign; but the other being Ib. pag. 81. President of the Council in the North, his absence was for that, and several years following, favourably admitted. And a like case was that of the Earl of Danby, an. 13. Car. 1. who Lib. R. p. 126. for his necessary attendance at the Seat of Iustice in Eyre, was excused of his waiting on the Soveraign, at the Grand Feast held by Prorogation on the 2.3. and 4. days of October in the foresaid year.
Fifthly, When the Grand Feast hath received Prorogation, and any of the Knights-Companions have not had notice of the day whereunto it was prorogued; and for non-attendance for want of such notice, Sir Simon Fehbridge an. 8. H. 6. (the Feast for that year, having been prorogued unto the Lib. N. p. 86. 22. of May) was excused by Humfry Duke of Gloucester, then the Soveraign's Deputy.
Sixthly, When any of the Knights-Companions have been employed upon Embassie or other Civil Affairs; as Sir Here Tanke Clux, who an. 3. H. 6. Ibid. p. 78. was by the Soveraign sent in Legation to the Emperor of Germany, and also for that an. 5.  6. H. 6. Pag. 83. he yet remained in the Emperor's Court by the Soveraign's command. In like manner the Indulgence of the Soveraign excused the Earl of Derby and Lord Cobham an. 30. Eliz. Lib. C. p. 107. they being sent Ambassadors into the Low-Countries, to treat with Philip King of Spain about a Peace. To like purpose is that Entry made in excuse of the Earl of Marr's absence in Scotland, and Earl of Carlisse's Embassy abroad, Lib. R. p. 37. an. 4. Car. 1.
Seventhly, When any of them have been in Captivity; as was Lib. N. p. 77. Thomas Earl of Salisbury, and the Earl of Huntington, both Prisioners in France an. 2. H. 6. So also the Earl of Ibid. p. 85. Suffolk, the Lord Talbot, and Lord Scales an. 7. H. 6. the Pag. 10 Lord Fauconbridge an. 30.  36. H. 6. and Earl of Pag. 111. Kendal an. 32. H. 6. and lastly, in the 4.5. and 6. years of Edward the Fourth, Pag. 129.  130. Sir Iohn Astley who was Prisoner there also.
Eighthly, When any of them have obtained the Soveraign's Letters of Dispensa|tion, of which sufficient is spoken before.
Lastly, some other just and lawful occasion, as well as accident, having fallen out (not relating to those under the former heads) the Soveraign upon informa|tion given in Chapter, hath been pleased to allow of, as sufficient to excuse the non-appearance and non-attendance of the Knights-Companions at the Grand Feasts; in which rank, the foresaid Lord Fauconbridge's care of his domestick Affairs, an. 32. H. 6. was readily admitted, Pag. 111. because having been lately in Prison, he had obtained leave to go to see his House and Lands in the Country. And the Earl of Arundel's absence an. 15. Car. 1. was pardoned, by reason of the Dut|chess of Richmond's Palmers Iourn. pro an. 1639. pag. 17. Death, who died on the Eve of the Grand Feast, that so

(he being the chief of her Family) might be at hand to advise and assist, in all things conducing to the honor of the deceased Dutchess.
And as the Knights-Companions have been often excused, for not appearing at the Grand-Feast, upon lawful and sufficient grounds, so hath the Soveraign, for like reasons, been pleased to license and dispence with their departure from the same. Of this we have met with an Example an. 6. Eliz. in the Lord Hastings of Longhborough, Lib. C. p. 46. who falling ill a MS. fol. pen. W. D. N. f. 16. a. little before the Offring on St. George's day, obtained license from the Soveraign, to depart out of the Choire; and came no more abroad that day, nor during that Feast. As also another in the Duke of Lenox an. 15. Car. 1. who being forced to go back to London, by reason of the aforesaid Dutchess of Richmond's Palmers. Iourn. pro. an. 1639. p. 20. death, had his excuse made in Chapter held the morning of the Feast day, by the Deputy Chancellor; whereupon he obtain|ed the Soveraign's Palmers. Iourn. pro. an. 1639. p. 20. allowance for such his departure.
We are next to consider Excuses, which though sent in due time, yet upon debate and consultation in Chapter were suspended, rather than allowed; to this head may be referred that case of several of the Pembr.  Montg. Salisbu|ry, Dorset, Ho|land, Berks. Northumber|land. Knights-Companions, who were members of the Lords house in the Long Parliament. For an. 18. Car. 1. the Deputy Chancellor, having by command of the Soveraign, and in dis|charge of the duty of his Office, sent unto each of them a several Summons, for their attendance at the celebration of the Grand Feast, to be held for the preced|ing year at York, upon the 18.19. and 20. days of April; and notice thereof being given to the House of Lords, they immediately made the ensuing Order.

Die Martis, 22. Maii 1641.
WHereas the Lord Chamberlain of his Majesties houshold, and some other Lords of Parliament, Knights of the Garter, have been summoned to give their attendance, and repair unto the City of York, for the celebration of St. George's Feast; who acquainting this House with the Summons aforesaid, it is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that they attend the weigh|ty Affairs of the Kingdom, discussed in Parliament, whereunto they are ob|liged by his Majesties Writ, and the Law of the Land.
Jo. Browne Cleric Parliament.

Whereupon, every one of the said Knights-Companions, before the days ap|pointed by Prorogation for holding the Feast, sent their Petitionary Letters of excuse to the Deputy Chancellor, wherein they professed their desire and readi|ness to attend, in obedience of the said Summons; nevertheless, pleaded the foresaid Order for the ground of their stay at London, and therefore desired him to obtain for them the Soveraign's gracious Letters of Dispensation: But when the said Letters were severally presented in Chapter, Palmers Iournal, p. 36. held before Vespers on the Eve of the said Feast, the Soveraign would not at present either admit or disallow of their Excuses; but Pag. 38. deferred the consideration thereupon until the next Chapter, to be held by Prorogation.
Of excuses which have not been allowed, the most remarkable is that of the Duke of Norfolk, and the Lord Scales, an. 36. H. 6. who, in regard the causes alledged to excuse their absence at the Feast, Lib. N. p. 118. were not approved in a Chapter held on the Eve, were adjudged to the penalty of the Statute; the latter being particularly fined by the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, in a Lib. N. p. 118. Iewel to the value of 20 Marks, to be offered in the Colledge: whereby the rigour of the Sta|tute appears to have been more strictly executed upon him, than on the Duke (whose contempt might be of a less nature, though it seems great enough to shut out his excuse) probably because the Lord Scales, having been absent the year before, and no cause thereof being then shewed in Chapter, Pag. 117. was therefore to suffer penalty for his absence, according to the Statute; so that this it seems was the second fault.
But now to enter upon the second Branch of the third general head, which relates to the proceedings upon the absent Knights-Companions neglect, or de|fault of sending their Excuses: We shall therein observe that some of them have with difficulty been remitted, some left in suspence, and others sentenced and referred, either to the Soveraign's pleasure, or the punishment assigned by Law.
Of the first kind are those,Defaulters pardoned. who having such a plea for their absence, as might induce the Chapter to dispence therewith; yet were with much ado excused, be|cause they neglected giving the due intimation thereof, according to the Statutes. Such was that of the Earl of Westmerland, an. 10. H. 5. who Lib. N. p. 69. though not very well, yet had much ado to be excused; because he signified not the cause of his absence, as the Statutes required.
So an. 12. Car. 1. The Earls of Rowes Iour|nal, pag. 9. Derby and Kelly, having made no Excuse nor Petition for Dispensation, were for that omission blameable; but by the grace of the Soveraign for that time pardoned.
Of the second sort are such,Suspended. who through the indulgence of the Soveraign, or his Lieutenant (where probable cause hath induced it) have not had sentence passed on them at that present, but were deferred, in expectation of some satis|factory cause to be shewed: As in the cafe of the Prince, the Duke of Tucking|ham, and five other of the Knights-Companions absent from the Feast held an. 18. H. 7. concerning whom, Lib. N. pag 175. no cause of Excuse was shewed, but there was an expe|ctation of one to be alledged.
But as for those of the third sort,Sentenced and let to mercy. upon whom sentence hath passed, for de|fault of sending their Excuses, they have been left either to the pleasure of the Soveraign, or to those penalties and penances which the Law of this Order doth inflict: And first of such Offenders as are left by the Chapter to the mercy of the Soveraign, we have several Examples. Of the Earl of Essex, an. 18. H. 7. it is re|corded, Lib. N. pag. 175. That his absence was referred to the Soveraign's indulgence. So an. 21. of the same King, upon occasion of the absence of the Earls of Northumberland, Oxford, Devonshire, Kent, together with the Lord Stafford, and no cause thereof assigned, Ibid. p. 179 they were left to the Soveraign's indulgence. To the Pag. 180. like effect is the entry made of the Earls of Essex, and Kent, absent the following year, without cause shewn to the Chapter.
Lastly,Punished. touching those on whom Iudgment hath passed, divers instances may be given, among which are these that follow. An. 10. H. 5. the Lord Willoughby, Sir Robert Vmsrevill, Sir Iohn Cornewall, and Sir William Harington, were in no wise excused for their absence, Lib. N. p. 69. because being within the Kingdom, they sent not the cause of their absence. And an. 2. H. 6. the said Sir Robert Vmsrevile, was also found culpable, Pag. 77. in regard no cause of his absence had been shwed. More|over, seeing the reasons of the Duke of Norfolk's, the Lord Scales, and Fastolss absence an. 33. H. 6. were not made known to the Chapter, Pag. 113. they were left to the Iudgment of the Statutes. And of the same Lord Scales, an. 35. H. 6. it is re|corded, Pag. 117. that he gave no reason of his absence, therefore underwent the punish|ment thereof.
Lastly, The Duke of York, the Earl of Salisbury, the foresaid Lord Scales, and Lord Willoughby, for presuming to be absent from the Grand Feast, an. 30. H. 6. Ibid. p. 107. without shewing any allowable cause, they were adjudged to the certain and deserved penalties (of the Statutes) against the next Feast. And the said Duke be|ing again absent the very next year (and also the Lord Hastings) Pag. 108. They were both adjudged to certain Penalties, as daring to be absent without sufficient cause shewn.
Besides these grounds for assigning Penances already mentioned,Penances where Knights are absent at other times of the Feast. there are (up|on a few other causes, set down in the before recited ninth Article of the Sta|tutes of Installation) other Penances appointed, that is to say, if the Knights-Companions be absent at other times beside the hour of Tierce; which (if we were strictly tied to pursue the series and order of time) would fall out to be spoke of, a little hence. Nevertheless, having had occasion to discourse so much al|ready of this subject, it will become further beneficial to the concerned Rea|der, to bring all the Injunctions which are included in the said Article, and

muster up the Penalties for breach thereof, in view together: nor will this anti|cipation at all interrupt our method, or become improper for this place, if well considered, and therefore we shall proceed with them here.
The Knights-Companions are further punishable, if they are absent at any of the times here spoken of, viz. First, at the beginning of the first Vespers. Se|condly, at the beginning of the Morning Service, on the Feast day. Thirdly, at the beginning of the Second Vespers. Fourthly, during the whole Feast. And fifth|ly, at the Grand Feast next following.
For the first, admitting any Knight-Companion hath failed of meeting and at|tending on the Soveraign at the hour of Tierce, and thereupon suffered the pu|nishment of non-admittance into the Chapter-house, and deprivation of Vote, ne|vertheless if at the rising of the said Chapter, he be not ready to proceed with the Soveraign, and other the Knights-Companions into the Choire, to the begin|ning of the first Vespers; he ought not only to suffer the former, but this addi|tional penalty, E. 3. Stat. Art. 10. That he shall not presume to enter into his Stall at that time, but tarry in that part of the Choire, where the Taper-bearers are wont to stand, never|theless before his own Stall, until the holy Offices be ended. And the Law of the Order is the same in King Henry the Fifth's and King Henry the Eighth's H. 5. Stat. Art. 10. H. 8. Stat. Art. 9. Statutes, only they render the place for the delinquent Knight to stand in, to be before their Stalls in the Choristers places. And now how the penalty hath been in|flicted, upon breach of the Law in this particular, we shall see by the following instances.
At the Grand Feast celebrated at Windesor, an. 21. H. 7. when it seems the Lord Kildare, Sir Gilbert Talbot, and Sir Richard Goulford came late to the Chap|pel, we find this Memorandum fixed to their names, Lib. N. pag. 179. They stood without (before their Stalls) by the Soveraign's permission, or rather command. But yet this is not all the punishment which hath been inflicted upon the Knights-Companions for this offence (though it be all that is set down in the foresaid Article) for an. 25. H. 6. upon the Eve of St. George, the Marquess of Dorset not coming to the first Vespers, and being convicted of his late coming, Ibid. p. 99. was prohibited joining in the Nomination then made, for th Election of the Pag. 100. King of Portugal, into the room of the Duke of Gloucester.
Offendors in the second and third case, being such as neglect to come E. 3. Stat. Art. 10. before the beginning of the high Mass, or the E. 3. Stat. Art. 10. second Vespers, called also the Hen. 8. Stat. Art. 9. Vespers on St. George's day, have the like punishment with the former assigned them, throughout all the Bodies of the Statutes; viz. Exclusion from their Stalls, and station in the Choristers range.
An. 1. H. 6. we observe the Lord Willoughby noted to be absent upon the Lib. N. p. 74. Eve of the Grand Feast, but present on the day; and consequently he incurred no further penance, than what his absence on the Eve drew on him. The MS. penes G. O. Y. pag. 123. Earl of Derby an. 18. Eliz. coming too late to the first morning Service, on the Feast day, did for some short time undergo the aforesaid penance, but soon after upon MS. penes G. O. Y. pag. 123. Dispensation from the Lieutenant, went up to his Stall.
In like manner an. II. Car. 1. the Earl of Lib. R. pag. 107, 108. Exceter came not to the Chappel, in the morning of the Feast day, till after the Grand Procession; and so the Penance for his tardiness, should have been according to the Statutes, stare Paviamento; but, upon consideration of his age, and the soul weather, whereby it was occasion|ed, the Soveraign permitted him to enter into his Stall.
And though absence at these times also be occasioned by Sickness, or some un|expected accident, yet notice is to be given thereof to the Soveraign or his Lieu|tenant. For instance, the Lord Burghley falling ill was absent Lib. C. pag. 127. from the first Morning Service on the Feast day, an. 37. Eliz. but upon notice given thereof, with the consent of the Lieutenant and Knights-Companions, he obtained leave of ab|sence. The Earl of Dorset an. 15. Car. 1. (the Grand Feast being then celebrated at Windesor) Palmers Iournal. pro an. 1639. p. 22. suddenly falling ill, before Evening Prayer, on the Feast day, be|sought the Soveraign to excuse his attendance for the present; but the Ibid. pag. 33. next mor|ning being recovered, he attended the Soveraign, with the rest of the Knights-Companions to the Chapter-house.
The Penances inflicted upon any Knight (for the foresaid defaults) he is in like manner to undergo, if he happen to offend in the like kind, when the Grand Feast is prorogued H. 8. Stat. Art. 4. from St. George's day, in what place soever it be celebrated.
But if he offend in all, and have neither license, nor reasonable or allowable excuse for his absence, he is then H. 8. Stat. Art. 4. prohibited entring his Stall, at the next St. George's Feast, where ever it be kept; and moreover to pay, as a pecuniary mulct H. 8. Stat. Art. 4. 10 l. to be employed towards the Ornaments of the Colledge. And we find the former kind of Penance, to have been inflicted, upon Late Comers to Divine Service, as well upon the Morrow after the Feast day, as on the Eve or Feast day it self. For the Earl of Lindsey coming into the Chappel on the mor|row after the Feast Collect. W. le N. Cl. held at Whitehall an. 8. Car. 1. after the Soveraign was en|tred, he suffred the punishment of Collect. W. le N. Cl. standing before his Stall a while, until the So|veraign signified his license, that he might ascend thereinto. In like Manner, the Earl of Northumberland coming somewhat late unto morning Service, on the last day of the Feast, held by prorogation at Whitehall the 17.18. and 19. days of April an. 13. Car. 1. did undergo the assigned Penance, Lib. R. p. 125. Rows. Iournal, p. 16. of standing beneath his Stall in the middle of the Choire, but Lib. R. p. 125. Rows. Iournal, p. 16. upon the gracious permission of the So|veraign he was soon admitted thereunto.
But touching the fourth degree of offence, as it is far greater than any yet named, so are there variety of Penances appointed to expiate the fault; and therefore, if any Knight-Companion shall be so negligent, as not to come E. 3. Stat. Art. 10. to the celebrations of the Grand Feast, and yet have no justifiable reason of his ab|sence, such as may be allowed by the Soveraign or his H. 5. Stat. Art. 10. H. 8. Stat. Art. 9. Deputy, he shall not (at the Feast to be held the ensuing year) enter into his own Stall, but stand below before it, in the place above mentioned: (2.) he shall walk alone by himself, before the three Crosses, which in ancient times were born in the Grand Proces|sion. (3.) When the Grand Procession returns to the Choire, he shall stand in the place before mentioned, the following part of the Mass, until the time of the Offertory. (4.) He shall Offer last of all by himself alone. And after the hum|ble sufferance of all these Penances, he shall forthwith approach the Stall of the Soveraign, or his Deputy, and there humbly desire absolution for his Offence: Whereupon the Soveraign, or his Deputy, shall restore him to his Stall and first estate. But we have not hitherto met with any Record or Memorial, where the particulars of this punishment were executed upon any of the Knights Offenders; albeit we too often find, where many have neither appeared all the time of the Feast, nor sent Letters of excuse, nor obtained license for their absence. As for in|stance an. 9. H. 6. Lib. N. p. 88. Sir Robert Vmsrevile, Sir Simon Felbrigg, and Sir William Harington, signified not the cause of their absence: neither did the Duke of Pag. 177. Buckingham, nor Earl of Northumberland, give any reason at all of their ab|sence. The like hath been observed of many others, but without further me|morial of what the Chapter did thereupon.
Fifthly, and lastly, the Statutes ordain. That E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 10. H. 8. Stat. Art. 9. if any Knight-Companion re|main within the Kingdom, and not having a sufficient excuse, to be allowed upon humble suit as aforesaid, shall presume to absent himself the E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 10. H. 8. Stat. Art. 9. next follow|ing year, and thereby become culpable of an omission of two years successively, from the Solemnity before mentioned, he ought thereupon to be so long E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 10. H. 8. Stat. Art. 9. in|terdicted his own Stall, until, in the said Chappel, he shall have offered at Saint George's Altar, a E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 10. H. 8. Stat. Art. 9. Iewel to the value of 20 Marks, of lawful money of England; and thence forward every year, so long as he shall continue guilty in that nature, the mulct must be doubled until he be reconciled and pardoned.
By vertue of this last Clause of the foregoing Article, was the Lord Mal|travers an. 15. E. 4. Lib. N. pag. 137. for such his absence, fined at 20 Marks. And the Lord Scales, an. 36. H. 6. in a Jewel of Ibid. p. 118. 20 Marks value, which as probably may be collected, was the following year endeavoured, either to be mitigated or taken off; nevertheless we find the sentence confirmed, and he Pag. 119. left to pay the Fine imposed.
Of later times the greatest Offender, that we observed, against this Statutes, was

Ferdinand Earl of Derby; who having made no excuse, nor Petition for his ab|sence in two years, was at a Lib. R. pag. 126. Chapter, held on the Eve of the Grand Feast, an. 13. Car. 1. accordingly fined, and that with some further Rowes Iour|nal, pag. 24. note of negligence, but at the mediation of the Earl of Penbroke and Montgomery, he was for that time remitted. Yet was he not guilty of any future neglect; for, the following year, upon his humble Petition setting forth his Ibid. p. 39. age, weakness, and inability to Travel, he obtained a Dispensation for attendance on the Soveraign at the Feasts of St. George during his life.
But the most memorable case in the prosecution of a contempt, was that against the Earl of Arundel, who in a Chapter held Lib. N. p. 134. an. 14. E. 4. was fined Lib. N. p. 134. 40 Marks, to be paid to the Colledge of Windesor, for being absent from the Solemnity of the Grand Feast, for two years together without any appro|ved cause: and the following year still continuing his Contempt, the mulct (by virtue of the aforesaid Statute) was doubled, and he fined in the sum of Ibid. p. 136. 80 Marks.
3. Of consti|tuting an Offi|cer to hold the Grand Feast.Touching the third particular, amongst those things done of course, in the Chapter held before the first Vespers, to wit, the nominating and constituting an Officer for holding the same (if the Soveraign be not present) we are beforehand to note the occasion and cause thereof, which was briefly this.
At the time of Instituting this Order, the Soveraign being engaged in Wars with France and Scotland, which he then, and for some time after, personally ma|naged, thought fit to make provision for supply of his room, no less than in case of sickness or other urgent occasion, where he should be hindered from afford|ing his personal presence, at such time of the year, whereon the Grand Feast should happen; and hereupon allowance was given by the E. 3. St. Art. 8. vide H. 5. Stat. Art. 8. H. 8. Stat. Art. 7. Statutes to depute another in his stead.
When therefore such occasion afterwards hapned, a Commission was made out to one of the Knights-Companions, some reasonable time before the approach of the Feast; to the end, that by such a representation of his Person, none of the ancient Ceremonies might be omitted, or any defect happen through his absence. For till the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, we meet not with any Commissions that stayed for the Soveraign's fiat so long as until the sitting of the Chapter, held before the first Vespers. Nevertheless, seeing from thence it hath been for the most part thus practised, we think it not improper to give our account thereof here, amongst those things of course, which (if at this day the appointing such an Officer shall be thought requisite) are usually dispatcht at the foresaid Chapter. And herein we shall speak, (1.) Of the Person Nominated to this Office, (2.) his Title, (3.) the Ceremonies used at his Constitution, (4.) the nature of his Employment, (5.) and the Dignity of his Office.
1. Of his No|mination.As to the Person Nominated, we observe, That (most usually) he hath been one, if not the chief of the Knights-Companions (we mean in Autho|rity, Eminence, or Birth) next to the Soveraign himself. Such were Lib. N. p. 58.68.  80. Iohn Duke of Bedford, Regent of France, and Ex eod. lib. pag. 61.86.87.92.  93. Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, Ibid. p. 74. sti|led also Earl of Henalt, Zeland and Penbroke, Lord of Frizland, Protector and Governor of England; both, Sons to King Henry the Fourth, Brothers to King Henry the Fifth, and Uncles to King Henry the Sixth. Ibid. p. 103. Humfry Stafford Duke of Buckingham (Son and Heir of Edmund Stafford, by Anne Plantaginet, Daugh|ter of Thomas of Woodstock) made Chart. 25. H. 6. nu. 31. Primer Duke of England 22. Maii, an. 25. H. 6. Lib. N. pag. 174.175. Thomas Earl of Derby, Father-in-Law to King Henry the Seventh, the Dukes of Ibid. p. 258.268.  292. Suffolk and Pag. 265: Richmond, with Pag. 245, 246. Marquesses of Dorset and Pag. 274. Exceter, in King Henry the Eighth's time. The Lib. 6. p. 44. Duke of Norfolk, Ibid. p. 50. Marquess of Nor|thampton, Pag. 68. Earl of Leicester, and Pag. 119. Lord Treasurers Burghley, and Pag. 140. Buckhurst, under Queen Elizabeth. And in King Iames his Reign, the Soveraign's eldest Sons the Princes of Wales, first Prince Henry, and after his death Prince Charles, the late Soveraign of blessed memory.
Next we shall consider the Time, and Place, when, and where he hath been appointed to this Employment: Concerning the Time, we observe it

anciently to have been uncertain, but so long before the Feast day, as that this Officer might make preparation, sutable to the state and grandeur this great So|lemnity required: For so when Henry the Sixth had deputed his Uncle (the aforesaid Iohn Duke of Bedford) to hold the Grand Feast at Windesor, on St. George's day, in the fourth year of his Reign, we see the Commission bears date at Leicester, Lib. N. p. 80. the first day of April preceding. In like manner the same Soveraign, having appointed Iohn Earl of Shrewsbury to the same em|ployment, the 14. of May an. 35. regni sui, his Commission bears date at Hereford, the Pag. 116. 18. day of April preceding. Again, that Commission given to the Marquess of Exceter, for holding the Feast at Windesor, upon the 17. day of May, an. 20. H. 8. is dated at Richmond the MS. in Offic. Armor. [M. 17] fol. 30,  31. 24. of April, which was above three weeks before.
But in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, the most accustomed time for this Nomination, was in the Afternoon of St. George's day; the day for holding the Anniversary of the Grand Feast, being in those days always appointed toge|ther with this great Officer Nevertheless in the Lib. N pag. 212. 13. Pag. 261. 24. Pag. 279. 31. and Pag. 294. 36. years of his Reign, the appointment of the Feast, and Nomination of this Officer may be observed to happen on the morrow after the day of St. George; as also Lib. C. p. 18. an. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar. and an. Pag. 23. 4.  5. of the same King and Queen; and for the most part it was so ordered, until the 9. of Queen Elizabeth, in which year the Grand Feast was removed from Windesor unto other places, as hath been before noted. Afterwards it became customary to nominate him immediately before the first Vespers, which hath continued in use ever since.
Now the reason why so many days passed heretofore, between the date of the Commission, and the time appointed for celebrating of the Feast, was because this Officer (in those times) held the Feast at his own charge; and therefore was it thought fit and reasonable, that he should have notice of the day assigned early enough, to the end he might provide all things sutable to his own honor, and the dignity of the person he was to represent. But afterwards when he was not named, till he entred upon the Execution of his Office, to wit, immediate|ly before the first Vespers, there needed no warning, the Soveraign being at the charge of the Feast.
As to the place, where this Officer received the honor of Nomination, that we always find to have been in Chapter, held at any the times aforesaid, and wheresoever called.
Secondly,2. His Title. the person designed to this employment, is in the Art. 8. Statutes of In|stitution, and those that H. . Stat. Art. 8. H. 8. Stat. Art. 7. follow, called Deputy: The first we find to have been made so, was Iohn Duke of Bedford an. 7. H. 5. and the reason thereof given in the Registrum Chartaceum is Fol. 6. Because the Soveraign being then in Normandy, was employed in the recovery of his right to that Dukedom.
And albeit the Title given by the Statutes to this Officer, be not particular|ly mentioned in the Pag. 58. Black-Book, where it speaks of the said Dukes holding the Feast of St. George at Windesor, for the aforesaid year, but rather implied in the words Regiae sublimitatis locum implevit; yet in the Registrum Chartaceum among other memorials of that same year, it is expresly set down, and the said Duke there stiled Loco citat. Depute del Ordre de Iaritier: wherein also the very same Ibid. fol. 7. Title is given to Humphry Duke of Gloucester, he being appointed to celebrate the An|niversary of the Feast at Windesor, the year following. And when the foresaid Black-Book comes to inform us (an. 1. H. 6.) that the said Duke of Gloucester did execute his Office, and hold that Feast, we find him therein called Pag. 74. Deputatus Ordinis; which Title is given him also at other times, upon the like occasion, as also to the Ibid. p. 103. Duke of Buckingham an. 28. H. 6. to the Ibid. p. 106. Earl of Exceter the year following, to Pag. 115. Iohn Earl of Shrewsbury, the 35. year of the same King, and to many others in the Reigns of King Edward the Fourth and King Henry the Seventh.
Sometimes also, we find other Titles given to this Representative of the So|veraign, as an. 10. H. 5. Iohn Duke of Bedford (the second time of his being such) is stiled Ibid. p.  Praeses Clarissimi Ordinis. Equivalent to this, is that expression

of the Black-Book, where it says, that at the Chapter begun at Windesor, an. 15. H. 6. Pag. 92. Praesidebat Nobilis Dux Gloucestriae. And in another place of it, that the Grand Feast was observed at Windesor an. 8. H. 7. per Iohannem Denham Angliae The saurarium Ibid. p. 170. ibi Presidem; the like is said of the Ibid. p. 207. Earl of Worcester, an. 10. H. 8.
In the Exemplar of the Statutes registred in the Black-Book, the Title of Vice|gerent is first mentioned, and indifferently used with that of Deputy; this great Officer being in some of those Articles called Deputy, and in others Vicegerent. But from that time to the 8. year of King Henry the Eighth we find no further remembrance thereof.
And then the Commission granted to the Marquess of Dorset, for holding the Grand Feast at Windesor that very year, invests him with such authority, Pag. 246. as the Soveraign's Vicegerent ever used to have, and might claim by right; whence it may be inferred, that some of the Knights-Companions had before that time held the said Feast, under the Title of Vicegerent, though we have not met with any of their Commissions. Afterwards, an. 24. H. 8. the Feastival was appointed to be held at Windesor, upon the 12. day of May, Pag. 261. in qua Comes Arundeliae Supremi vicem gereret, or as it is exprest an. 28. H. 8. Pag. 272. Northumbriae Comes Supremi vicem gerens. And that this Title was at other times placed upon this Officer, may be implied from some other places of the foresaid Register, where he is said, Pag. 274. Supremi vices tenere, Pag. 279. administrare, Pag. 283. supplere, c.
About the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, the Title of Locum tenens, or Lieutenant, began to be taken up; for at a Chapter held at El|tham, the Regist. Chart. fol. 53. 23. day of April an. 8. H. 8. it was determined, that the celebration of St. George's day should be held at Windesor, upon the 25. of May following, Regist. Chart. fol. 53. Et quod potens vir, Marchio de Dorset, erit ad tunc regiae Majestatis Locum te|nens. And a little after, the same old Register, speaking of the Chapter held on the Fol. 54. 25. and 26. days of the said Month of May, saith they were celebrated Fol. 54. per praedictum Nobilem Marchionem, Locum Regis tenentem, sub Sigillo Garterii le|gitim deputatum: Which Title of Locum tenens, this Book also gives to the Earl of Arundel, the ensuing year; and frequently to others, afterwards nominated to this Office. But the first time we find this Title expresly mentioned in the Pag. 294. Black-Book of the Order, is an. 36. H. 8. where the Soveraign Pag. 294. constituted the Earl of Essex Locum tenentem, during St. George's Feast; albeit it is before in the same Book, many times used, in a way somewhat different; as for Example, such a one of the Knights-Companions (naming him who is appointed to this Office) Regiae Majestatis locum Pag. 204. impleret, or Pag. 253. adimpleret, Pag. 258. occuparet, Pag. 267. suppleret, Lib. C. p. 23. obtineret, and the like. Lastly, this Office hath been for the most part conferred, under the Title of Lieutenant in all succeeding times, and the other Titles of Deputy, President, and Vicegerent laid aside, as is manifest from the Blue and Red Books, and sundr original Commissions which we have seen under the Seal of the Order.
But besides the usage of these Titles of Deputy and Lieutenant severally, we have met with them sometimes joined together in one person, as in the Stile of Henry Earl of Essex, proclaimed at the holding of the Grand Feast an. 25. H. 8. as followeth; Autogr. Du noble  puissant Seigneur, le Conte d' Essex  de Eu, Seigneur de Bourgchir,  de Loveyn, Lieutenant  Depute de la Feste de Sancte George, Che|valier, Frere,  Compaignon, de le tresnoble Ordre de la Jarretier. As also in another of like nature, when Henry Courtney Marquess of Exceter and Earl of Devonshire held the Feast an.  H. 8. wherein he amongst his other Titles, is al|so stiled Autogr. Lieutenant  Depute de la Feste de Saint George. And in the Blue Book also, there is taken notice of the like conjunction of these two Titles, for an. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar. the Grand Feast having been prorogued unto the 25. day of May, it is there recorded, Lib. C. p. 18. that then the Soveraign appointed the Earl of Shrews|bury, Deputy and Lieutenant.
To conclude, the Titles of this great Officer are sometimes exprest not so much positively, as by way of Periphrasis, and that in several manners; as Lib. N. p. 103. Deputatus  Rege praesuit. Pag. 111. Assignatus ore Regio praesedit. Pag. 142. Virtute Regiae Commissionis Assigna|tus. Pag. 148. Cui Supremus eam potestatem commiserit. Pag. 155. Regiae sublimitatis commissione ac authoritate communitus. Lib. C. p. 19. Regias vices subiret, Pag. 93. gerebat, Pag. 99. praestabat, Pag. 132. suscepit, Pag. 108 cui

vices ejus demandatae sunt. Also Pag. 88. Supremae absentis vice sufficitur. Pag. 101. Suprema ab|sentis potestatem reserebat. Pag. 112. Supremus surrogatur. Pag. 143. Ejus (viz. Supremi) absentis Officio fungeretur, with several other variations, much of the same nature.
As to the third particular,3. The Cere|monies of his Constitution. the Ceremonies used at the constituting the Sove|raign's Lieutenant, they were these three; (1.) The reading of the Commission. (2.) Delivery of it to the Lieutenant. And (3.) his taking an Oath. For the Commission being ingrossed in Parchment, and prepared ready by the Chancellor, it is brought into the Chapter by him, and there read in the presence of the Lieu|tenant and Knights-Companions, before it be delivered; for thus we find it re|corded an. 19. H. 7. Lib. N. pag. 176. The illustrious Lord Thomas Marquess Dorset, was impow|ered (to hold the Feast) by the Soveraign's Letters of Commission which were read in Chapter. And at the meeting in Chapter, on the day prefixt, for celebrating of the Grand Feast an. 17. H. 8. by the Duke of Norfolk, it is said, that Ibid. p. 249. in the presence of the said Duke (the rest of the Knights-Companions attending him on either side) the Kings Letter was read, wherein the power committed to the Duke was declared. So also, when the Earl of Penbroke (Lieutenant for the Grand Feast, held the 3. day of Iune an. 1. Eliz.) was arrived at Windesor with his As|sistants, Lib. C. p. 31. and a Chapter being held, the Soveraign's Letters were read, wherein she conferred the Lieutenancy on the said Earl. So an. 3. of the same Queen, the Earl of Arundel being Lieutenant, and the Grand Feast kept at Windesor, Ibid. pag. 40. The Letters of Legation (for so the Commission of Lieutenancy, and Letters of Notice to the Lieutenants Assistants are here called) were openly read in Chapter. And some|times we find the Officer taken notice of, who reads these Commissions; as when the Earl of Shrewsbury was constituted Lieutenant, at a Chapter held in the Privy-Chamber at Greenwich, on the Eve of the Feast, an. 27. Eliz. his Commission was read by the Dean of Windesor. But an. 37. Eliz. the Lord Cobham's MS. pen. G.O.Y. fol. 20. Commis|sion of Lieutenancy, and the Lib. C. pag. 192. Prince's an. 19. Iac. R. were both read in Chapter by the Chancellor of the Order; which being finished, in the next place the Ex pref. MS. pen. G.O.Y.  vide Coll. R.G. Cl. fol. 9. So|veraign (if present in Chapter) delivereth it Lib. C. p. 41. propri manu, to the Lieutenant, who receives it upon his MS. pen: G.O.Y. fol. 20. Knees; as did the said Lord Cobham in the great Closet at Whitehall, an. 37. Eliz.
Thirdly, the Lieutenant is to take an MS. pen: G.O.Y. fol. 20. Oath, for the due Execution of his Of|fice (but the form thereof we have not hitherto met with) before the Ceremo|nies of his Constitution are fully dispatcht. This Oath the Lieutenant takes in Chapter upon his MS. pen: G.O.Y. fol. 20. Knees, when sometimes the MS. pen: G.O.Y. fol. 20. Prelate and sometimes the MS. pen: G.O.Y. fol. 20. Register have read the words, whilst the MS. pen: G.O.Y. fol. 20. Black-Rod held the Book; in attestation of which the Lieutenant MS. pen: G.O.Y. fol. 20. kisseth the same, and then ariseth. And we find that in the aforesaid 27. year of Queen Elizabeth, the Lieutenant when he proceeded to Chappel (after the Ceremonies of his Constitution were over) gave his Commission to Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 9. Clarenceux (who then waited in the Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 9. place of Garter) to bear it before him thither.
And albeit, it hath been the most usual way, for the Soveraign to constitute his Deputy or Lieutenant for holding of the Grand Feast, or any part thereof, by Commission, and to add thereunto the foresaid Ceremonies of Creation; yet sometimes in great exigencies and sudden occasions, he hath appointed this great Officer by word of mouth; whereunto no other Ceremony hath been adjoined, than that of taking the usual Oath: as for instance, an. Lib. N. p. 111. 32. H. 6. the Soveraign being then at Windesor, and falling sick a little before the Feast, the Duke of Buckingham was assigned his Deputy, Lib. N. p. 111. Ore Regio, by word of mouth.
But before we take leave of this head, we shall observe, that, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, though in some one of the Chapters, held during the ob|servation of the day of St. George, both the Grand Feast hath been prorogued to a further time, and the Lieutenant nominated for holding the same: yet up|on just cause, or for some reasons urged, or excuse made, which the Soveraign hath approved of; some other of the Knights-Companions hath been appointed to the execution of this Office, instead of him who had been first nominated: Thus it chanced an. 9. H. 8. when at the Celebrations of the day of St. George at Greenwich, the Pag. 206. Earl of Arundel was chosen the Soveraign's Lieutenant for holding

the Anniversary of the Grand Feast at Windesor, upon the 10. of May following, but he Pag. 206. not thinking himself able to perform the Duty, humbly objected his infirmity of body, and disability otherways, and the Soveraign graciously admitting of his alledged excuse, substituted in his stead the Marquess of Dorset. So also when St. George's day was observed at the same place, in the 20. year of the same King, at which time Charles Duke of Suffolk, was Reg. Char|tac. fol. 66. b. nominated to keep the Grand Feast at Windesor, upon the Reg. Char|tac. fol. 66. b. 17. day of May ensuing, the Black-Book saith, Lib. N. pag. 257.  258. That afterwards for certain causes, moving the Soveraign thereunto, that Office was transferr'd from the aforesaid Duke, to the Marquess of Exceter, who executed it consonantly to the dignity thereof. Again an. 32. H. 8. the Grand Feast being pro|rogued unto the 9. of May, at a Chapter held on St. George's day preceding, the Earl of Cumberland was appointed to celebrate the same. Ibid. p. 283. But in regard the said Earl could not be present by reason of some urgent Affairs; his excuse was accepted, and the Earl of Southampton supplied his room.
But what hapned Ibid p. 272. an. 28. H. 8. was more remarkable; for the Earl of Nor|thumberland (then the Soveraign's Deputy) was in the time of the first Vespers sud|denly taken with the Vertigo, or diziness in his head, and that accompanied with a distemper over his whole body. Ibid p. 272. From hence arose a great scruple, what was hereupon to be done; it being conceived, that they could not con|veniently proceed, without the presence of the Deputy, and that another could not rightly be substituted in his room, without new authority from the Sove|raign: Ibid p. 272. But whilst they were in the midst of this controversie, he recovered, and came again among them, and performed all that was to be done, both on the Vigil, and on the day it self.
But this may clearly be inferred, from this procedure of theirs, that if the Deputy had not recovered, the Ceremonies of the Feast had been adjourned till the Soveraign had nominated a new Officer. And not unlike, but upon re|flection had on this accident, and prevention of the like afterwards, occasioned what was done, An. 3.  4. Ph.  Mar. to wit, the nomination of Lib. C. p. 21. two Knights-Companions to be Deputies, namely, the Earls of Derby, and Huntingdon; the second being designed to supply the place, in case the former should be obstru|cted by Lib. C. p. 21. indisposition, or weighty affairs.
4. The nature of his Imploy|ment.The Authority and Obligations annexed to this Office of Deputy (or Lieu|tenant) are deducible from the Statutes of the Order, which give him power E. 3. Stat. Art. 8. to hold a Chapter at the hour of Tierce, on the Eve of the Feast: as also on the day it self, and punish Offenders against the Statutes. And though he be thereby ex|presly prohibited, the Ibid. making of any new Decrees or Ordinances, nevertheless he may H. 8. Stat. Art. 7. correct and reform all points of the Chapter as shall seem necessary.
And now to shew that the powers granted by the Commissions, are, as deriva|tive from, so pursuant to the Statutes, we shall insert in the Num. CLXXVI. Appendix first, the most ancient Commission of Deputation that Record hath preserved, being that which King Henry the Sixth gave to his Uncle Iohn Duke of Bedford, in the fourth year of his Reign, to supply his place, when by reason of his abode at Lib. N. p. 79. Leicester, in expectation of the Parliaments sitting there, he could not person|ally hold the Grand Feast at Windsor that year.
First then, in the Preamble, the reason and cause of making such a Commis|sion, is set down in general words. Next the Soveraign takes notice of the al|lowance given him by the Statutes to constitute a Deputy, and thereupon sets down the particulars wherewith he impowers him, namely, to hold Chapters, to reform what is amiss, to make Elections, and by a general Clause, to perform all other things which should be any way pertinent to the necessary observa|tion of the Statutes: to the end his Deputy, in one and the same Instrument, might both understand the duty of his place, and be impowred to put the same in execution. Such like particulars are also inserted in the Commission made to Ibid. p. 116. Iohn Earl of Shrewsbury, an. 35. H. 6. But in later Commissions they are omitted, and supplied by a general Clause, which gives this Officer the same authority as had been allowed him, or such as he of right might claim. Then follows the words of Constitution (which in succeeding Commissions are ex|prest

with some variety As Eligimus, Assignavimus, Nominavimus, Constituimus, Instituimus, and the like.) and lastly a Clause commanding obedience from the Knights-Companions present.
In the Commissions of Lieutenancy, (though not at all in the Deputational Commissions) we find the Title of this great Officer, inserted immediately after the words of Constitution, in this following manner. We therefore by these pre|sents name, constitute, appoint, and ordain you to be our Lieutenant, at the said Feast: Giving you full Power and Authority, to do and accomplish every thing in the same, which to our Lieutenant there, in such cases belongeth, and hath been accustomed, as it is exprest in that Commission of Lieutenancy, given to the Mar|quess of MS. in Offic. Arm. [M. 17.] fol. 30. b. Exceter, dated at Richmond the 24. of April, an. 20. H. 8. and that other to the Collect. A.V.W. Marquess of Winchester, and dated at St. Iames's the 14. of May, an. 2.  3. Ph.  Mar. for celebrating the Grand Feast at Windsor, the 26. of the same month: and not only in this, but in all other since, that have come to our view.
In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth and King Iames, when the Grand Feast was held, either at Whitehall, or Greenwich, and the Soveraign present only at some part of the Solemnity (as in the Chapters, or at the Chappel in the morning of the Feast-day, and sometimes proceeded publickly to the Closet (not down into the Chappel) to the first and second Vespers) but by reason of some weighty affairs, could not conveniently be present in person, at all parts of Divine Service, and other Ceremonies and things to be done and executed at the Feast, neither on the Eve, nor on the day of St. George, nor the next day following; in such case the Clause in the Commission, which constituted the Lieutenant, was put after this manner, Rowes Iour|nal, fol. 209. We do therefore name, c. you in our ab|sence, to be our Lieutenant for that purpose, c. Or, as it is in that Commission made unto Prince Henry, an 4. Iac. R. Autogr. pene W. D. N. We have made choice of you to supply Our Peace, whensoever we shall have cause to be absent, at any time of the said Eve, Day, or Morrow: And do give unto you full power and authority, to do and accom|plish all things in Our absence, incident and meet to be performed, for the honoring and celebration of this Feast, as by the Statutes, and laudable usage, and Customs of Our said Order doth appertain.
Now how the Soveraign is to constitute such an Officer, appears from the directions given in the Statutes of Institution, to wit, by his E. 3. Stat. Art. 8. Letters; and that these Letters since, do carry the style of Commissions, and ought to pass under the Seal of the Order, and the Soveraigns sign manual, is evident from divers passages in the Registers, and from the Commissions themselves: For instance, The before recited Deputations, made to Iohn Duke of Bedford, an. 4. H. 6. is said to be done, Lib. N. p. 79. by a sufficient Commission delivered unto him, under the Com|mon Seal of the Order. So an. 8. H. 6. Humfry Duke of Gloucester, c. was deputed Ibid. pag. 8. by a certain Commission, signed by the Soveraign under the Common Seal. And for holding the Feast, an. 1. E. 4. Viscount Bourghier was also Deputed by the Soveraign, Ibid. p. 125. By a fit and suicient Commission. So also the Earl of Essex, an. 14. E. 4. Pag. 134. by the authority of the Soveraigns Commission. In like manner an. 18. E. 4. Pag. 142. The Lord Dudley was assigned by vertue of the Sove|raigns Commission, to observe the yearly Feast of St. George, and to perform all things according to custom.
It may be further observed, that the Commissions of Lieutenancy (as ancient as the Reign of King Henry the Eighth) are said in the close to issue forth Pag. 20. under the Seal of this most Noble Order. So was that to the Duke of Norfolk, an. 17. H. 8. And also that other to the Marquess of Exceter, an. 20. H. 8. which runneth thus, Yeoven under the Seal of Our Garter, c. and according to the Modern expression, Given under the Seal, c.
These Commissions of Lieutenancy, Lib. G. p. 64. an. 14. Eliz. and the six following years run under the title of Letters Patent, and are so called in the Blue Book; but how justly, is to be questioned. For in one of these Commissions, made to the Earl of Lincoln, an. 15. of the said Queen, the conclusion is the same with those other Commissions of like nature, of former years, viz. Yeoven under the Seal of Our Order, at, c. and wanteth that Clause, or conclusive period, from which

such instruments (as we are informed) derive the Cookes second part Instit. p. 8. name of Letters Patent, to wit, In cujus rei testimonium has liter as nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Again, an. 12. Eliz. and for seven years after, we observe from the said Blue Book that this Officer was made Pag. 60. with the consent of all the Knights-Companions, a Phrase much like that used elswhere, touching the Election of Knights, as hath been before taken notice of. But, if duely examined, we shall find this expression of no more strength to entitle the Knights-Companions to a joynt power with the Soveraign, for the constituting of a Lieutenant, than the other is to make them Coelectors; where though something requisite to the obtain|ing of their consent, may seem to be implied in the aforesaid words, yet we conceive those expressions were used by the Register, as of his own choice, ra|ther than such as the Law of the Order will allow of.
5. The Dignity of his Office.The Dignity of this Officer, as he Lib. N. pag. 246. represents the Soveraign's person, and supplies his place, is very great. Which, that we may the better set forth, we shall distinguish the Honors annexed to this eminent Place, as they are essential, and necessarily consequent thereto; or personal, that is, such as may additio|nally be conferred upon him, at the pleasure of the Soveraign.
That this Officer, as an essential Honor to his Place, hath from ancient time, had some of the Knights-Companions assigned him for his Assistants, during the whole Feast, is evident enough throughout the Registers; yet the first mention of Assistants, as to the Title particularly given unto such persons, we find in the Fol. 53. b. Registrum Chartaceum, in the Decree made at a Chapter, called at Eltham, on St. George's day, an. 8. H. 8. (wherein after the Anniversary of the Grand Feast, had been appointed to be observed at Windsor, upon the 25. of May, then next ensuing, and the Marquess of Dorset nominated the Soveraign's Lieutenant) the Fol. 53. b. Earl of Essex, the Lord de la Ware, the Lord Monteagle, and Sir Thomas Lo|vell, were appointed Assistants to the said Marquess. Another instance in the same Register concerning the celebration of the Grand Feast at Windesor, the following year, upon the 10. day of May (the Earl of Arundel being appointed Lieutenant) affirms that the Fol. 53. b. Lords de la Ware, and Monteagle, and Sir Thomas Lovell, and Sir Henry Marney were also appointed Assistants to the said Earl.
The number of Assistants were in those times uncertain, here above we see they were four; Anno 21. H. 8. we find but Ibid. f. 66. b. three: and afterwards, an. 32. H. 8. they were reduced unto Lib. N. pag. 283. two: which number, following times exceeded not, except once, and that was the last year of the aforesaid King, when there were Pag. 298. three appointed.
These Assistants were always appointed in Chapter, when the Lieutenant himself was Nominated; and afterwards had Letters of notice sent, to each of them, from the Soveraign, requiring their repair to Windesor, a Transcript whereof see in the Num. CLXXIX. Appendix; of which form have we seen several other Letters, sent upon the same occasion, to each of the Assistants, after they had been ap|pointed to the said Service.
And as before we have noted in the case of Lieutenants themselves, it hath sometimes chanced, that others were afterwards upon occasion, put in the places of those first named; so here amongst the Assistants, it hath in like manner hapned: for the Lib. N. pag. 204. Lord Poynings an. 8. H. 8. Registr. Chartac. fol. 53. b. by the Soveraign's Commission was appointed Assistant to the Lieutenant, in the room of the Earl of Essex, who had been before nominated. And the Earl of Rutland being named one of the Assi|stants an. 22. H. 8. was afterwards excused by the Kings Letters, Ibid. f. 66. b. whose place the Lord Montjoy executed. So an. 29. H. 8. the aforesaid Earl of Rutland fall|ing sick, after the time of his nomination, and before the approach of the Feast day, the Lib. N. pag. 274. Earl of Sussex was substituted Assistant in his place.
And sometimes a Quorum of Assistants have been nominated, as an. Lib. C. pag. 22. 3.  4. Ph.  Mar. in case some of them should be absent: for the Lord Pagit, the Lord Clynton, the Lord Howard of Effingham, and Sir Edward Hastings, having been appointed Assistants to attend the Lieutenant at the following Feast, it is added, Lib. C. pag. 22. that at least any two of them, who at that time were neerest to the Kings Court, should be there present, to assist the Soveraign's Deputy, according to his Majesties pleasure, as the Custom and their duty obliged.
Another Honor, essential to the Dignity of the Lieutenant is, that the Sove|raign layes an Injunction upon the rest of the Knights-Companions then present, to yield Assistance and Obedience to him in all things, as if himself were per|sonally present: For so is it enjoyned by the Commission to the aforesaid Lib. N. p. 80. Iohn Duke of Bedford. And generally all Forms of Commissions since, close with such like Injunctions of Obedience, in the execution of the Soveraign's Authority.
To these Honors before spoken of, we might add some other of the like nature, viz. that this great Officer possesseth the Soveraigns Place, in all Pro|ceedings, and at the Table, that he hath his Train carried up, that a Reverence is given him by the Knights-Companions, an essay taken for him of the Offering, and offereth with Carpet and Cusheon; but these we reserve to speak of at large by and by.
In reference to personal Honors (though generally all Lieutenants sit in their own Seats in the Chappel) we find the Marquess of Northampton had assigned to him a higher Stall than his own, during the whole Festivity of St. George: For in the Chapter held on the Eve, an. 3. Eliz. the Celebration of the day of St. George, being that year observed at Whitehall, the Soveraign decreed, Lib. C. pag. 38. that the foresaid Marquess, during only the time of his Deputation, should take the Stall of the Earl of Shrewsbury, then lately deceased. Now the Marquesses own Stall was at that time the MS. fol. penes W D. N. fol. 2. a. eight Stall on the Princes side, but that which the Earl of Shrewsbury then lately possest, was the MS. fol. penes W D. N. fol. 2. a. fourth on the same side, and next below the Duke of Holstein, whose Seat was the MS. fol. penes W D. N. fol. 2. a. lowest among the Stranger Princes then alive.
To conclude; it seems in time, the Duty incumbent on both the Lieutenant and his Assistants, grew so burthensom, that the Soveraign took their attendance and charge into consideration, and therefore in their favour decreed (at a Cha|pter held on Registr. Chartac. fol. 65. b. St. Georges day at Greenwich, an. 19. H. 8.) Registr. Chartac. fol. 65. b. That the Knights-Companions Appointed or Deputed [Lieutenants or Assistants] to be present or to keep the Feast of St. George in the Colledge of Windsor one year, should not be Appointed or Deputed to be present, or to keep it the year next following, unless the Soveraign should please to be present at the day or Feast. And to the same effect, though briefly, is this Decree recorded in the Pag. 255. Black Book. But more large and par|ticular is it thus entred in one of the MS. now remaining in the Office of Arms.
Lib. M. 17. fol. 33. b. Memorandum, That the Soveraign of the Order King Henry the Eighth our Soveraign Lord, by the advice of the Knights of the said Order, the 19. pear of his most noble Reign, by vertue of a Chapitre holden at his Manor of Greenwich the 23. day of April, Ordained and enacted by Acte of Chapitre, that all such Knights of the Order from thenceforth, which should be appointed by his Highness to be his Lieute|nant or Deputy at the Feast of St. George kept at his Castle of Winde|sor, and all such other Knights as was to the said Lieutenant, Attendant, and Assistant at that time, should, for the next year ensuing, be clearly discharged and excused for their attendance at the said Castle; unless any Knight of the Order upon his own devotion would be at the said Feast of St. George at Wyndesor, then be to be there at pleasure.
Nor was that yet thought a sufficient indulgence to the Ibid. Lieutenant and Assi|stants, to be absent from the next Grand Feast, and therefore the said Ordinance was afterwards an. 23.  24. H. 8. extended to the space of Ibid. three years, from and after the said Feast.
And herewith we are to note, That this Officer always held the Feast, at his peculiar charge and cost; and gave liberal Rewards to Collect. A. V. W. vide etiam MS. penes G.O.Y. fol. 155.  190. Garter, and for his Scatcheons, as also to the Officers of Arms, the Gentlemen-Vshers, the Alms-Knights, the Vshers and Grooms of the Chamber, the Clerks of the Kitchin, the Harbinger, and Groom-Porters, with the rest of the Soveraign's Servants, Waiters of several Offices in the House, to the Choristers, the Vergers, c. that kept the Robes, and the Sexton, even to those who made clean the Seats, and laid the Cusheons.
And because all things relating to the Feast, were set forth with exceeding State and Nobleness (which was commonly every year augmented, each Lieu|tenant striving to outvie his Predecessor in magnificence and liberality) his Ex|pences became very great: In consideration whereof, the aforesaid Priviledge was granted, that so by a Licence of Non-attendance, for the three following years, the Persons who had undergone the charge and trouble of these Offices, might be in some measure eased. Nevertheless the generous Lord Fitz Wil|liams was so far from taking advantage of this indulgence, that he was one of the Assistants to the Soveraigns Lieutenant, for the Regist. Char|tac. fol. 66.  67. vide etiam Lib. N. sub an 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,  25. H. 8. six years next ensuing the Decree past, an. 19. H. 8.


SECT. VI. The Ceremonies relating to the first Vespers.
WE have now finished our Discourse upon the Particulars managed in the first Chapter, held on the Eve of St. George; which being broke up, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, do immediately proceed from the Chapter-house into the Choire, to hear Vespers. In handling and describing the Ceremo|nies relating thereunto, we shall consider, first, those performed before the Ve|spers begin; secondly, the Course of Divine Service; and lastly, those used after it is ended. Wherein we shall be particular and exact, not only in regard the State thereof is both solemn and sacred; but because the same Order of Cere|mony is to be repeated, so often as the Soveraign and Knights-Companions enter the Chappel, or depart thence, or go up into, or come down from their Stalls.
Proceeding to the Choire.First then we are to presuppose, that the Officers of Arms, Prebends of the Colledge, and Alms-Knights, having attended in the North Isle of the Chappel, du|ring the sitting of the Chapter, do now upon the rising and coming forth of the Soveraign, Knights-Companions, and Officers of the Order put themselves into Rank, and continue the Proceeding (through the passage and Guard made by the Knights-Companions Attendants, and the Soveraigns Band of Pensioners) from the Chapter-house door, along the said North Isle, and so to the West door of the Choire, in like manner and order as they did proceed from the Chamber of Presence to the Chapter-house. The Organs then beginning to play, and conti|nuing on, till Vespers begin.
When theCollect. W. le N. Cl. Alms-Knights be arrived at the West Door,Entry there|into. they first enter in a whole Body, (while the rest of the Proceeding makes a short stand) and pass forwards near to the Collect. W. le N. Cl. middle of the Choire, where they make a joynt and low obeisance, first towards the Altar, next (all Collect. W. le N. Cl. turning about by the left hand) to the Soveraign's Royal Seat; then still turning from the right to the left hand, they Collect. W. le N. Cl. ascend the Haut Pas's even to the Rails set before the Altar, and forthwith divide themselves, flanking on each side, (the Juniors standing nearest to the Rails) and Collect. W. le N. Cl. at such a spacious distance, that the Altar may be discerned by all that follow in the Proceeding, when they draw near to make their Reverences.
Assoon as the Alms-Knights have made their obeisance, the Prebends of the Colledge enter in a whole body also, and having turned on the left hand, and made the like double obeisances in the middle of the Choire, they divide them|selves, and take their Seats, every one in their Order. The Seats appointed for them at this Solemnity (and at other times when any of the Knights-Com|panions are present in the Chappel) is in the lower range of Seats, and so ordered by Art. 14. King Henry the Eighth's Statutes; albeit in their absence, the Prebends are permitted to sit in the higher Seats, between (but not in) the Stalls of the Knights-Companions.
While the Prebends are entring their Seats, the Pursuivants, Heralds, and Pro|vincial Kings of Arms (in a Body) enter also the Choire; and after their double Reverences made, pass up towards the Altar, and joyn to the Alms-Knights.
But sometimes heretofore,Collect. W. le N. Cl. to enlarge the Ceremony, as Collect. W. le N. Cl. an. 3.  8. Car. 1. the Pursuivants have by themselves advanced into the Choire, and proceeding into the middle, there Collect. W. le N. Cl. made their Reverences, first towards the Altar, and then turning about by the left hand, did the like to the Soveraign's Stall, then, they ascended unto the second Haut Pas before the Altar, where also Collect. W. le N. Cl. dividing themselves on each side, (the Junior Pursuivants joyning near to the Senior Alms-Knights) Collect. W. le N. Cl. kept the like spacious Lane between them, as the Alms-Knights did, to the end also, that the Soveraign and Knights-Companions might have the Altar in full view, as they made their several Reverences towards it.
Next, the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Heralds proceeded in a Body by themselves, up to the middle of the Choire, and there having likewise made the like double Reverences, ascended the first Haut Pas before the Altar, and divided themselves, flanking even with the Pursuivants.
In like manner the two Provincial Kings made their Entry, (doing their Re|verences) and placed themselves on each side upon the Collect. W. le N. Cl. edge of the lowest Haut Pas, towards the Stalls. Thus they divided themselves, not only here at their first entrance, but at all other times when they passed up and down, or in, or out of the Choire, during the foresaid Feasts. But for shortning of the Ce|remony, (as of late hath been the usual course) the Pursuivants, Heralds, and Provincial Kings joyn all in a Body, and perform this part of the Ceremony together.
Afterwards, the two Collect. W. le N. Cl. Junior Knights-Companions enter, and passing on till they come near their own Stalls, there make their Collect. W. le N. Cl. double Reverences together, first towards the Altar, next the Soveraigns Royal Stall; then they divide themselves, and take their stand Collect. W. le N. Cl. directly before their Stalls. Thus also do the rest of the Knights present, at their entry into the Choire, and in the same order as they past in the Proceeding to the Chapter-house; taking their several stations under their proper Stalls, until the Soveraign shall have ascended his Seat. But where any of the Knights want his Collect. W. le N. Cl. opposite Companion, in such case he enters the Choire alone.
And this manner of doing Reverence and Obeisance,Manner of do|ing Reverence, and when in|troduced. was introduced in the Reign of Henry the Fifth, and hath continued in use ever since. For whereas from ancient time, the Knights-Companions at their entrance into the Choire, and taking of their Stalls, gave Reverence to God, and towards the high Altar, Iohn Duke of Bedford, an. 6. H. 5. holding the Feast of St. George at Windsor in absence of the Soveraign: It was then in Chapter decreed, Lib. N. pag. 65. That all the Compa|nions of the Order, whensoever they entred into the Choire, and at their going forth, as likewise at their descent from their Stalls, should do Reverence to the Sove|raign, if present; or if absent, to his Stall: Lib. N. pag. 65. by which Ceremony they should owne him as their Soveraign, and acknowledge all manner of subjection and obedience to be due unto him. But when the Soveraign returned out of France, he signified to the Knights-Companions, as, much more reasonable and convenient, Ibid. That at the Entrance and Departure aforesaid, the devout Obeisance due to Gods honor, should be first paid to God, and towards his Altar, after the manner of Ecclesia|sticks; and then, what of Honor was due to him, to pay it next to Himself, or in his absence, to his Stall.
Next to the Knights-Companions doth the Black-Rod, Garter, and Register Collect. W. le N. Cl. enter in Breast, who proceeding also to the Collect. W. le N. Cl. middle of the Choire, do their double Reverences together, and then pass to their Form, placed on the South side of the Choire MS. penes W. D. N. f. 7. b.  15. a. before the Soveraigns Stall, and stand before it.
After them come in the Chancellor and Prelate, who having made their double Reverences also, go from the middle of the Choire, and stand before their Form, set between the Soveraigns Royal Seat, and that other but now men|tioned. As touching these two Forms whereon the Officers of the Order sit in the Chappel, there is a special Decree for the allowance of them, entred at the

end of the Constitutions of their Offices, which is this; Lib. N. pag. 238. Within the Choire of the Chappel, during the Celebration of Divine Service, there shall be placed before the Soveraigns Seat two other Seats or Forms, one before another; upon one of which shall sit the Prelate and Chancellor of the Order, on the other the Register, Gar|ter, and Vsher of the Black-Rod.
Last of all, the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Soveraign entreth, (having the Sword born before him, but his Band of Pensioners stay at the Choire door, to keep off the press) who co|ming to the Collect. W. le N. Cl. steps which ascend to his Royal Seat, makes there a Reverence towards the Altar, and then ascending thereinto, makes a Collect. W. le N. Cl. second Reverence and seats himself.
And when (in the Soveraigns absence) his Lieutenant proceeds to the first Vespers, he goes in the Soveraigns place, and assoon as he hath entred the Choire, and is come near the Soveraigns Stall, he stands, and makes a little pause there; then MS. penes W. D. N. f. 3. a.  7. b. vide MS. penes G. O. Y. pag. 123. doing his Reverences, first towards the Altar, next towards the Soveraigns Stall, after he hath again stood a while before it, heMS. penes W. D. N. f. 3. a.  7. b. vide MS. penes G. O. Y. pag. 123. ascends his own (which like unto the Stall of the Soveraign (Emperors, Stranger Kings and Princes when present) is garnished with aMS. penes W. D. N. f. 3. a.  7. b. vide MS. penes G. O. Y. pag. 123. Carpet and Cushion laid before it) where be|ing arrived, he makes the double Reverence a second time, and then sits down.
And now, in order to placing the Knights-Companions in their Stalls, Garter (so soon as the Soveraign (or his Lieutenant) is set down) maketh again his usual Reverences, in the middle of the Choire, then turneth to the two Senior Knights, and doth his Reverence to each of them; whereupon, at one instant, they make their double Reverences Collect. W. le N. Cl. below, where they stood, and forthwith ascend at the Collect. W. le N. Cl. first or Western entrance, that goeth to the side Stalls; where being Collect. W. le N. Cl. arrive, they make again the double Reverence, and seat themselves.
But when the Soveraigns Lieutenant is present, each Knight adds a MS. penes W. D. N. f. 7. b.  20. a. third Re|verence to him, both when they ascend to, and descend from their Stalls. And this third Reverence, not only they, but all the persons who pass in the Pro|ceeding add to their double Reverences, so often as there is occasion to make it, after such time as the Soveraigns Lieutenant is entred his Stall, and so long as he continues therein, both on the Eve, the Feast day, and the Morrow after.
In like order, and with like Reverences do all the rest of the Knights-Compa|nions (having each waited the seating of his senior fellow) ascend their Stalls, where they proceed by pairs; otherwise they take their Stalls singly. But the place appointed for all but the two senior Knights-Companions to enter into, and come out of their Stalls, is the Collect. W. le N. Cl. middle entrance, or that at the Collect. W. le N. Cl. East end of the Stalls, which of them fall out to be next below each Knight's respective Stall, to avoid the trouble and inconvenience of passing before any of their senior Companions.
The Knights-Companions being all seated, the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Prelate and Chancellor of the Order pass into the middle of the Choire, and having made double Reverences, return to their Form and sit down. After them doth the Register, Garter, and Black-Rod, pass thither, there make their Reverences, and then sit down on their Form, in the order as they proceeded.
As touching the Soveraign's other Attendants, we have observed, that the No|bleman who carries the Sword retires before the Soveraign's Stall a little on the right hand, and the Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold (if not a Knight of the Order) and the Vice-Chamberlain on his left, until the Soveraign give them leave to sit down; the Clerk of the Closet stands at the Soveraign's right hand; but the young Noblemen that carry up the Soveraign's Train, and the Gentleman of the Robes, sometimes repose themselves upon the Steps going up to the Sove|raign's Stall.
This great Ceremony of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions entry into the Choire, and taking their Stalls being finished, preparation for the Vespers begin; in reference to which the Prelate ascends to the Altar; it being appointed among other things relating to the duty of his Office, That Lib. N. p. 233. Whensoever the Soveraign should think fit to keep the Solemnity of St. George at Windesor, he should be ob|liged to be present to celebrate divine service; which if he purposely omitted, it

is there provided, that Lib. N. p. 233. for such omission he should be fined 20 Marks to the Colledge, to be laid out upon the Reparations that are there to be made, Lib. N. p. 233. unless he alledge to the Soveraign and the Knights-Companions some reasonable and just cause of his being absent. And therefore, in case of Vacancy of the See of Win|chester, Sickness, or other lawful occasion for absence, the Soveraign hath dispnesed with this penally, and appointed some other Bishop to officiate for him. The Proceeding to the Altar on this occasion is in manner following.
First the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Serjeant of the Vestry makes a double Reverence,Prelates going up to the Al|tar. then comes before the Prelate and makes a single one to him, who thereupon ariseth from his Seat, and the SerjeantCollect. W. le N. Cl. proceedeth before him into the middle of the Choire; where standing a little on the one side, the Prelate Collect. W. le N. Cl. there makes a double Reverence, and from thence passing forward after the Serjeant, and having ascended the uppermost Haut-pas before the Altar, he makes Collect. W. le N. Cl. one single Reverence towards the same, and so goes to the Collect. W. le N. Cl. North side of it.
In his ascent to the Altar, he hath sometimes made Collect. W. le N. Cl. an. 11. Car. 1. three double Reverences, viz. one before his Seat, a second in the middle of the Choire, and the third on the first Haut-pas, and after these, the single one above the Haut-pas's; all in a direct line before the Altar.
After the Prelate hath arrived at the Altar, the twoCollect. W. le N. Cl. Provincial Kings, Heralds and Pursuivants, leaving their forementioned Station, join together, and pass along the Choire, until the Kings come neer to the Form, whereon the Register, Garter, and Black-Rod sit, where all making their double Reverences together, they divide themselves again on each side, and there stand.
Lastly, the Alms-Knights come down into the Choire in a Body, and there make their joint double Reverences, and then take their Chairs.
The like in every thing is performed in the Chappel at Whitehall, and other pla|ces, where the Solemnity of the Feast is observed; where because the Alms-Knights are absent, the Pursuivants at Arms ascend neerer the high Altar than when they are at Windesor, that there may be room enough for the rest of the Officers of Arms to stand in rank, yet so that the Provincial Kings stand not further from it than the lowermost Haut Pas, to avoid pressing upon the Junior Knights.
All these Ceremonies being finished,The Course of Divine Service and the several Degrees in the Proceeding duly placed, the Choire, resembling the coelestial Spheres, where the Soveraign of this most Illustrious Order sits as Sun, among the Planets and Stars, the Divine Of|fice is begun by the Prelate in a most solemn manner; which is now celebrated according to the Order of the Book of Common Prayer, established by the Acts of Parliament made an. 1. Eliz.  14. Car. 2. being the same appointed in the Ru|brick for the Evening of the 22. day of April, or for the Evening of such other day, whereon the Feast by Prorogation hath been celebrated: Where sometimes to shorten the Ceremony, the Prelate hath omitted the Confession and Absolution, and began with the Pater Noster; and frequently instead of the Magnificat, or Nunc dimittis, or one of them, some choice-composed Anthems are sung to the Organ: and after proceeding on with the Creed, and the rest of the Prayers in the accustomed order, to that of St. Chrysostom, before which in the Reign of King Iames, was the following Prayer used throughout the Feast.

O Lord, save our King, And mercifully hear us, c.
Almighty and most merciful Father, we humbly beseech thee in the Name of thy Son Christ Jesus our Lord and Saviour, to direct and en|due King James our most worthy Governour, with the continual aud plentiful grace of thine holy Spirit, that as be is anciently and rightly descended from the valiant and prudent Princes of this Realme, the first Founders and Creors of this most noble Order of the Garter, So be may abound and excell in all things acceptable to thee, namely in the maintenance of piety, peace, justice, and unity, to the support of good Learning, relief of the poor and oppressed; and grant most gracious Lord, that all the Noble men of this Realm, especially such as be Com|panions

of this most honorable Order, may be truly deboted to godliness, balour, and bertue, in such sort, that God may be thereby the better honored, their Soberaigne serbed, the Common-wealth secured, and the memorial of their well-doing remain to their posterity. And that we all may live and dye in thy faith and fear, and walk in these good works, which thou hast appointed us through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
O Lord, long preserve James our King, and all the Companions of this most noble Order of the Garter, Amen.

Next follows the Prayer of St. Chrysostom, and last of all the Blessing. After the pronouncing of which, at the Feast of St. George celebrated at Windsor, in the 15. year of the present Soveraign, there was an Anthem composed for the present So|lemnity, sung to the Organ and other Instrumental Musick, placed in the Organ loft: and this was the first time, that Instrumental Musick was introduced into the said Chappel.
When the Vespers are ended, the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Prelate goes to the middle of the Altar, and there before it (with great reverence) makes an obeisance; and thence (Collect. W. le N. Cl. ta|king the Serjeant before him) descends to the middle of the Choire, where he makes his double Reverences, and so Collect. W. le N. Cl. returns to his Seat; whereupon all make ready to pass out of the Choire in the following manner. And first,
Proceeding out of the Choire.The Alms-Knights come from their Seats, and draw together into the mid|dle of the Choire, and having made their double Reverences, in manner first above described, they ascend in a body upon the highest Haut Pas before the Altar (the Junior near to the Rails) and there dividing themselves again, make a Lane, and stand in the same places they did before.
Next them, the Pursuivants, Heralds, and Kings make their double Reverences,  ascend to the Altar, where dividing themselves, they stand where they did before. All which is done, to the end the body of the Choire may be wholly cleared, for the Knights-Companions to descend into, and stand over against their Stalls.
After this, Garter riseth from his Seat, and passing into the middle of the Choire, makes there a double Reverence, then going forward till he Ex eod. Col|lect. W. le N. Cl. come over against the Junior Knights Stall, (for when they descend from the Stalls, he is the first) he there bows towards him, and (Ex eod. Col|lect. W. le N. Cl. if his Companion be present) then turns himself towards the opposite side of the Choire, and immediately bows to him also, and then gives the Ex eod. Col|lect. W. le N. Cl. usual Signal or Summons for the Knights-Compa|nions to descend, by the waving or bending of his Scepter towards them; which done, he draws back to his Seat without any other Obeisances. And the Reason given is, Ex eod. Col|lect. W. le N. Cl. for that at this time while Garter is retiring, the Junior Knights are making their Reverences, and therefore it were not proper for him to be also doing his.
Assoon therefore as Garter hath given the aforesaid Signal, the two Ibid. Junior Knights-Companions (if both be present, otherwise the Junior alone) rise from their Seats, and standing above before their Stalls, make their double Reverence Ibid. both at one time, and then descend into the Choire by the way they went up; where making a second double Reverence, they forthwith place themselves directly over against their own Stalls, and Ibid. stand there.
Then the Ibid. next Junior Knights (or Knight, if he be not paired with his Companion) arise, and descend with like Reverences; and in like order, do all the rest that are present at the Ceremony, each with his opposite Compa|nion; but if he be wanting, then he performs the Ceremony alone.
When all the Knights-Companions are come down, and placed before their Stalls, the Black-Rod, Garter, and Register step forth, make their double Reve|rence all at once, then retire before their Forms, and stand there. After whom, the Chancellor and Prelate do the like.
Assoon as they have done, the Alms-Knights descend into the middle of the Choire (the Puisnes going formost) and there, turning about by the left hand, as before, make their double Reverences together, and so pass out through the West door of the Choire, and at some convenient distance thence, stand, till

the Prebends be also come out and joyned to them, and moving a little fur|ther, when the Officers of Arms are come forth, all then attend the coming out of the Knights-Companions, and they, that of the Soveraign.
Whilst the Alms-Knights are passing out, as aforesaid, the Prebends of the Colledge came forth of their Seats into the Choire, and in the middle thereof make likewise their double Reverence, and then pass out (the Verger of the Chappel going before them) and joyn themselves to the Alms-Knights.
Next the Pursuivants, Heralds, and Kings descend into the middle of the Choire, and there making a double Reverence, pass likewise forward
Then the two Junior Knights (or Knight, if his Companion be absent) make their double Reverence in the middle of the Choire, over against their proper Stalls, and proceed forth, and so do all the rest in order, the Seniors last. And here (and all other times when the Knights-Companions pass out of the Choire, except in the Grand Procession) do the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Choristers step in, and bear up their Trains to the Presence-Chamber, which piece of Service, was so at first permitted, to intitle each of them to the favour of a half-piece gratuity, which the Knights-Companions have usually bestowed upon them, in recompence of their officios Attendance.
After the Knights-Companions, the Black-Rod, Garter, and Register make their double Reverences, and pass forward. The like do the Chancellor and Prelate, and follow them.
Then doth the Soveraign rise out of his Royal Seat, and having made his obeisance towards the Altar above in his Stall, he descends, and doth the like again being descended.
But when the Soveraign is absent, his Lieutenant descends from his Stall MS 4. pen. E. W. G. with usual Reverences; and when he comes to the Soveraigns Royal Stall, he MS 4. pen. E. W. G. stands a while before the entrance into it, and then making his accustomed Reverence, proceeds out of the Choire.
The Soveraign having made his Reverences, proceedeth forthwith out of the Choire, (the Sword being born before him) thence he passeth through the South door of the Chappel, into the lower Ward of the Castle, and presently enters into the same way, by which he came to the Chapter-house; and as the Statutes do ordain, E. 3. Stat. Art. 3. returns in the very same order, viz. per modum Processionis back to the Presence-Chamber.
When the Servants and Attendants of the Knights-Companions are arrived at the great Gate, in the upper Ward of the Castle, entring into the Soveraigns Lodgings; (or to the same place, as far as their number reached, to make the Lane for the Proceeding to pass thorow, when the Soveraign proceeded to the Chapter-house) then do they begin to divide, and rank themselves on either side the passage, through the Stone-Gallery, up the Stairs to the Guard-Chamber door, in the same order, as they were marshalled at the beginning of the Proceeding; that so the whole Proceeding may again pass through them.
The Alms-Knights having entred the Guard-Chamber, and being come near to the middle, the Juniors begin to fall off on both sides the Room; the next Seniors, (and so forward to their Governor) following in due order, do place themselves up further in the Room.
Whereupon the Prebends pass through the Lane so made, and assoon as they are past the Alms-Knights, fall off on either side the Room, to the Presence-Chamber door. Then the Pursuivants, Heralds, and Provincial Kings pro|ceeding through the Lane made by the Alms-Knights and Prebends, do forth|with enter into the Presence-Chamber, and immediately fall off on either side, towards the State, the Kings of Arms standing uppermost.
Then enter the Knights-Companions, and place themselves Collect. W. le N. Cl. on each side of the State, in such order Collect. W. le N. Cl. as they sat in their Stalls, the eldest neerest the State; but such whose Companions are absent, stand alone. After whom follow the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Officers of the Order, disposing themselves conveniently neer the State.
Lastly, the Soveraign (attended as before) passeth to the step before the State; where being arrived, he Collect. W. le N. Cl. turns his Face towards the Knights-Companions, who immediately make their Reverences Collect. W. le N. Cl. jointly to him, and he thereupon puts off

his Cap, and re-salutes them, which done, the Soveraign and they withdraw into the Privy Lodgings, until Supper time.
But in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, when the Feast of St. George was kept at Whitehall, or at Greenwich, and the Soveraign (as was usual for the said Queen) proceeded no further on the Eve to Vespers, than to the great Closet, the ordinary way, and thence sent her Lieutenant into the Choire: Then in such case, when Vespers were ended, the Lieutenant returned from the Choire orderly through the great MS. penes W.D. N. f. 3. a. 7. b. 9. b.  26. a. Vide etiam MS. penes praefat. Geo. O. Y. 123.  MS. 4. pe|nes E. W. G. Hall, and so back to the said MS. penes W.D. N. f. 3. a. 7. b. 9. b.  26. a. Vide etiam MS. penes praefat. Geo. O. Y. 123.  MS. 4. pe|nes E. W. G. Closet, and stood at the Door thereof attending the Soveraigns coming forth, from whence they all proceeded before her into the MS. penes W.D. N. f. 3. a. 7. b. 9. b.  26. a. Vide etiam MS. penes praefat. Geo. O. Y. 123.  MS. 4. pe|nes E. W. G. Presence-Chamber, and there the Ceremony (for that time) ended.
But in King Iames his Reign, when the Supper on the Eve, as also the fol|lowing Meals, were prepared in the Banqueting-House, the Soveraigns Lieu|tenant frequently returned from the Closet by the Lobby over the Terrace (since pulled down) to the said MS. penes E. W. G. Banqueting-House, (the Noblemens Servants standing on either side the way) instead of goin to the Presence; and passing up to the State, gave an end to the Ceremony till Supper time: and so do we find it observed in the 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, and 16. of the said Soveraigns Reign.
When the Soveraign and Knights-Companions are retired, they are not to put off any part of their Robes till after Supper; for that is prohibited by the Statutes, E. 3. Stat: Art. 3. not only to those that do not sup, no less than those which do. And hereupon the 22. of April, An. 19. Car. 2. the Grand Feast being held at Whitehall. The Soveraign having a desire to take the Air, after he had taken leave of the Knights in the Presence-Chamber, took Coach, and went into Hide-Park, taking the Duke of Monmouth and Earl of Oxford with him, and all three in their whole Habit of the Order. The Duke of York also at the same time, went in another Coach, his Dutchess accompanying him, but habited in full Robes likewise; and so returned to Supper.


SECT. VII. The Supper on the Eve.
WHen the Soveraign is pleased to Sup publickly, on the Eve of the Feast at Windesor, the Supper hath been always prepared in St. George's Hall; and was accordingly done an. Palmers large Iournal. pag. 14. 14.  Palmers Iournal, pro an. 1639. pag. 19. 15 Car. 1.  13.15.  23. years of the present Soveraign.
The usual place at Whitehall for this first Meal, was heretofore the Presence Chamber, MS. penes W. D. N. f. 3. a. 7. b. 20. a. of latter times the Banqueting-House; and at Greenwich either the MS. penes G. O. Y. pag. 114. Presence or MS. praef. W. D. N. penes f. 26. b. Council-Chamber; where the Soveraign or his Lieutenant were always present. But when the Feast of St. George was celebrated at York, an. Palmers large Iour|nal, pag. 38. 17 Car. 1. The Soveraign and Knights-Companions marched after the first Ves|pers ended, to an Palmers large Iour|nal, pag. 38. House prepared for that purpose, and Supped there; and thence returned to his own Palace to Bed.
But if the Eve of the Feast fell out to be on a Fasting Day, as it did an. 22. H. 8. upon MS. in Offic. Arm. M. 17. fol. 32. a Saturday, and an. 11. Iac. R. upon a MS. penes E. W. G. f. 151. a. Friday; the Supper was always omitted, and the Soveraign or his Lieutenant and Knights-Companions were served of the Void only; concerning which Term, more shall be spoken immediately.
Nor doth the Soveraign when he suppeth publickly, pass privately to the place: but as soon as notice is given that the first Mess is set upon the Table, he forthwith entreth the Presence-Chamber, whence the Officers of the Order and of Arms, the Knights-Companions in their full Robes (for so the E. 3. Stat. Art. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 3. H. 8. Stat. Art. 3. Statutes of the Order direct in particular) having put themselves into their usual and due Or|der, proceed before him into St. George's Hall. Where being entred, the Pur|suivants,

Heralds, and Provincial Kings, fall off all upon the right hand, Collect. W. le N. Cl. oppo|site to the Knights-Companions Table, the Iunior Pursuivant standing towards the lower end of the Hall.
Then the Knights-Companions passing up beyond them, formerly Collect. W. le N. Cl. divided themselves on either side, according to the Decree Lib. N. p. 31. an. 16. H. 8. and made a stand, each taking place, Collect. W. le N. Cl. according to the order of their Stalls. But at the Feast held at Whitehall an. 19. Car. 2. the Soveraign directed, that they should stand all on the right hand side, facing their Table.
Next the five Officers of the Order follow, who ascending Collect. W. le N. Cl. beyond the Se|nior Knight, retire on the right hand; After them the Soveraign, who coming up last (all the Officers of Arms Collect. W. le N. Cl. doing him reverence as he passeth by) goes directly to the Haut-pas, before his own Table, where turning himself to|wards the Knights-Companions, and Collect. W. le N. Cl. putting off his Cap, they return their Re|verences jointly to him.
After this, in order to the Soveraigns sitting down to Supper, he is first ser|ved with Water by some Noblemen appointed for that Service. Next Grace is said by the Prelate, and then doth the Soveraign place himself in his Chair, set in the middle of the Table. After whom the Senior Knight, conducted to his Table by two Officers of Arms, sits down, and so do all the rest in due order, at the Tables appointed for them. Whereupon the Officers of the Order and of Arms, retire out of the Hall to Supper.
Now in regard all these last mentioned particulars are ordered alike, and in the same manner, at the other Meals of this Grand Feast, as here at this: We chuse rather to transfer the further enlargement upon them, to our Discourse of the Dinner on the Feast day, where these, and such things and services as are also common to every Meal, are once for all brought to view, and handled at large.
If a Lieutenant be constituted, he MS. f. pen. praef. W.D.N. f. 3. a. vide etiam MS. penes G.O.. p. 114. proceeds to Supper in full Robes, and in the same order as doth the Soveraign, whether it be to St. George's Hall, or else|where, and sits MS. f. pen. praef. W.D.N. f. 3. a. vide etiam MS. penes G.O.. p. 114. alone at the Soveraign's Table, yet on the MS. f. pen. praef. W.D.N. f. 3. a. vide etiam MS. penes G.O.. p. 114. left hand of the Cloth of State; being served in all points with MS. f. pen. praef. W.D.N. f. 3. a. vide etiam MS. penes G.O.. p. 114. Water, and by a MS. f. pen. praef. W.D.N. f. 3. a. vide etiam MS. penes G.O.. p. 114. Cupbearer, Carver, and Sewer, as is the Soveraign himself.
This, and the other Meals were usually heretofore closed with Comfits, Spi|ces, and Wine, and of late times with a costly Banquet: which, after the So|veraign hath washed, is brought in and placed upon the Table.
This Banquet after Supper,The Voyd, what? is that which in some places is called the Voyd, as an. 31. H. 8. it is observed, that Supper being ended, the Pnesident and Knights-Companions had a Lib. L. 1. in Offic. Arm. p. 19. Voyde of Comfits and Hypocras, and an. 4. Eliz. a MS. pen. W.D.N. fol. 7. b. Voyde of Spices and Wine. So Ibid. f. 15. a.  20. a. an. 6.  7. of the same Queen, it is said, they were served of the Voyde and departed, and an. 20. Eliz. it is likewise said, Supper being ended, and MS. pen. G.O.T. pag. 114. Voydance brought, they departed for that night. So also is it phrased in King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, Art. 3.
But somewhat more fully an. 5. Eliz. when St. George's day falling upon a Fri|day, at the return from the second Vespers, instead of a Supper (it being a fast|ing night) the Lieutenant MS. pen. W. D. N. fol. 10. a. standing in the middle before the Cloth of State, and the Knights along on either hand, the Comfits, Spices, Sugar, and Wine were brought in, and in several Bowls (or Chargers) presented; first MS. pen. W. D. N. fol. 10. a. a Bowl to the Soveraign's Lieutenant, and then a Bowl to each two of the Knights-Companions; and the Relator, at the close, noting also the posture they took the Banquet in, calls it a Voyde; for he says, they had the MS. pen. W. D. N. fol. 10. a. Voyde standing. And lastly, the Feast hapning on a Friday, an. 27. of the same Queen, celebrated at Greenwich, it is noted by MS. quar. penes E. W. G. fol. 9. Robert Cook then Clarenceux, that when the Banquet was brought in, the Lieutenant and all the Knights-Companions standing in order, were served of the MS. quar. penes E. W. G. fol. 9. Voyde, because they had no Supper.
When Supper is ended, and the Banquet taken away, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions Palmers large Iourn pag. 14. proceed back (in the same order as they came) into the Presence-Chamber; where the Soveraign (or his Lieutenant) standing on the step before the State, saluteth them as before, and then MS. 4. penes E. W. G. fol. 2. appoints the hour and

place for the Knights-Companions to attend him the next morning; which com|monly is about MS. in Offic. Arm lib. M. 17. fol. 32. b. 8 a Clock, after which they make their Reverences, and all de|part to their several Lodgings.
The like if Supper be prepared in any other place besides the Presence-Cham|ber; for from thence (when it is ended) doth the Soveraign (or his Lieutenant) and the Knights-Companions proceed to the Presence, because the Ceremony ought to end there. So we find it observed an. 17. Car. 1. when the Feast was solemnized at York, where, though the Palmers large Iour|nal, pag. 38. House appointed to sup at, was some|what remote from the Soveraign's Palace, yet the Knights-Companions and Offi|cers of the Order attended the Soveraign thence, after Supper, to the Palmers large Iour|nal, pag. 38. Presence-Chamber in the foresaid Palace; and there, he taking leave of them, they imme|diately retired to disrobe themselves. In like case an. 27. Eliz. the Feast being then held at Greenwich, and the Soveraign's Lieutenant and Companions supping in the Collect. R. C. Cl. Great Chamber, (at the neither end of the Guard-Chamber) they thence attended the Lieutenant to the Collect. R. C. Cl. Presence after Supper; where the Lieutenant ta|king his place at the upper end, and the Knights-Companions their places in due order, they stayed a while there, and then departed.
The like did they the next day, both after the Grand Collect. R. C. Cl. Dinner, and at night after Supper, because the Lieutenant dined and supped in the said Great Chamber.
But when Supper was prepared in the Presence-Chamber, at any of the Sove|raign's Courts, the Soveraign (or his Lieutenant) and Knights-Companions did take their leave one of another in the same Room, there being no occasion for any formal Proceeding further. Nevertheless, if any of the Knights-Companions accompanied the Soveraign (or his Lieutenant) to his Lodgings, they then went Collect. E. W. G. after, not before him, in regard the Collect. E. W. G. state of that nights Service ended in the Chamber of Presence; and after they are retired to their several Lodgings, they have permission to put off their Robes.
When the Soveraign or his Lieutenant do not sup in St. George's Hall on the Eve of the Feast, or the following night, the Officers of Arms have formerly had the liberty to eat their Suppers there; and this priviledge and assignment of a Table, was given them by a Decree in Chapter held the 16. of Iune, an. 8. Eliz. as followeth.
Lib. C. p. 53. videsis lib Par|tit. in Offic. Arm. [1. fol. 275.]  MS. penes G. O. Y. fol. 93. That forasmuch, as the Officers of Arms had formerly no certain place assigned them, wherein they might eat their meat, the night next preceding the day of St. George, and also on the Evening of the Feast day, they should from thenceforth hold, within the Hall at Windesor, that Table, which was before that time appointed for the Chancellor and Register, and other Officers of the Garter, to sit at, on the day of the said Festival. But how they came to lose the priviledge, hereby granted, we cannot learn; for now instead of sitting in the Great Hall, they are necessi|tated to eat their Meat in such Rooms of the Castle, as upon the score of friend|ship they can obtain; and among others, at the Grand Feasts held at Windesor an. 13.  15. Car. 2. Captain Burgh, one of the Alms-Knights, very courteously be|friended them with the use of his lower Room, to dine and sup in; and in the 23. year of the same King, Captain Hull, another of the Alms-Knights, did them the like kindness.




CHAP. XXI. THE ORDER OF THE Ceremonies ON THE Feast Day.

SECT. I. The Proceeding to the Chappel in the Morning.
ALbeit the Celebrations of the Feast of St. George take up three days inclusively, that is to say, part of the 22. all the 23. and part of the 24. days of April; yet the 23. day [the day of St. George] is the Grand day, wherein the chiefest and most solemn Ceremonies are celebrated; all things being set forth after the noblest order that can be devised, for the greater honor and lustre of this Princely and Ancient Order of the Garter.
The Ceremonies of this Grand day may be divided, into Sacred and Civil; the former solemnized in the Chappel, the latter in St. George's Hall. The Sacred (as is most requisite) are first celebrated; in reference to which, the Knights-Compa|nions then present at Windesor, repair to the Soveraign in his Privy Lodgings, about the hour he had appointed them the night before, vested in the whole Habit of the Order; and thither also repair all the Officers of the Order.
In the mean time, the rest of the Degrees and Persons, which compleated the Proceeding to the Chappel, on the Eve of the Grand Feast (and before remembred) do repair to the several stations that were then appointed for them, and there attend the Soveraign's coming forth into the Chamber of Presence, viz.


The Attendants on the Knights-Companions
To the Passage from the Guard-Chamber door, down into the Cloister and upper Ward.


Alms-Knights and Prebends Into the Guard-Chamber.
Officers of Arms Into the Presence.


And in these several places, do they all rank themselves, in the very same Order, as is before set down, and directed to be observed on the Eve.
Here it will be proper to note, that though the Serjeant Trumpeter, and the Trumpets, do not pass in this Proceeding, nor in that on the Eve; yet at the Feast held an. 23 Car. 2. they stood ranked one by one, when the Proceeding came forth of the great Gate, in the Upper Court to Morning Service, on the right hand against the Wall, but ounded not.
When the Soveraign (having the Knights-Companions, and Officers of the Order before him) hath entred the Presence, the Sword is delivered to the Noble|man appointed to bear it; and after the Soveraigns usual Salutation, and Knights-Companions Reverences returned, the whole Proceeding sets forward towards the Chappel in the same Order, as on the Eve; the Knights-Companions having their Trains born by some of their own Gentlemen.
At the Palmers large Iourn. p. 14.  15. foot of the Stairs, entring the Cloyster or Stone-Gallery, do Palmers large Iourn. p. 14.  15. twelve Gentlemen of the Privy-Chamber attend, with a rich Canopy of Cloth of Gold; who, when the Soveraign approacheth receive him under it, and bear it over his head, Palmers large Iourn. p. 14.  15. until he arriv at the Choire Door of St. George's Chappel; and this Canopy is carried over the Soveraign only in the Morning of the Feast Day, not in the Afternoon, nor on the Eve, nor the Day after the Feast.
The Processional way to the Chappel, is the same they traversed on the Eve, if the Soveraign and Knights-Companions march to the Chapter-House first; for Ex Vetust. MS. pen. G.O.Y. anciently it was the Custom to hold a Chapter in the Morning of the Feast Day, either before Mattins, and sometimes when MS. f. p. 12. an. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar. Mattins was finished before the Grand Procession set orward. This course received interruption in Queen Elizabeths time; during which no Chapter was held in the Morning, but in the Lib. C. p. 94. 26. Ibid. p. 111. 31. Pag. 130. 38. years of her Reign, and then only for admitting of some of the Officers of the Order. But the time of holding this Chapter, was restored by King Charls the First, who several times held it before the first Service began, as in the Lib. R. p. 48. 5. Ibid. p. 140. See Palmers large Iournal, pag. 14. 14.  Palmers Iour|nal, pro an. 1639. pag. 20. 15. Years of his Reign.
But if no Chapter be at this time held, then as soon as the Proceeding comes near to the Chappel, instead of entring the passage between the East end of the Chappel, and King Henry the Eighth's Tomb-House, (as it doth on the Eve, because the Soveraign goes first to the Chapter-House) it proceedeth straight on to the South Door of the Chappel, and thence into the Choire. Yet the pre|sent Soveraign An. 15. of his Reign, appointed the whole Proceeding to pass by the said South Door, along the Southside of the Chappel, and then to enter in at the West Door, which was then, and since, so observed.
When the Alms-Knights are come to the West Door of the Choire, they en|ter, and pass up above the steps to the Altar, in the very same manner and Or|der, as is at large described and mentioned to be observed, upon the entry of the Proceeding into the Choire, on the Eve of the Feast.
Then do the Prebends take their Seats, and
The Officers of Arms pass to the Haut Pas's of the Altar.
After this, the Knights-Companions proceed, and stand before their Stalls.
The Officers of the Order before their Forms, and
The Soveraign ascends his Royal Seat, as also
The Knights-Companions their Stalls.
Then the Prelate, conducted by the Serjeant of the Vestry, goes up to the Altar,
The Officers of Arms descend into the Choire, and lastly
The Alms-Knights retire to their Seats.
All which being done, the Prelate begins the Morning Service; wherein he proceeds according to the order prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, save only that the first Lesson, being made proper to the Festival, is taken out of the 44 Chapter of Ecclesiasticus.
This solemn Proceeding to the Chappel in the Morning of the Feast day, is, and hath been most usually performed on Foot; nevertheless sometimes heretofore, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions have proceeded on Horseback, to enlarge the state and gallantry of the show.
For it is remembred, that an. Vide Lib. vocat. Dal|ton. 16. E. 4. the Feast of St. George being then celebrated at Windesor, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions Vide Lib. vocat. Dal|ton. rode to the Chappel on Horseback, to hear Mass that morning: and with them also rode the Vide Lib. vocat. Dal|ton. Queen, the Lady Elizabeth the King's Daughter, and the Dutchess of Suffolk the King's Sister, the Lady Marchioness Mountague, the Marchioness Dorset, and divers other Ladies, in Vide Lib. vocat. Dal|ton. Gowns embroidered with Garters; concerning which Habit we have Chap. 7. Sect. 5. already spoken.
So also Lib. N. p. 166. an. 3. H. 7. on the Morning of the Feast-day, did the Soveraign and Knights-Companions proceed on Horseback to Matins, with equal splendor, or rather more glorious, than on the Eve to the first Vespers: For the Knights-Companions were vested in Surcoats of MS. penes Arth. Com. An|glesey, fol. 167. White Cloth, embroidered with Garters, (the Livery of the new year) the Kings Courser was trapped with a Trapper of St. George, of white Cloth of Gold, and the Lord Berners bare the King's Sword, his Courser being trapped with St. Edward's Arms. This Proceeding was aug|mented by the presence of the Lib. N. p. 166. Queen, and the Kings Mother, attended with a splendid Train of Ladies, and others that waited on them, themselves being at|tired in the Livery of the Order, and their Horses most richly accoutred with Foot-Cloths, Trappings, and all other Furniture correspondant, in like State as on the Eve. Again, in the 20 year of the same Soveraign, who then held the Feast of St. George at MS. Baynards Castle in London, he proceeded on Horseback to St. Paul's Church (in like order as on the Evening before) where he heard Ma|tins. And King Henry the Eighth, at the Feast held at Windesor in the MS. in Offic. Armor. [M. 17] fol. 27. 11. year of his Reign, rode with the Knights-Companions, about eight a Clock in the morn|ing, down to the Colledge to hear Mattins, in like manner as on the Eve, and alighted at the South door of the Chappel. The like did MS. pag. 12 King Philip an. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar. And Queen MS. f. penes W.D.N. f. 15. b. Elizabeth in the sixth year of her Reign, proceeded also on Horseback to the Morning Service, in her whole Habit of the Order.
Lastly, an. 6. Eliz. the Lib. C. p. 46. vide MS. f. pen. W.D.N. p. 17. b.  etiam MS. in Offic. Arm. [H. 12.] fol. 142. Soveraign in the whole Habit of the Order (the French Ambassador riding neer her) and all the Knights-Companions with the Officers of the Order, and Officers of Arms, proceeded on Lib. C. p. 46. vide MS. f. pen. W.D.N. p. 17. b.  etiam MS. in Offic. Arm. [H. 12.] fol. 142. Horseback to the Chappel on the Morning of the Feast-day. And in like manner did the Soveraign's Lieute|nant, at the same Feast, ride to the Lib. C. p. 46. vide MS. f. pen. W.D.N. p. 17. b.  etiam MS. in Offic. Arm. [H. 12.] fol. 142. first and second Vespers, and to the Morning Service the day after the Feast.
It was a Custom begun by Queen Elizabeth, and used when she celebrated the Feast of St. George, either at Whitehall or Greenwich, for the Ex eod. MS. pen. W. D. N. vide etam MS. f. penes G.O.Y. p. 113,  123.  Collect. R. C. Cl. Soveraign's Lieu|tenant and the Knights-Companions in full Robes, attended with the Officers of the Order and of Arms, to Ex eod. MS. pen. W. D. N. vide etam MS. f. penes G.O.Y. p. 113,  123.  Collect. R. C. Cl. meet in the Presence-Chamber, (about 9 a Clock in the Morning of the Feast day) and thence to Ex eod. MS. pen. W. D. N. vide etam MS. f. penes G.O.Y. p. 113,  123.  Collect. R. C. Cl. proceed as they did the Evening before, through the Guard-Chamber down into the Great Hall, and thence into the Chappel, where they took their Stalls as on the Eve; after which, Ex eod. MS. pen. W. D. N. vide etam MS. f. penes G.O.Y. p. 113,  123.  Collect. R. C. Cl. Morning Prayer, according to the order established in the Church of England, was begun and continued so far as the Letany; and this was called the Ex eod. MS. pen. W. D. N. vide etam MS. f. penes G.O.Y. p. 113,  123.  Collect. R. C. Cl. first Service; which done, they all descended from their Stalls, in the accustomed order, and Ex eod. MS. pen. W. D. N. vide etam MS. f. penes G.O.Y. p. 113,  123.  Collect. R. C. Cl. pro|ceeded back to the Presence, in the same manner, and by the same way as they went to the Chappel, and there waited the coming of the Soveraign; before whom they proceeded a second time to the Choire, where the Letany and Grand Proces|sion begun, (called the Ex eod. MS. pen. W. D. N. vide etam MS. f. penes G.O.Y. p. 113,  123.  Collect. R. C. Cl. second Service) at which the Soveraign was usually pre|sent, but never at the first Service.
And the first memorial that we have met with, of this double proceed|ing to the Chappel in the Morning of the Feast-day, is re|corded in the Pag. 32. Illustrissimus Comes Arundel (constituted the Soveraign's Lieutenant for that Feast) cum reliquo Ordinis co|mitatu slipatus, Matutinis Precibus in|tersuit. Postea ver omnes celeberri|mi Ordinis Commilitones, illustrissimae Reginae dederunt operam seduli, quae Sa|cellum est ingressa, inibi Regis sedl recepta, quod reliquum erat celebritatis gratios peregit. Blue Book of the Order, an. 3. Eliz. And this double Proceeding and dividing of the Service, continued throughout the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King Iames, not only when the Feast of St. George was celebrated at Whitehall or Greenwich, an. MS. pen. E.W.G. 7.8.10.12.13.14. and 16. Iac. R. but also an. Eod. MS. 15. Lib. C. p. 1. 20. Ibid. pag. 6. 21. and Pag. 19. 22. of the same Sove|raign, when solemnized at Windesor, and also the Pag. 30. first year of King Charles the First. But from that time, the Soveraign

went to the Chappel to the Lib. C. pag. 41.62.74.85.107.117.  127. beginning of Divine Service, and the celebration thereof continued on, without any interruption, to the end; and this latter Custom hath been ever since duly observed by the present Soveraign.
But when it was known (before the Lieutenant proceeded to the first Service) that the Soveraign did not go the Grand Procession, (as, when either through indisposition of Body, or some other occasion, she could not come abroad) there the Service being begun, continued; and at the usual time the Grand Procession began, wherein the Soveraigns place was supplied by the Lieutenant.
Nevertheless once we observe, that the Soveraigns Lieutenant, at the Lib. R. p. 1.  2. an. 20. Iac. R. finish|ing of the first service, proceeded back to the Soveraign's Lodgings (the Feast being then kept at Windesor) not knowing of the Soveraigns indisposition, which understanding to be such, as permitted him not to go in the Grand Proceeding, he with the rest of the Knights-Companions, Lib. R. p. 1.  2. an. 20. Iac. R. returned to the Chappel a second time, to celebrate the rest of that Mornings Ceremonies.


SECT. II. The Proceeding to the second Service.
BUT when the Feast hath been celebrated elsewhere than at Windesor, as soon as the Prelate was come down from the Altar, upon finishing the first Service, the Knights-Companions MS. fol. pen. W. D. N. descended from their Stalls in usual order, and then the MS. fol. pen. W. D. N. Soveraign's Lieutenant, with the Officers of the Order, and of Arms, pro|ceeded before him to the MS. fol. pen. W. D. N. Presence, to conduct the Soveraign to the second Service. This second Proceeding to the Chappel was disposed in the MS. fol. pen. W. D. N. same order, as was that in the Morning to the first Service; only, in the latter, because the Soveraign proceeded, the Sword also was carried. Here follows a Scheme of one of these Proceedings, viz. an. 19. Eliz.

MS. pen. G.O.Y. pag. 113.Pursuivants. Heralds. Provincial Kings.

This Lord and the three fol|lowing Knights wanted their opposite Compa|nions, therefore went single. Lord Howard of Effingham.




Earl of Penbroke.



Earl of Worcester.



Earl of Bedford.


Lord Viscount Mountague.
Earl of Leicester.


Lord Clynton.
Earl of Sussex.




The Vsher.
Mr. Dean of Windesor, in place of the Register.
Garter.


One Gent. Vsher.
The Bishop of Winchester. Sword, born by the Earl of Southampton.
One Gent. Vsher.



The Soveraign.

The year pre|ceding the So|veraign had her Mantle born up in like manner from her shoulders by the Earl of Northumber|land on the right hand, and the Lord Rus|sel on the left. Ex eod. MS. pag. 123. The Earl of Ormond (on the left hand) assisted the Robe on her shoulder.
The Earl of Rutland (on the right hand) assisted the Robe on her shoulder.


The Train of the Robe born by the Earl of Oxford,


The Train of her Kirtle by the Countess of Derby.


The Processional way from the Presence to the Chappel at Whitehall, is at this time, the same as it was in the Morning to the first Service, viz. through the Grd-Chamber and Great Hall. And as soon as the Soveraign and Knights-Com|panions had ascended their Stalls, after the usual manner, in the MS. penes W. D. N. f. 3. b. 3. Ibid. f. 8. a. 4. and Fol. 10. a. 5. years of Queen Eliz. a Psalm was sung (the Feast being celebrated those years at Whitehall, at the ending of which) the Knights-Companions descended, and stood before their Stalls, and then the Grand Procession began.
Sometime afterwards, as an. 18.  19. Eliz. instead of a Psalm an MS. fol. pene G. O. . p. 123. Anthem was sung by the Choire, in praise of the Soveraign's presence there, with her Knights-Companions; which custom of singing an Anthem immediately before the Grand Procession, was observed an. MS. pene E.W. G. 9. MS. pene E.W. G. 14.  MS. pene E.W. G. 16. Iac. R. and probably theuse conti|nued long after.
But an. 4. Eliz. by reason that the Soveraign was not well, she somewhat al|tered the usual processional way to the Chappel, proceeding from the Presence, MS. fol. pe praef. W.D.N. fol. 8. b. first to the great Closet, where she reposed her self, while the Choire was making ready to advance in the Grand Procession; and when the Soveraign was gone in|to the Closet, the Lieutenant and Knights-Companions leaving her there, MS. fol. pe praef. W.D.N. fol. 8. b. pro|ceeded through the great Hall into the Chappel, where they took their Stalls in due and solemn order, while the Choire sung a Psalm. After which the Letany begun, and then the Knights-Companions descended from their Stalls in usual or|der, and MS. fol. pe praef. W.D.N. fol. 8. b. went the next way up to the Closet, having the Officers of the Order and of Arms before them; where waiting the Soveraign's coming forth, they returned before her again to the Chappel (the Choire having by that time ad|vanced forward in the Grand Procession) and proceeded through the body thereof.


SECT. III. Of the Grand Procession.
WE are now arrived at the Grand Procession of this Noble Order, which is indeed the most solemn and most illustrious part of the whole Ceremony; to usher in the state and magnificence whereof, it seems here both proper and necessary, to premise somewhat concerning Procession in general, and by reason of their correspondency, to say something of Triumphs, Cavalcades, and Eccle|siastical Proceedings; those glorious and pompous Solemnities, which the wis|dom of all Ages, and custom in most parts of the World for all, or in all parts for some, have thought most necessary to exhibit upon particular and remarka|ble Occasions.
Procession is so called as it were Durant. de Ritibus Eccl. Cath. p. 427. progressio  procedendo in publicam. The original of Processions some deduce from the ancient Iews in the Old Testament; and well may we do so too, since we observe the Israelites removal from Sinai to Paran, was Nmb. c. 10. v. 13. according to the commandment of God, and the order and manner of their Proceeding thus recorded.
Cap. 10. . 14. us ad ver 2, First went the Standard of the Camp of the Children of Iudah, where Nah|shon the Son of Ainadab commanded in Chief.
Next that of Issachar.
Thirdly, that of Zebulon: and after these
The Tabernacle born by the Sons of Gershon and Merari.
Then followed the Standards of Ruben, Simeon, and Gad: and after them,
The Kohathites bearing the Sanctuary.
Afterwards the Standards of the Camps of Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin: And lastly in the Rere came
The Standards of Dan, Asher, and Naphtali.
A second and most solemn Proceeding we have in the Book of Cap. 6. Ioshua, at the famous encompassing the Walls of Iericho; where Ver. 8.  9. first the Army proceeded on before the seven Priests, who sounded the seven Trumpets of Rams horns, then the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord followed them, and lastly the Rere came after the Ark.
Again, when the 2 Saln cap. 6. 1 Chron. c. 13. Ark was fetched from Kiriath Iearim by David, unto the House of Obed Edom, it was brought thither with great Ceremony, the King, and all Israel joining with him in the Procession: And to be more particular as to the order thereof, David himself informs us out of the 67. Psalm (which most Interpreters agree to be penn'd upon this solemn occasion) that in this Proceed|ing, Ver. 25. The Singers went before, the Minstrels followed after, and in the midst were the Damsels playing with the Timbrels. Moreover, for the setting forth of this Solemnity and celebration of the glory of God, not only vocal Musick [Psalms] namely the 47. and 67. Psalms, as the Rabins are of opinion, were composed and sung; but Musical Instruments to the honor of God, were also introduced,  Sam. c. 6. ver. 5. even all Instruments made of Fir Wood. 1 Chron. cap. 13. ver. 8. And David and all Israel played be|fore God, with all their might, and with singing, and with Harps, and with Psal|teries, and with Timbrels, and with Cymbals, and with Trumpets. All which is not only our Warrant but Precedent.
Now in respect of the correspondence and alliance between the State of Pro|cessions and Triumphs, and that a Triumph seems but to be a Military Procession, We think it not amiss in speaking of Processions to divide them into Military, Ci|vil, and Ecclesiastical: Under the Military may best be comprehended Triumphs, and the Transvection of the Roman Knights; under the Civil, the pompous En|tries or Cavalcades of Princes, into or through any great City; and the Ecclesi|astical are those generally so called, wherein the Church proceeds upon a solemn account of Supplication or Thanksgiving: To all which, in the last place, shall follow the order of the Grand Procession of this most Noble Order; which in reference to the Degrees of the Persons appearing therein, is composed of a mixture of such as are to be seen in each of the three former.
Triumphs.It is evident enough out of the sacred Story, that Triumphs were of ancient time celebrated after the obtaining Victory over Enemies; and the Triumphal Songs of Exod. cap. 15. Moses, made upon the destruction of Pharaoh and his Armies in the Red Sea, and of Iudg. cap. 5. Deborah and Barak, after the discomfiture of Sisera and Iabin, seem to inform us so much. But a more particular account of a Triumph, with the order of Proceeding, is recorded in the second Book of the Cap. 20. Chronicles, where Iehosaphat having taken the spoil of the Children of Ammon and Moab, it is said, that Ver. 27. every man of Judah and Jerusalem returned, and Jehosaphat in the forefront of them, to go again to Jerusalem with joy; and they came to Jerusalem with Psalteries, and Harps, and Trumpets, unto the House of the Lord.
Besides the ancient Iews, the Grecians and Romans did oftentimes, upon the gaining of signal Victories, ordain and celebrate Triumphs; which led to their Temples, where Sacrifices were made, and there the Solemnity terminated.
It is a received opinion, that Pancir. li. rerum deperd. Cap. de Trium|phis. Bacchus first triumphed after his Victory over the Indians; and that at Rome, Romulus was the first, who, at his return to the City, after a Victory, sending his captived Enemies before, himself followed on foot, and after him marched the whole Army in due order.
Mart. de Gui|chard. de antiq. triumph. spect. pag. 72. But it is thought by some, that there was never any absolute Triumph cele|brated at Rome, till the time of Tarquinius Priscus, who triumpht over the Sa|bins, and ancient Latines, as Lib. de Vir. illustr. p. 385. Plinius secundus relates, and subdued 12 several Nations of the Tuscii. And thence first came the Mart. de Gui|chard. pag. 73. Fasces, the Trabeae, the Sellae curules, the Annuli, the Phalerae, the Paludamenta, the Praetexta, the Currus Tri|umphalis, drawn with four Horses, the Togae pictae, the Tunicae palmatae, and all other Ensigns of Triumph, mentioned by Lib. 1. cap. 5. Lucius Florus.
As concerning the word, Lib. 5. de lin|gua Latina. Varro affirms that Triumphare hath its appellation, for that such of the Souldiers as returned with the Emperor, all the way as they marched from their very entrance into the City, unto the Capital, used to cry out unto him in his passage, with a loud voice, I triumphe, I.
This Mart. de Guichardo de antiq. triump|spe aculis, pag. 21. Triumph was the highest honor the Roman City could bestow, and given to a General when he had gain'd a Victory, with little loss to his own Army, and great loss to the Enemy: And among the Roman Writers Lib. 2. c. 3. Valerius Maxi|mus observes, that it was provided by Law, that none should have a Triumph granted, but upon the slaughter of 5000 of the Enemy in Battel.
These Triumphs were either M. Guich. de antiq. Triumph. spect. pag. 24. Triumphi minores, termed also Ovations, or Ma|jores, which were perfect and entire Triumphs. In Ovations (granted upon put|ting an Enemy to flight without effusion of blood, or obtaining a Victory against an Enemy of mean quality, as Slaves, Pirates, or the like) Perot. in Cornucopia. fol. 74 col. 1. the General either went on foot, or was drawn through the City with one Horse only, and conduct|ed to the Capital by Plebeians, or at most by Roman Knights; the Sacrifice was only of Sheep, and thence called Ovation; whereas in a just and compleat Triumph, the General was drawn in a Triumphal Chariot by four White Horses, and conducted into the Capital by the whole Senate going before him, and the Sacrifice was of Oxen. Moreover in an Ovation the General wore a plain Salmuth. in Pancir. lib Re|rum dperd. Cap. de Tri|umph. purple Gown without any Gold or embroidery, and a Garland of Myrtle; but in the greater Triumph (called properly Triumphus) he wore the Trabe, or Garment of State, and had his Temples adorned with a Wreath of Laurel.
What the order and state of these Triumphs were, will partly appear by the description at large of that famous Triumph of Scipio the elder, out of Appia|nus Alexandrinus: But for a general description of a Roman Triumph, it is best seen from Onuphrius Panvinius, who hath most accurately collected it out of Lib. 2.  5. Dio+nisius Halicarnassaeus, Lib. 2. cap. 8. Valerius Maximus, Lib. 7. c. 24. Iosephus de bello Iudaico, In vita Pauli Aemilii. Plutarch, the aforesaid De Bello Ly|bico. Appianus Alexandrinus and others.
And to perpetuate the memory of these glorious shows to posterity, and cause them not only to outlive the triumphal day, but also that Age; The Romans in publick places of the City erected Statues, Columes, and Arches; and caused the memorials thereof to be inscribed on Marbles, c. We also meet with great va|riety of emblematical Devices referring hereunto, in the Roman Coyns, both of Gold, Silver, and Brass, as will appear out of Hubertus Golzius, Antonius Augu|stinus, Franciscus Angelonus, Octavianus Strado, Adolphus Occo, and divers others, who have illustrated that Subject. Which Custom being revived, hath been of|ten used (especially in this and the last Century) among the European Princes; in the former of which Sylloge Nu|mismatum, ele|gantiorum Edit. Argent. 120. Iohannes Iacobus Luckius affords us variety of Examples, among those which he calls the Nummi Triumphales.
And for a description in painting, there is now to be seen in the Soveraign's Gallery at Hampton Court in large pieces, the Triumphs of Caesar, done with great Art by the famous and admirable Painter Andrea Montegua, which are al|so extant of Evelins Scul|ptura, pag. 52. Transvection of the Roman Knights. his own Engraving.
But to remember somewhat else, which more particularly sutes with those Pro|ceedings of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions of the most Noble Order of the Garter, especially when celebrated on Horseback; we shall bring hither a pro|spect of the stately Transvection or Cavalcade of the Equestrian Order among the Romans, annually celebrated in Rome, on the Quintilian Ides, which answers to our 15. day of Iuly, concerning which, Dionysius Halicarnasseus affords this com|mendation, that Lib. 6 p. 351. certainly it was a gallant sight, and worthy the greatness of the Empire.
This solemn show was first instituted by Liv. Dec. 1. lib 1. extremo, vide etiam Val. Maxim. Q. Fabius, that the pomp and glory of the Equestrian Order, might thereby be the more fully observed; not for mu|stering the Knights before the Censors, who were thereupon to note their defects or neglects; for that was done at another time of the year, namely, on the 18. Calends of October, and the 18. Calends of December, as may be seen among Gru|ters Inscriptions in a Marble Table of the Inscript. Ian Gruteri, p. 133. Kalendar of the Roman Fasts pub|lished by Cn. Flavius, and mentioned by Lib. 33. c. 1. Pliny; which Table was, at the time that Gruter published his work, in the House of Cardinal Mapheus.
The occasion of its Institution, the foresaid Loc. citat. Dionysius Halicarnasseus doth refer to the honor of Castor and Pollux, in memory of a Victory, which the Romans had obtained over the Latines, neer the Lake Regilius, in the 357. year after

the Foundation of the City; where those two Gods seemed to lead on and as|sist the Roman Army against the Latines, and when the Victory was gained va|nished out of sight; but immediately appeared to the Roman Citizens in the Fo|rum at Rome, in that very place thereof, where afterwards the Temple (dedica|ted to their Names) was erected, and in the Habit of Knights on Horseback; who having told the News of the foresaid Victory, forthwith disappeared, and were no more seen.
Now the manner and order of this gallant Transvection, is likewise thus re|lated by the said learned Author, the Dion. Hali|car. loco cit. Sacrifice was first performed by the chief of the Equestrian Order, which being finished, all the Knights who had Horses bestowed on them at the publick charge, (distinguished by Tribes and Centuries rode in order, as returning from Battel) crowned with Olive Leaves, and ap|parelleled in Purple Mantles, embroidered with branches of Palms, the Sym|bol of Victory. The beginning of this solemn show being made from the Temple of Mars, erected without the City (others say, from the Temple of Honor) and thence (leaving the other parts of the City) they rode through the Forum, and passing by the before mentioned Temple of Castor and Pollux, proceeded to the Capitol. They were sometimes not less than 5000 Knights in this Proceeding; and as an augmentation of their honor, they carried and ex|hibited to view, whatsoever had been bestowed on them by their Commanders, as the reward of Valour in fight.
Turnebus explicating a piece of Iulius Capitolinus in Vid. Hist. Aug. Veteres, pag. 163. Antonini Philosophi vita, is of opinion, Advers. lib. 25. cap. 18. That this gallant Cavalcade was led on by an eminent Comman|der, who was called Sevir, whom he there interprets to be the chief of the six Classes of Knights, in such manner that every Classis had his Sevir; they relating as we suppose to the six ancient Decuriae of Knights, instituted by Romulus, viz. the Rhamnenses, Tatienses, and Luceres, all three being a little after doubled, and so became six: For the said Author having (Lib. 11. cap. 9. in another place) mentioned these very six Decuriae, he also saith, They who commanded them were called Seviri. Now Mar. Aur. Antoninus, whom Capitolinus saith, was then created, Hist. Aug. Scriptores, pag. 163. Sevir of the Troops of the Roman Knights, had been before by Antoninus Pius, designed Con|sul with himself; whence it is very apparent, that the dignity of Sevir was most honorable and eminent, since it was placed upon a Consul, and had the com|mand of all the Roman Cavalry.
In the year after Christ 1578. there was a Marble digg'd up in Saint Peters Church at Rome, whose Inscription (taken by Ios. Castalio) doth relate to such a Commander, and was this.

Vide Gruter Inser. ant. Rom. p. 456. Inser. 4.C. POMPVSIDIO
FABIO
FRATERNO
X. VIR Stlitibus ju|dicandis, id esi, super lites judi|candos.. STL. IVD.
VI. VIR.
EQVITVM. ROMANOR.

Vrsinus hath also transmitted to posterity an Inscription of one of the Eque|strian Order, yet but a very young Knight; who having received the honor of a publick Horse, he also rode in this famous Cavalcade before he was a man; for he lived not beyond the age of 16 years. The Inscribed stone is noted by Inscr. ant. Rom. pag. 1026. Inscr. 4. Ia|nus Gruterus to be in a private House at Montefiasco
Inscr. ant. Rom. pag. 1026. Inscr. 4.
DIIS MANIBVS
SEX. GAVI. SEX. F.
PROCVLI.
VIX. AN. XVI. EQVO PVBLICO
TRANSVECTVS EST.
To conclude, this grand Ceremony is mentioned also by Pliny, who speak|ing of the Olive, saith, Lib. 15. c. 4. The Roman Majesty did afford great honor to the Olive, crowning therewith the Troops of the Knights in the Ides of July. As also by Sue|tonius, who writing of Augustus saith, that In vita Aug. Cap. 38. He frequently reviewed the Troops of the Knights, reviving the custom of Transvection on Horseback, after a long in|terruption.
The Civil Processions or Cavalcades,Cavalcades. are the solemn Entries of Princes, into, or riding through any great City, which in all Ages have been set forth, with exceeding state and Pomp; being for the most part solemnized (especially in these latter Ages) at Inaugurations, Interviews, and Marriages of Emperors, Kings, and great Estates: as also at the Entries of Ambassadours, and upon such like extraordinary occasions, of which a few Instances.
Quint. Curt. Am|sterl. 1650. lib. 5. pag. 95. Alexander the Great after the taking of Arbella, proceeded on towards Ba|bylon, and upon his approach to the City, had it surrendred to him in a sup|pliant manner by Mazaeus, a person of very great Fame and Eminency among the Babylonians; by whose Example many went forth to meet him, amongst whom Quint. Curt. Am|sterl. 1650. lib. 5. pag. 95. Bagaphanes the Kings Treasurer and Governour of the Castle, that he might not come short of Mazaeus in his respect to Alexander, strewed all the way with Flowers and Garlands, and on each side thereof were placed Altars of Silver, which fumed with Frankinsence and all manner of Odors. After him followed divers great Presents, droves of Cattel and of Horses, Lyons also and Leopards were brought forth in Coops, after these came the Chalde|ans, and both the Poets and Artificers of the Babylonians, with a sort of Musi|cal Instruments, wherewith they were wont to sing forth the praises of their Kings; the Chaldeans, describing the motions of the Stars and the vicissitudes of times; next the Babylonian Troops, so richly adorned both Men and Horses, that it inclined rather to Luxury, then Magnificence. Lastly the King himself came attended with his Life-Guard, and ordered the multitude of Cittizens to fol|low after in the Rear of his Foot, entring the City in his Charriot.
We might here extend our observation to the Entrance of our Saviour into Ierusalem: at which, Matth. c. 21. v. 8. the multitude spread their Garments in the way for him to ride on, (a Rite ordinary among the Iews, at the Inauguration of a King, as we find the 2 Kings c. 9. v. 13. Captains did when Iehu was proclaimed King) and they Matth. 21. vers. 9. that went before, and that followed after cryed Hosanna, that being the solemn form of Acclamations, used by this people, especially Godw. Moses  Aaron, pag. 134. in the Feast of Tabernacles.
How sumptuous and stately the Ceremonies used in this last Age are, to set forth and adorn the Cavalcades and Grand Proceedings among the Astatick Prin|ces (who very much exceed in this kind of Pomp and Magnificence) may be conceived from that which Io. Albert Mandeslo relates, in his Pag. 122. See also Iost Schan|ten's Descript. thereof, an. 1636. Travels into the Indies, concerning the King of Siam's annual Procession in October, both by Land and Water, through his principal City (seated in an Island on the River Menam) to one of his Chief Mosqueys; the greatness whereof deserves particu|lar relation, and is thus set down by him.
Pag. 122. See also Iost Schan|ten's Descript. thereof, an. 1636. In the head of this Procession march about 200. Elephants, each of them carrying three Armed Men; then come the Musick, consisting of Hoboyes, Tabours and Cimbals; next come about a thousand men compleatly Armed, divided into se|veral Companies that have their Colours and Banners. Next to these follow the Noblemen of the Kingdom on Horseback, and amongst them, many with Crowns of Gold upon their heads, each attended with a Train of fourscore or a hundred per|sons on foot. Betwixt these Noblemen and the Life-Guard, march two hundred Souldiers, Japoneses, all very well appointed, who go immediately before the Horses and Elephants, which are for the Kings Life-Guard, their Harness is adorned with Buckles and studs of Gold, set with Diamonds and other precious stones. The Servants who bear the Fruits, and other things for the Sacrifice, march before cer|tain Grandees of the Kingdom, whereof one bears the Kings Standard, the other the Sword of Justice. These walk on foot immediately before the King, who sits mounted on an Elephant in a Chair of Gold. The Prince his Son, or some other Prince of the bloud, followeth next after him, and then comes the Queen and the

Kings other Women on Elephants, but not to be seen, as being in certain wooden Closets guilt. The rest of the Houshold and six hundred of the Guard, follow in the Rear, which by this means consisteth of fifteen or sixteen thousand persons.
As to their Procession upon the River, the Order following is observed. First, in the head of this Fleet passeth about two hundred Noblemen, each in his several Barge, where they sit in a gilt Cabin, and each Barge is rowed by three or fourscore slaves. Then follow four Barges assigned for the Musick; and next follow about fifty Banks of State, each having fourscore, or fourscore and ten Rowers, and after these come ten other gilt Barges, in one of which the King is seated in a Throne of Gold, attended by divers Noblemen, all upon their knees before him, and amongst them, one of the chiefest Grandees who bears his Standard. The Prince followeth after him in another Barge with his Train, and after him comes the Queen and the Concubines each in their Barges apart; and lastly, in a great number of other Barges follow the Houshold Servants and the Guards, so as this Procession consists of twenty five or thirty thousand persons.
Together with this great Ceremony, the ordinary Proceeding of the King of Iapan, either on Horseback or on Mens shoulders, in a Palanquin (related by the said Mandeslo, as also by Fr. Caron in his Pag. 18. description of Iapan) may be fitly remembred. Whether we regard the numerous Train and Atten|dants, or the manner or order thereof: Idem, p. 182. all of them marching with such gravity and so orderly, that there is not only any one man to be seen out of his Rank, but a man hears not so much as a word spoken; which may well deserve our wonder and admiration.
There is in the Soveraigns Privy Lodgings at Whitehall, the order of the King of Gulcandale his Ordinary Proceeding, when he goes abroad, set forth in Fi|gures about a foot long, it is of that Countries manner of Painting, and an ex|traordinary piece of Oriental Rarity, being sent thence to Sir Martin Noell Knight, and by him presented to his now Majesty.
But we may not yet take leave of the Grandeur of these Oriental Princes, in relation to these pompous shows, before we have referred our Reader to Conraed Krammer's description of the magnificent and unparralleld Proceeding of the Deyro, (who indeed is the true Prince of Iapan) when he past from his own Court in the City of Meaco, to the Emperor of Iapans Palace in the same City, on the 25. of Oct. 1626. which is to be seen at large, Pag. 109. Printed in Eng|lish at the end of the foresaid Description of Iapan; nor may we omit this; That the preparation for the said Emperors usual progress from Iedo his present Imperial City, to Meaco, (the former Metropolis and as yet the Court of the Deyro, (being 125. Dutch Miles) to visit the said Deyro, (which happens once in 5. or 7. Years) takes up a Ibid. p. 20. whole Year, before the Orders are given out, on what Day, and with what Train every man shall go.
And to draw somewhat nearer Europe, the State and Pomp among the Turks, however barbarous enough in other things, yet in these Ceremonies are ex|ceeding regular and stately; as may be seen in the Grand Seigniors Cavalcade to Sancta Sophia, cut in Copper Plates by Evelyn's Sculptura, pag. 84. Peter van Aelst, as also in the order of his Ordinary Penes eund. I. Evelyn. Cavalcade, etched by Anthony Tempest.
But enough of these. We now come to give some Account of the Gallan|try of our Christian Princes, in this particular. Among whom the Triumphal Evelins Scul|ptura, pag. 70. Entry of Maximilian the First, Emperour of Germany, into Noremburg, is excellently well design'd, and cut in Wood by Hans Brossehaemer.
The Entry of the Emperour Charles the Fifth, and Ppe Clement the Seventh into Bononia in Italy, an. 1530. in Order to his being Crowned King of Lom|bardy there, is In Musaeo no|stro. graved in 40. Copper Plates with large Figures, excellently well designed, by Nicholaus Hogenbergus.
Io. August. Pastorius in his Pag. 271. Acta Publica, hath exactly described the solemn Cavalcade, of the present Emperor Leopold his Entry into the City of Franc|fort upon the Mayn, the 19. of March 1658. where the 18. of Iuly in the same Year (Io. Iusti Win|kelmani Caesa|reologia, p. 119. non sine difficultate  invidi tandem unanimi Octoviratus consensu) he was Elected Emperor of Germany; and the first of August following had

his Inauguration solemnized there also. The Order of this Gallant show is to be seen cut in brass by Gasper Merian, in a thin Plate 14. Folio, Printed at Franfort the same Year.
In the same Acta Publica, are also described at large, the several Entrances into that City, of the Electors of Pag 257. Mentz, Pag. 278. Tryers, Pag. 284. Collen, the Duke of Pag. 280. Sax|ony, Count Palatine of the Pag. 286. Rheyne, as also the Deputies or Substitutes of the two other Electors Pag. 262. Bavaria and Pag. 282. Brandenburgh: and the order of each Caval|cade is likewise particularly set forth in Copper Plates, cut by the said Gasper Merian, and collected together in the foresaid Book.
We could here insert the particulars of divers other solemn Cavalcades, exhi|bited upon like occasions, but we are unwilling to dwell longer upon them, since many of them are to be met with.
Here in England it hath been the ancient usage for our Kings and Queens, the day before their Coronation, to ride from the Tower through the City of Lon|don, in a most noble and magnificent Equipage they being at those times at|tended on by all the Nobility, Officers of the Houshold, and a gallant and splen|did Train.
Among these, Proceedings, the order and pomp of that magnificent and nume|rous Cavalcade of the present Soveraign, from the Tower to Whitehall, the day before his most happy Inauguration is worthy observing, in that his Majesties Entertainments described by Mr. Ogilby, together with the sumptuous Arches which then adorned the Streets; and how well that ingenious Artist Mr. Wene|slaus Hollar hath merited both in designing and etching the same, is obvious to every ingenious Eye.
Besides these, relating to the Inauguration of Princes, many other solemn and particular occasions have been honored with sumptuous Cavalcades; such was that of our King Henry the Eighth, when he entred Boulogne, and is to be seen in the Soveraign's Gallery in Whitehall, being painted by a Disciple of Hans Holben.
Such was that brave Cavalcade of the late Duke of Florence, celebrated at his Nuptials; which, together with the Scenes and other Representations, were etched by the most excellent Iames Callot, an Artist of incomparable skill and fancy in things of that kind.
So also that of Lewis the Fourteenth, the French King, with his Queen Maria Theresa of Austria, into Paris, the 26. of August 1660. shortly after their mar|riage, which was as full of splendor and magnificence as could be devised. But among these, and indeed above all, none ought more deservedly to be cele|brated, than that which passed through London upon the 29. of May 1660. a day since made venerable amongst us to posterity, upon the safe and most happy re|turn of the present Soveraign, to his Crown and Kingdom, to the unconceiva|ble joy of all his loyal Subjects.
In the last place, touching those Cavalcades made at the reception of Ambas|sadors, we have met with two (and those very solemn ones) described at large in the foresaid Pag. 260.  263. Acta publica of I. A. Pastorius, namely the entrance of the French and Spanish Ambassadors into Francfort, that, upon the 19. of August 1657. this, upon the 24. of March 1658. when the Election was to be made of the present Emperor; both which are likewise cut in Copper Plates, by the before mention|ed Gasper Merian.
Adam Olearius in his Voyages and Travels of the Ambassadors from the Duke of Holstein to the great Duke of Muscovy, as also to the King of Persia, makes mention of such Cavalcades, they being ordered according to the manner of those Countries with very great Ceremony; Namely that of the Pag. 21. Turkish Ambassadors entrance into Musco 17. Sept. an. 1634. he being met with 16000 Horse, be|sides the persons who made up the Cavalcade. Likewise that of the Duke of Ibid. p. 13. Holstein's Ambassadors entry into the same City 14. Aug. immediately before|going. As also the entrance of the same Duke's Ambassador into Pag. 270. Ispahan in Persia, the 2. of Aug. 1637.
To conclude, the Cavalcade of the Polish Ambassador upon his Reception in|to Rome an. 1633. was a most magnificent Ceremony; it being made publick in Aqua Fortis, by the incomparable hand of Stephen della Bella a Florentine.
And now to come within the Verge of the Order of the Garter, we shall here present to the Readers view, some few, yet stately Cavalcades, made upon the Soveraigns entrances, not only into Windesor Castle, but other places upon account of its Grand Solemnities, and of which we have happily met with these following Memorials.
The 20. Year of King Henry the Seventh, the Feast of St. George was celebra|ted at Baynards Castle in London; and the Soveraign (being at the Tower on the Eve) Proceeded thence on Horseback to St. Paul's Church to Vespers, in the following Order.
Ex ipso Auto|grapho.First, all the Noblemen aftir their Estates and Degrees, then the Offi|cers of Armes next before the Knyghts of the Ordre, then the Knyghts of the Ordre, ryding in theyr Gownes of the Garter only, with their Collers without Mantells, whych Lyvery is of crymosin velvet lyned with whyte, next following them the Byshopp of Winchestre Prelate of the Ordre, then the Ambassadors, then the Secretary and Aulmoner, then Gartier Kyng of Armes of the Ordre, the Maior of London beryng the Mace rode on the left hand of the Kyngs Cote, then the Sword borne by
then the Kyng, Soverain of the Ordre, then followed the Prince, and after certaine Nobles, and then the Garde all on foote, the Aldermen and all the Craftys of London standying in theyr Lyveries in places accustomed. And when the Kyng came to the West Dore of Powles he did on his Mantell, and all the Knyghts did on theyrs, and so entryd the Church, where some|what within the Church, there was ready the Byshopp which dyd the Di|vine Service, with the Deane and Chanons, c. where they sensed and re|ceyved the Kyng as accustomed; and from thens proceeded to the Queere, and entred their Stalls, and there herd Evensonge; and aftir Evensonge, the Kyng with the odyr Knyghts rode to Baynards Castle his Logging, wher hys Hyghness remayned that nyght.
The Ex alio Autogr. 16. of April in the following Year, the Soveraign began his Pilgri|mage to the Shrine of the Blessed Lady of Walsingham, and took Cambridge in his way thither, where he arrived the Ex alio Autogr. 22 of the same Month, and was in this manner received.
Ibid. First, the Maior with hys Brederen rode to meet the Kyng, two or three mylle owt of the Towne; Also Mr. Molory then Shereff of the Shire bore his rodd, and gave hys attendance, and as he approached nere the Unyversyte, within a quarter of a mylle, ther stode, first, all the four Ordres of Freres, and aftir odir Religious, and the King on Horsbacke kyssed the Crosse of everyche of the Religious, and then ther stode all along, all the Graduatts, aftir their Degrees, in all their Habitts, and at the end of them was the Unyversyte Cross, wher was a Forme and a Cushin, c. as accustomed, where the Kyng dyd alight, and there the Byshopp of Rochestre Doctor then beyng Chaunceller of the Unyversyte, accompanied with odir Doctors, sensyd c. the Kyng, and aftir made a litle Proposition, and welcomed hym; and then the Kyng took hys Horse ageyn, and rood by the Blackfriers, thoroughe the Towne, to the Queens Colledge, wher hys Grace was at that tyme lodgged, and ther rested the space of a Houre, and then did on hys Gowne and Man|tell of the Gartier, and all odir Knyghts of the Ordre there beyng present, gave their attendance in the Habit of the Ordre, as apperteyneth, and roode from the Kyngs Logginge to the Chappell of the Kyngs Colledge, whych was for the same cause ready appointed with Scochins c. as ys yerely accustom|ed. The Byshopp of Rochestre, beyng there Chaunceller, did the Divine Service, both the Even, the Day, both at Mattens, c. and sang the Mass of Requiem on the Morrow.
With these, we shall remember the same Soveraigns noble reception of Phil|lip King of Castile at Windesor, on Saturday the 31. of Ianuary, next ensuing the foresaid Feast, where he was Installed Knight of this most noble Order, the 5. of February following; which we find thus reported.
MS. penes W. le N. Cl. p. 88. vide Lib. N. p. 182. His Highness (King Henry the Seventh) having notice of the King of Ca|stile's approach, rode towards him a mile or two out of Windesor, and there in an Arable Field (where the King of Castile by the Kings pleasure tarried his comeing) met with him. And when the Kings Compaignie approched neer to the said King of Castyll, some stode on oon part, and summe on the odir part, and soo made a lanne, that the two Kyngs myght mete togeder; and when the King of Castyll perceyved the King, he toke of his hat, and in like man|ner the King toke off his, and with a loving and glad countenance, everych salued and embraced odir. The King with many odir good wordys welcom|ed him to his realme, and the King of Castyll with humble and lo|ving wordys smyling, thanked the King of the great honours that he did him, and alsoo for the grete plesirs and kyndness, that the King had shewed and doon unto him, sython his arivall, and at divers tymes before; and the King toke the King of Castyll on his left hand, and in good ordonance Rode to|wards the said Castyl of Windsor, the Officers of Armes beryng theyr Cots of Armes, and the Kings Trumpetts blew at the metyng, and soo by the way, c. the Earle of Derby barre the Swerd right before the King. Hit is to be noted, that there was many Noble men verely well appointed, both in Cloth of Gold and Goldsmyth werke, as my Lord Marquis, therle of Kent, therll of Derby, the Lord Henry Stafford, with many and divers odir Noble and Gentlemen, which all for the most part, were in Velvet, and oder silkes, right honorably apparelled; and when the Kings entred the furst yate of the Castyll, the Mynstrells and Shackuth play'd, and when they approached neere the place where they alighted, the King of Castyll tarryed, and wold have alighted before the King, but the King would not suffer him, but tooke hym forth with him, and soo lighted booth at oons, the King of Castyll sum|what got before the King, and in like Order, the Lords and odir Noble men, went before the Kings through the Nedar Galarie towards the Hall, and as the King perceyved that the King of Castyl's hatt was off, he toke of his hatt, and would not doe hit on againe, till the King of Castyl was almost ready to doo on his; and soo went up the Stayres, and passed through the upper Gala|rie to the Kings grete Chamber, which was richly hanged with Cloth of Arras, and a gret riche Bed in the same Chamber, where remayned the Knights and Esquires, and from thence to the 2^d. Chamber which was alsoo richly hanged, where remained Barons and Sic. Baronetts and from thence to the 3d Chamber, which was hanged with a very rich Arras, in the which there was a Cloth of Estate, and as rich a Bed as I have seen, where re|mained the Bishopps, Erlls and Officers that attended upon him; and from thence would have conveyed the King of Castill to the 4^t^h Chamber, which was all hangen with rich Cloth of Gold, the bordure above of Cremosin Velvett, and brodered upon the Kings Armes, with other the Kings devyces, as Roses, Portecolys c. but the King of Castill excused hym, and said, that the King should not take the paine to convoye him to his Logging, then the King shewed him, that all that he had passed through was and should be his Logging, and that the King thowght that place honoured by his com|myng, and called hym Sonne, and sayd that he was as welcome unto him, as though he had been his owne Naturall Sonne, and that his comyng was not only agreeable and joyfull unto him, but also to all his Subjects, and that that Rome, and all his Servants should be at the Com|mandement of the said King of Castill, and that he should thinke that he were come to his own Faders House, and soo desired him to goo at his ple|sir to Dyner, or to shuft hym: but when the King of Castill perceyved, that that greate Logginge was for hym, he thanked the King bare headed, for he had taken off his hood a little before, and sayd, that he was sorry that the

King had taken soo moch labour and payne for him, and for any words or thing that the King might doe, he wold convoye the King to his Lodging, and soo he did; and after the King had showed hym his Chamber, and would he should take no further paine, the King would somewhat have reconvoyed him, but the King of Castill would not suffer hitt, and soo they enter salued the one the odir and departed.
Another most magnificent Cavalcade, was that of King Henry the Eighth, and the Knights-Companions into Windesor, upon the 27. of May, in the 11. year of his Reign, being the day preceding the Eve of the Grand Feast (during which he begun his Reformation of the Statutes of the Order) which was ordered as fol|loweth.
MS. in Offic. Armor. [M. 17] fol. 25. On the 27. day of May being Friday, the King removed from Richemont towards his Castle of Windesor, and appointed them about one a Clock at Afternoon the same Friday, that all Noblemen, and oder which should wayte upon his Grace, should be ready between Richemont and Honslowe to attend upon him, and in consideration of a scarcyte and straitnes of Lodgings, as well as in avoyding and eschewing of the corrupt air, every Nobleman was taxed and rated to a certain number of Horse, that is to say, every Duke at 60 Horses, a Marquess at 50 Horses, every Earl at 40 Horses, every Baron at 30 Horses, every Knight of the Garter Batchellor at 20 Horses, and no odre Knight or Nobleman to have above 16 Horses, with their Carriages and all. And the King, thus right nobly companyed, rode to Colebroke, and at the Sign of the Katherines Wheel the King took his Courser, and his Henchmen richly apparelled followed, and also the Kings Horse of State led, Gartier King of Arms wore his Coat of Arms, the Lord Richard Fox Byshop of Win|chester and Prelate of the Order, with many odre great Estates, gave their at|tendance upon his Highness. The Queen and the Ladies, and their Com|paignies stood in the feild at the Towns end, besides the high way towards Windesor, to see the Kings noble Compagnie pass by, and then the Queen rode to the Fery next way to the Castle. The King rode by Slow, and so to Eton Colledge, where all they of the Colledge stood along, in manner of Pro|cession, receiving his Grace after their custom.
MS. The King entred Windesor with his great Horses, that is to say nine Coursers with nine Children of Honor upon them, and the Master of the Kings Horses upon another great Coursers back, following them, having and leading the Kings Horse of Estate in his hand, that is to say, a rich Courser with a rich Saddle, and trapped and garnished following the King, and so entred the Castle.
Ex Lib. praed. M. fol. 26. At the Castle Gate, the Ministers of the Colledge received the King with Pro|cession, and the King and Knights of the Ordre, at the Church dore, took their Mantles, and entred the Quere, and stood before their Stalls, till the Sove|raign had Offred and retorned to his Stall; then every Knight offered accord|ing to his, as by the Statute is ordained, and entred their Stallys, which was a long Ceremony or ever they had all offered, because of the great number of Knights that then was present, which were 19 in number besides the So|veraign.
MS. The Offring Doon, the Soveraign and all the foresaid Knights of the Ordre, (putting of their Mantles at the Church Dore) with the Prelate and odre Officers of the Ordre, as the Register, King of Armes, and Huishier of the Ordre, called the Black Rodd, borne by Sir William Compton, according to his Office of Hueshier; all thes rode before the King from the Colledge, unto the Quadrate of the Castle, and so conveyed his highness to his Lodging.
MS. The King had attendant on him, all his Officers of Armes, wearing their Coats of Armes; and all his Trumpetts, which blew the Entry of the King, all the tyme of the said Entry. The Lord Mountague, Henry Poole, hare the

Sword before the King, and Garter King of Armes rode next before the Sword, and Sir William Compton rode on his left hand, bearing the Black Rodd.
MS. p. 10.  11. Another Cavalcade offers it selfe here, namely that of King Philip and Queene Mary, who, after the Marriage solemnized betweene them at Win|chester the 15. of July 1554. arived at Windesor the 3. of Aug. following, where, at the nether end of Pescod-street, they were met by the Major of Windesor and his Brethren, and thence (the Trumpets sounding) they Pro|ceeded with the Officers of Arms before them, into th Castle, till they arrived at the West door of the Chapell, where was prepared a Form with Carpets and Cushons, and at their entry, the Byshop of Winchester sensed them.
The Queene having received the Mantle of the Order, with a reverential kiss from the Earl of Derby and Penbroke (to whom it had been presented by the Register of the Order) put it upon the King (assisted by the said Earles) the Earls of Arundell and Penbroke, receiving the Collar of the Order from Garter, presented it to the Queene (with the like Ceremony as was the Mantle) who put it about the Kings Neck.
Then all the Knights Companions put on their Mantles, within the Cha|pell Dore, and Proceeded into the Choire, and stood before their Stalls ac|cording to ancient Order. Then the Queene went into her Stall, taking the King by the Hand, and setting him in the same Stall with her, and af|ter a little space, they both descended and Proceeded up to the High Altar (the Queene keeping the right hand) and there Offred; after which, they retorned to their Stall, where they reposed themselves, while all the Knights Companions present did Offer, according to their Degree, and had taken their Stalls according to their ancient Custome. Then was Te Deum, and de Profundis sung, which being finished, they came all downe from their Stalls, and Proceeded to the Chapter House Dore, where the King, and all the Knights Companions put off their Mantles; and imediately going out of the Chapell, they tooke their Horses at the Chapell Dore, and Proceeded in Order, up to the Castle, where they reposed themselves that night.
In the last place, we may properly add the duty of the Colledge of the royal Chappel of St. George, touching their Reception of the Soveraign, upon special occasions; to wit, the manner to be observed by them in their Proceeding, to meet the Soveraign of the Order, at his first coming thither in his royal State, or in his return after some great Victory, or extraordinary Action performed, or some Foreign or unwonted Atchievement; according to the most decent manner there observed, by the most invincible Prince King Henry the Fifth, in the 9. year of his Reign: at which time he ordained, that this his Ceremonial should be firmly observed for ever, in the like cases. The same in Lib. N p. 307 effect is also appointed by King Henry the Eighth, only the direction is put into other words, and where the title of Custos is in the former Precedent used, in the latter, that of the Dean is inserted instead thereof, and is as followeth.
Regist. Char. tac. fol. 9. b. In the first place, a Form or Bench decently adorned, being placed after the usual manner, in the midst between the Chappel of the Colledge and the uttermost gate of the Castle, the Custos and Canons are there to meet with all the Officers of the Col|ledge, each in their proper order and Habits, having a handsom Cross carried before them, with two Torch-bearers, and two Censers. The Register of the Or|der bearing the Kings Mantle, is to present it to his Majesty, who being therewith invested by the Custos, assisted by the senior Canon, the King is to be Censed five times, and then taking the Cross to kiss, from the hand of the Custos, or some one of the more eminent Prelates then present, he is to be conducted, in way of Proces|sion, to the Chappel, the Knights-Companions present vested with their Mantles, go|ing orderly immediately before the King, until he hath arrived at the Faldstool be|fore the high Altar, for that purpose adorned, and there kneeling, till the end of the Responsory, to be sung by the Choire, at his arrival, by appointment of the Prae|centor, to wit, Honor Virtus, or some such like, answerable to the Affair in hand,

with a Prayer also correspondant And then kissing the venerable part of the Cross of our Lord, and the Heart of St. George, he is to offer, and then to betake him|self to his Stall, and there to sit, till the Knights of the Order have also offered, each in their turns, and placed themselves again in their Stalls, and until the Anthem De Profundis hath been sung by the Canons, with the accustomed Prayers; then the Knights-Companions are to descend from their Stalls into the Choire, each of them bowing himself towards the Altar, every time they so come down, and thence pro|ceed through the middle of the Choire,, unto the place where the Chapter is to be celebrated, at the hour of Tierce, the Soveraign of the Order following in the last place, as in all other Processions, and consequently in his absence, his Deputy do|ing the same. These things thus performed, they are to get up on Horseback, and conduct the Soveraign into the place appointed by the Statutes; and the Proceeding being finished, the Bells are to ring at convenient seasons.
Ecclesiastical Processions.As touching Ecclesiastical Processions, they are of great antiquity in the Chri|stian Church; some are ordinary and stative, other extraordinary or indictive.
The Ordinary, are those celebrated on Ascension-day, mentioned by Hom. 28.  Sm. ad Ascen. Dm. St. Chri|sostom, and on the Purification, by Serm. 172.  173. St. Austin, Rabanus, St. Bernard, and divers others. The Extraordinary are commanded and appointed by authority on se|veral occasions; such was that which Lib. 7. Hist. Eccl. cap. 10. Sozimus makes mention of, at the transla|tion of the Reliques of St. Miletus. So also that of Ruffinus li 2. c. 5. Socrat. l. 3. c. 19. Theod. li. 3. cap 9. the Christians of Antioch (when Iulian the Apostate commanded the Coffin of St. Babilas to be removed) who went a Procession with their Women and Children, rejoicing and singing Davids Psalms, and removed the Reliques of St. Babylas, from Daphney to Antioch.
A like Procession do we find celebrated, within the most Noble Order of the Garter, on Collect Tho. Wriothesley Mil Garter. penes W le Neve Cl. p. 3. Wednesday in Easter week, being the 27. of March 1504. at Green|wich, upon reception of that noble Relique the Collect Tho. Wriothesley Mil Garter. penes W le Neve Cl. p. 3. right Leg of St. George, sent to King Henry the Seventh, then Soveraign, from the Cardinal of Rowen being Lega, by a Chaplain of his own, an Augustine and Abbot ofby Meaux; which was most solemnly ordered in the following manner.
Collect Tho. Wriothesley Mil Garter. penes W le Neve Cl. p. 3.First, as the Oratour of the Legat was landed, which landed before the Fryers yat of Greenwiche, he did on a surplis and a cope, holding St. George's Leg in his hand, which was goodly garnished in Silver, like a Knights Leg arm|ed with a gilt Spor, c. and immediately upon his arrival, there went to meet the said Relique, first the Kings Chappel, all in Copis, with Cross c. and on eve|ry side of the Chappel, were divers Yoemen of the Garde in their beten Cotys of Goldsmith work, beryng certain Torches brenning, then the Bishop of Chestre in Pontificalibus, the Dean on his left hand, and on every side of them certain of the Officers of Arms, then followed the Kings of Arms, and next them the Knights of the Order, beryng their Mantle and Collers of the Ordre, that is to say, the Marquiss of Dorset, the Erll of Surrey, the Erll of Shrewysbyry, the Erll of Es|sex, the Lord Dawbeny the Kings Chamberlaine, the Lord Herbert, Sir Thomas Lovell Treasurer, and Sir Rich. Gilford Controller of the Household, and next the Knights of the Order, followed the odir Lords and Noblemen, after their Estates and Degrees in gret nombre; and when the Bishop approched neer the Le|gats Oratour, which was assisted by two Doctours, beyng Chappellyns to the King. The Bishop censed the Relique, and then the Legats Oratour, beryng the Said saint George's Leg, went between the Bishop and the Dean, and returned in licke or|dre till they came to the Kings Chappel, where the Leg was set on the high Aul|tre, and then the Quire sange O George,Pag. 4. c. that doon the Knights and Officers went up into the Galery, and there did off their Mantles, and the Officers of Arms their Cotys of Arms, and from thence all the Noblemen went into the Kings grete Chambre, to attend upon his Grace, which immediately went to Mass, and at Of|fering time his Highness kissed and offered the Leg, and so the second Relique re|mained in the Kings Chappel; and after Mass the King returned to his gret Cham|bre where he dyned, c. with Gods blessing and Saint George.
Again, of Processions some are called Synod. August. cap. 20.  cap. 23. Lugubres, i. e. mournful; which seems to us to be properly termed Supplications, being to implore some help, or to avert some evil impending, wherein Letanies were also used, as that of The dous the younger, who instituted a Letany to supplicate for fair weather, and a mild temper of the Air; wherein, as Lib 14. cap 2. Nicephorus saith, the Supplicants went in Pro|cession with Hymns and Adorations, Theodosius himself going before them in a mean Habit, singing of Psalms; and thereupon the face of the Heavens chang|ed, the troubled Air grew calm and serene, and plenty of all things ensued; and whilst the Letany in our Book of Common-Prayer was used, the Grand Pro|cession of the Order might well be cast among the Lugubres, and in some places of the An. 28  30. Eliz.  14. Iac. R. Blue Book we see it is so called; being only upon this occa|sion sung walking; See Dr. Tay|lor's Preface to his Collection of Offices. a gesture more anciently used, than the posture of kneeling or standing.
Others are called Letae, i. e. joyful; which are to give thanks for blessings re|ceived: And such is the nature of the Hymn, appointed (by the Soveraign and Knights-Companions command) to be sung in the Grand Procession of the Order, an. 15. Car. 2. instead of the Letany, and since continued.
Having immediately before delivered somewhat of Proceedings, Military, Civil, and Ecclesiastical; we shall now pass on to the Grand Procession of this most Noble Order it self, which consists of persons Military, Civil, and Ecclesiasti|cal: The Military are the Soveraign, the Knights-Companions, and Alms-Knights; the Civil are the Officers of the Order, Officers of Arms, and other Attendant; and lastly, the Ecclesiastical are the Prebends of the Colledge, the Choire-men and Choristers. And in reference to this magnificent Solemnity (whether it fell out to be celebrated at Windesor, or at any other place, where the Soveraign kept his Court) we are to consider, the (1.) Time, when this great Ceremony took its beginning; next, the proper (2.) Place or Processional way; then the (3.) Or|der and Manner of the Solemnity; and lastly, the (4.) Pomp and State thereof.
The Grand Procession hath been always celebrated,1. The time when the Grand Proces|sion begins. in the morning of the Feast day of St. George, or upon such other day, as the Soveraign hath appointed to hold the same by Prorogation; but as to the instant of time when it began, we find it divers and uncertain; but those variations make no very great diffe|rence, having been ordered and appointed with considerations had to conve|niency, and at such a part of the Church Service, as was conceived most proper, and generally after the end of the last Collect, appointed for the morning, in our Book of Common-Prayer, immediately before the Letany. Nevertheless an. 6. Eliz. the Feast being then held at Windesor, we find it began MS. fol. pen. W.D.N. f. 15. a. presently after the Te Deum was sung, and an. 20. of the said Queens Reign (at Greenwich) MS. pen. G.O.Y pag. 114 after the reading of the second Lesson. Again an. 22. Iac. R. it is said to be|gin Lib. R. p. 20. when the second Morning Service was celebrating, and almost half done. And to come neerer our times, the Grand Procession set forward an. 8. Car. 1. when Collect. W. le N. Cl. the first Service was finished, and an. 17. Car. 1. Palmers Iourn. p. 40. after the Sermon. But at the Grand Feast solemnized at Windesor in the 13. year of the present Sove|raign, and since, it took beginning at the most usual and accustomed time, viz. when the Prelate (then officiating at the Altar) came to that part of the Common Prayer where the Letany was next to begin. Who there making a pause, was conducted from the Altar by the Serjeant of the Vestry, down to his Seat.
We come next to the second consideration,2. The Pro|cessional way. which is the compass of the Pro|ceeding, or the Processional way; and that we observe, not to have been always one and the same at Windesor; for sometimes we find it confin'd within the walls of St. George's Chappel, but at other times enlarged through the lower Court of the Castle (in divers places of the Registers called also the Church-yard) a few memorials in both cases are left unto us, though none of very ancient date: as An. 15. Iac. R. Lib. C. p. 190. The Soveraign and whole assembly of the Knights-Companions, going out at the West door (of the Chappel) in remarkable pomp and order, pro|ceeded about the bounds of the Church-yard; that is, (as is elsewhere of the same Procession more particularly exprest) MS. penes . W. G. from the Choire through the middle Ile (or Nave of the Chappel) out at the West door, down to the Castle Gate, so through

the passage into the Cloyster, and by the Chapter-house door again into the Choire. To which purpose, doth the Pag. 41. Red Book briefly describe the passage of the Grand Procession an. 4. Car. 1. and yet more particularly, the Grand Procession (cele|brated at Windesor in the 15. year of the present Soveraign's Reign) passed down the Middle Ile of the Chappel, through the West door, and so along the lower Ward of the Castle, neer unto the Castle Gate; from whence ascending to|wards the Alms-Knights old Lodgings, unto, and through the passage, between the East end of the Chappel, and the Tomb-house, into the Cloyster, it entred in|to the Chappel, by the door neer the Chapter-house, and from thence proceeding down the North Isle unto the West door, and up through the aforesaid Middle Ile, it re-entred the Choire.
But when the Soveraign hath pleased to shorten this great Ceremony, which, either through his Lib. R. p. 20. indisposition of health (as an. 22. Iac. R. when being so ex|treamly taken with the Gout, that he was Lib. R. p. 20. carried, during the Grand Procession, in a Chair) or, upon other like occasion he has sometimes done, then the Grand Proceeding hath passed out at the East door of the Chappel, and going through part of the Church-yard, hath entred the Chappel again at the South door, and so into the Choire; or else Lib. R. p. 62. through the South door, and returning by the Cloyster, at the East end of the Chappel, hath passed thence to the West door, then up the Nave, and so ascended again into the Choire, as an. 6. of the same King.
Moreover, upon foulness of Weather, the Grand Procession hath been cele|brated within the coverture of the Chappel, as MS. penes Edw. Faucon|bridge gen. an. 1. Car. 1. But more fully for the same cause (abundance of Rain) doth the Register observe, that an. 9. Car. 1. it Lib. R. pag. 85. pass'd from the Choire to the West door of the Chappel, whence turning to the left, it proceeded through the South Ile, and coming about by the East door, de|scended at length by the North Ile again to the West door, and thence through the Nave of the Chappel it returned into the Choire.
And this Ex Collec Io. Vincent. gen. Processional way was in like necessity made use of, both by the Duke of Norfolk, the Soveraign's Lieutenant for the Feast holden an. Ex Collec Io. Vincent. gen. 5. Eliz. as also by the present Soveraign, an. Lib. Carol. pag. 29. 13. Car. 2.
And because it is necessary to know, which is the way where the Grand Pro|cession hath usually passed, in other places honored with the celebration of the Feast of St. George, aswell as the Castle of Windesor, it will be requisite here to describe the same, and set them down; and first we shall shew how it lies at Whitehall, the whole passage having been (both MS. penes G.O.Y. p. 113.  123. formerly and ofCollect. W. le N. Cl. late) strewed with Rushes upon this occasion.
Here, the Grand Procession sets forth from the MS. penes W. D. N. middle of the Choire (as in all other places) and so on, to the outward Chappel door, thence through the Hall, and the left entrance of the Skreen towards the Thames, then to the Hall Porch, and so along on the right hand of the great Court (sometimes called the Vtter, or outwardmost Court of the Palace, as an. MS. penes G.O.Y. loco cit. vide etiam Col|lect. R. C. Cl. 2.3.5.7. and 26. Eliz. and Lib. R. p. 94.  107. 10.  11. Car. 1.) towards, and beyond the Signet Office, then turning on the left hand to|wards the Court Gate, and yet on the left hand (on that side of the Court which formerly lay towards the Terrace, but now neer the covered Walk) it passeth in at the Hall Porch, and enters the Hall at the right entrance of the Skreen, and thence into the old Chappel, and so into the New.
Where note, that in all solemn Processions, where the return is to the same place, the regular turning is on the left, not right hand; and this the present Soveraign well understood, when at the Grand Feast held at Whitehall, an. 19. Car 2. the Foot Guards having made a Lane on the left hand of the great Court, along by the covered walk, for the Proceeding to pass through, and a great part of the Proceeding had gone that way, so soon as the Soveraign came to the steps descending into the Court, (for by reason the Hall was shut up, being imployed for Masks and Scenes, the Proceeding passed from the Chappel up Stairs into the Guard-Chamber, and so into the Court) He discovering the Error, caused all to come back, and proceed on the right hand of the Court, towards the Hall Porch and Signet Office, and make their return upon the left hand, according to the right rule of turnings in solemn Proceedings.
At Greenwich we find the Grand Processional way an. 20. Eliz. MS. penes W. D. N. led out of the Chappel, through the Hall, beneath the Skreen, and thence going round about the 2d. Court, came in at the South Door, in the upper end of the Hall, and so along the Hall again into the Chappel.
And when the Feast was celebrated at the City of York an. 17 Car. 1. The Palmers Iourn. pag. 40 Grand Proceeding passed out of the Choire, and marched round the inside of the Church only, and then returned back into the Choire, as it is usually obser|ved at Windesor, in rainy weather. Once, viz. an. 20 H. 7. the Grand Proces|sion was solemnized in St. Pauls Church London, of which the Black Book of the Order gives but this short account. Pag. 177. The most Illustrious Soveraign of the ar|ter solemnly made his Procession in St. Pauls Church London. But Ex ips. Au|eg. an old me|morial calls this the Grand Procession, and notes it to pass about the Church as the Custom was, Ex ips. Au|eg. to which solemnity there flockt as great a multitude of Peo|ple, as had been seen in that Church, at any time before.
Lastly, The way through which the Grand Procession passeth, (wheresoever Celebrated) is fenced in by the Yeomen of the Guard, and the Knights-Compa|nions Attendants and Servants, who standing on both sides, make a spatious Lane for it to pass through, and keep off the Crowd, from pressing upon it.
The third consideration relating to the Grand Procession,3. The Order in Proceeding. is the Order and Manner thereof; and herein (as to particulars) the more ancient times afford us very little light. Nevertheless, that the same hath been Celebrated (even from the Institution of the Order) as part of those Ceremonies used to set forth the solemnity of St. Georges Feast, we have collective Evidence enough; and that, not only at Windesor, but other places, where the Anniversary of St. George hath been kept and observed.
To proceed then; What the Order of this Ceremony anciently was, may be collected from that which an Old Relator saith (where he sets down the order of the solemn Procession made the Ex Lib. M. 17. in Offic. Armor. pag. 27. 29. of May, an. 5 H. 8.) namely, that it was Ordered Ex Lib. M. 17. in Offic. Armor. pag. 27. as of old time accustomed. Now the Proceeding he speaks of, was marshalled in this manner.
Ex Lib. M. 17. in Offic. Armor. pag. 27. First went the Alms-Knights, two and two on either side the Choire, then the Officers of Armes, next after whom, came the Knights-Companions, after them the Officers of the Order, and then went the Prelate of the Order, bearing the Heart of St. George, under a Canopy honorably assisted, four Noblemen at the Corners bearing each a Torch, and last of all the Soveraign.
And though here is no mention made of any Ecclesiasticks that joined in this Proceeding, yet if we consider, that throughout this Grand Ceremony, some part of the Divine Office of the Church was Sung (which until of late was Gi|ther the Letany, or Te Deum,) it cannot be supposed, that the Chaplains and Priests were left out.
And to cleer this doubt, we have happily met with another Old Observator, who informs us, That the Ex lib. L. 1. in Offic. Arm. pag. 17. Priests not only went in the Grand Procession, but had a place assigned in it, where the Gentlemen of the Soveraigns Chappel and Choire of Windesor, now go.
But it must be confest, that the Records of the Order, are defective in this particular relating to the Grand Procession, and speak not otherwise of it, then in general, or at most, take notice but of some of those Degrees, that attend|ed in it, and this, but of late time neither; amongst which an. 23 Eliz. it is said, that Lib. C. p. 8. they all Proceeded in order, as the Custom was, the Soveraign follow|ing in the Rear of the Procession.
As to Place and Precedency, not only among them who Proceed here in Bo|dies, but also those that walk singly by themselves, it is the same, in all points, with the Soveraign Proceeding to the Chappel, on the Eve of the Grand Feast: (Concerning which we have Chap. 20. Sect. 2. already spoken largely enough) only here are some Persons added, which go not in that, namely the Gentlemen and Choristers of the Soveraigns Chappel at Whitehall, and the Petty Canons, Vicars, and Chori|sters of Windesor; the whole Order is as followeth.
The Morning Service having proceeded to the end of the second Lesson, and the Prelate conducted by the Serjeant of the Vestry from the Altar to his Seat, with usual Reverences,
The Alms-Knights rise from their Seats and pass to the middle of the Choire, and after their accustomed Reverences, go up to the sides of the Altar.
Next, in like manner, do the Officers of Arms pass up.
Hereupon Garter riseth from his Seat, and makes his Reverences, then wa|ving his Rod, summons the junior Knights-Companions to descend.
Whilst they and the rest of the Knights are leaving their Stalls, with usual Reverences, the Gentlemen of the Chappel, Petty Canons and Vicars of Windesor put on Copes, and make themselves ready to proceed.
Then the Knights-Companions being all come down, and having made their accustomed Reverences, stand each under his proper Stall.
Then the Black-Rod, Garter, and Register rise, and after Reverences made, stand before their Forms.
So do the Chancellor and Prelate.
This done, the Alms-Knights came down from the Altar, and passing into the middle of the Choire, make again their double Reverences, and proceed out of the Choire.
After them, all the Choristers pass in a body to the middle of the Choire, and having made their double Reverences (so do all that follow) proceed forth, two and two.
So do the Vicars of Windesor.
Next four of the Petty Canons come from their Seats, into the middle of the Choire, and there begin to sing the Hymn.
Then followeth the Serjeant of the Vestry, bearing his gilt Rod.
After whom, the Gentlemen of the Chappel at Whitehall.
Next, the Verger of Windesor Chappel, bearing his Silver Rod.
Then the Prebends of Windesor.
After whom, the Officers of Arms come down from the Altar, and pass on.
Then the Knights-Companions, the juniors first.
Then the Black-Rod, Garter, and Register.
The Chancellor and Prelate.
The Nobleman that bears the Sword of State.
Then the Soveraign above in his Stall, makes a Reverence towards the Altar, and being descended, another below, then passeth out and enters under the Canopy, which waits him at the Choire door, having his Train carried up; the Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold, if he be not a Knight of the Order, at|tending somewhat behind the side of the Canopy, on the Soveraign's right hand, and the Vice-Chamberlain at the like distance on his left, for so they waited in the Grand Procession an. 23. Car. 2.
And lastly, the Band of Pensioners, who attend in Guard on each side the So|veraign and Knights-Companions, with their Captain in the head of them.
In this order (at this day) they proceed with great devotion, the whole Choire singing the Office appointed, which heretofore was the Letany; but that Suppli|cational Procession, is now converted into a Hymn of Thanksgiving, composed by the Reverend Doctor Brune Ryves, the present Dean of Windesor, and Regi|ster of the Garter, at the command of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions in Chapter, held the 17. of April an. 13. Car. 2. which follows here.

An Hymn to be sung in the Procession at St. George's Feast instead of the Letany.
Iudg. 5. HEar, O ye Kings; give ear, O ye Princes: I, even I will sing unto the Lord; I will sing praises unto the God of Israel.
The Lord is my Rock,Psal. 18.2. and my Fortress, and my Deliverer, my God, my Strength, in whom I trust: my Buckler, the Horn of my Salvation, and my high Tower.
The Lord is my Strength,Exod. 15.2. and my Song: and he is become my Salvation.
The Right hand of the Lord is become Glorious in Power: The Right hand  of the Lord hath dashed in pieces the Enemy.
In the greatness of thy Excellency thou hast overthrown them, that rose up  against thee: who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the Gods: who is like un|to thee, glorious in Holiness, fearful in praises, doing Wonders.
Sing aloud therefore unto God,Psal. 81.1. our Strength: make a Ioyful Noise to the God of Jacob.

CHORVS.
I will sing unto the Lord: for he hath triumphed glo|riously: Exod. 15.1.
To day will we sing this Song, We have a strong City: Sal|vation will God appoint for Walls, and Bulwarks: Isay 26.1.

The Princes of the People are gathered together,Psal. 47.9. even the People of the God of Abraham: for the Shields of the Earth belong unto God: he is greatly exalted.
We will therefore rehearse the righteous Acts of the Lord:Iudg. 5.11. even his righteous Acts towards the Inhabitants of the Villages of Israel.
We will not hide them from our Children,Psal. 78.4. shewing to the generations to come the praises of the Lord: and his Strength, and his wonderful Works, that he hath done.
That the generation to come might know them, even the Children, which  should be born: who shall arise, and declare them to their Children.
That they may set their Hope in God: and not forget the works of God, but  keep his Commandments.
Sing unto the Lord therefore,Psal. 30.3. O ye Saints of his: and let us give thanks for a remembrance of his Holiness.
Sing aloud unto God,Psal. 81:1. our Strength: make a Ioyful Noise unto the God of Israel.

CHORVS.
The Lord is my Strength, and my Song: and he is be|come my Salvation: Exod. 15.2.

We will be glad,Psal. 31.7. and rejoyce in thy mercy, O Lord: for thou hast considered our trouble, and hast known our Soul in Adversities.
For our Sins thou didst cast our Crown to the Ground:Psal. 07.40. thou powredst con|tempt upon our Princes, and causedst them to wander in the Wilderness, where there is no way.
Thou gavest us like Sheep appointed for slaughter:Psal. 44.11. and didst scatter us among the Nations.
Thou madest us a reproach to our Neighbours: ae Scorn, and a Derision to them, that are round about us.
Thou madest us a By-word among the Heathen: a shaking of the Head among  the People.
Thou didst deliver thy Strength into Captivity,Psal. 78.612 and thy Glory into the Ene|mies hand.
Thou gavest thy People over also unto the Sword: and wst wroth with thine  Inheritance.
Nevertheless,Psal. 106.44. thou didst regard our Afflictions: and heardest our Cry, and didst repent, according to the Multitude of thy Mercies.
But,Psal. 32.7. as the Lord was our hiding-place, and did preserve us in the midst of our trouble: so at last he hath compassed us about with Songs of Deliverance.
For the Lord did awake,Psal. 78.65. as a man out of sleep: and like a Mighty man, that shouteth by reason of Wine.
His anger endureth,Psal. 30.5. but a Moment; in his favour is life: Weeping may en|dure for a Night; but Ioy cometh in the Morning.
God hath turned our Mourning into Dancing: he hath put off our Sack-cloth, and girded us with Gladness;
 To the end, that our Tongues may sing praises unto thee, O Lord; and not be silent: O Lord our God, we will give thanks unto thee for Ever.

CHORVS.
The Salvation of Israel is come out of Sion, the Lord hath brought back the Captivity of his People: Therefore shall Iacob rejoyce, and Israel shall be glad: Psal. 14.7.
O! that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wondrous Works to the Children of Men: Psal. 107.8.

Psal. .4.Thou, O God, hast maintained my Right, and my Cause: thou satest in the Throne, judging right.
 Thou hast rebuked the Rebellious: thou hast destroyed the Wicked; and hast put out their Name for Ever and Ever.
Psal. 37.35.I have seen the Wicked in great power: and spreading himself like a green Bay-tree.
 Yet he passed away, and, lo! he was not: I sought him, but he could not be found.
 Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the End of that Man is Peace.
Psal. 85.1.Lord, thou hast been favourable unto thy Land: Thou hast brought back the Captivity of thy People.
 Thou hast forgiven the Iniquity of thy People: Thou hast covered all their Sin.
 Thou hast taken away all thy Wrath: Thou hast turned thy self from the fierceness of thine Anger.
Psal. 18.49.Therefore will we give thanks unto thee, O Lord; among the People: and sing Praises unto thy Name in the great Congregation.
Psal. 81.1.Sing aloud unto God, our Strength: make a Ioyful Noise unto the God of Israel.

CHORVS.
O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his Mercy endureth for Ever.
Let the Redeemed of the Lord say so: whom he hath redeemed from the hand of the Enemy: Psal. 106.1, 2.

Psal. 46.8.O come hither, and behold the Works of the Lord: what Desolations he hath made in the Earth.
 He maketh Wars to cease unto the ends of the Earth: He breaketh the Bow, and cutteth the Spear in sunder, and burneth the Charriots in the fire.
Psal. 65.7.He hath stilled the noise of the Seas: the noise of their Waves, and the Tu|mult of the People.
Psal. 68.30.He rebuked the Company of the Spear-men, the Multitude of the Bulls with the Calves of the People: till every one submitteth himself with pieces of Silver: He hath scattered the People, that delight in War.
Psal. 75.3.He hath broken the Arrows of the Bow: the Shield, the Sword, and the Battel.
Psal. 98.1.O! come therefore, let us sing unto the Lord a new Song; for he hath done marvailous things: His right Hand, and his holy Arm hath gotten him the Victory.
Psal. 60.4.For he hath given a Banner to them, that fear him: that it may be displayed because of the Truth.

CHORVS.
The Lord is a Man of War: the Lord is his Name: Exod. 15.3.
The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Iacob is our refuge: Psal. 46.11.
O! clap your Hands therefore, all ye People: shout unto God with the voice of Triumph: Ps. 47.1.

Great deliverance giveth he to the King:Psal. 18.50. and shewed mercy to his Anointed, and to his Seed for evermore.
Then he made him,Iudg. 5.13. that remained, to have Dominion over the Nobles among the People: the Lord made him have Dominion over the Mighty.
And he shall be as the Light of the Morning,2 Sam. 23.4. when the Sun riseth, even a Morning without Clouds: as the tender Grass springing out of the Earth, by clear shining after Rain.
Thou,Psal. 18.43. O Lord, that hast delivered him from the strivings of his People: Thou, that hast made him head of those, that rose up against him:
Let his Glory be still great in thy Salvation:Psal. 21.5. increase daily that Honour, and Majesty, which thou hast laid upon him.
Fasten him as a Nail in a Sure place:Esay 22.23. and let him be for a Glorious Throne to his Father's house.
And hang upon him all the Glory of his Father's house: the Off-spring, and  the Issue. And let all the People say Amen.

CHORVS.
The Lord hear him in the day of his trouble; the Name of the God of Iacob defend him: Psal. 20.1.
Send him help from the Sanctuary, and strengthen him out of Sion. 2.
Grant him according to his own Heart's desire: and ful|fill all his Counsel. 3.
We will rejoyce in thy Salvation, O Lord, and in the name of our God will we set up our Banners: The Lord fulfill all his Petitions. 4.

The King shall joy in thy Strength,Psal. 21.1. O Lord: and in thy Salvation how greatly shall he rejoyce?
Thou hast given him his heart's desire: and hast not withheld the request of  his Lips.
For thou preventest him with the Blessings of Goodness: Thou hast set a Crown  of pure Gold upon his head.
Thou hast made him most Blessed for ever: Thou hast made him exceeding  glad with thy Countenance.
For the King trusteth in the Lord: and, through the mercy of the most high, he shall not miscarry.
Thou wilt prolong the King's life:Psal. 61.. and his Years, as many Generations.

CHORVS.
O satisfie him with a long life: and shew him thy Sal|vation: Psal. 91.16.
Keep thy mercy with him for evermore: and let thy Covenant stand fast with him: Psal. 89.28.
Make his Seed also to endure for Ever: and his Throne as the days of Heaven. 29.
Cloath his Enemies with shame; but upon himself let his Crown flourish: Psal. 132.18.

How excellent is thy loving kindness,Psal. 36.7. O Lord: therefore the Children of men put their trust in the Shadow of thy Wings.
Whom have we in Heaven,Psal. 73.25. but Thee, and there is none upon Earth, that we desire, besides Thee.
Many,Psal. 40.5. O Lord our God, are thy wonderous Works, which thou hast done: and thy Thoughts, which are to usward, they cannot be reckoned up in order to Thee. If we should declare, and speak of them: they are more, then can be Numbered.
Psal. 68.35.O Lord our God, thou art terrible out of thy holy places: The God of Israel is he, that giveth strength and power unto his people. Blessed be God.

CHORVS.
Rejoyce, rejoyce, O ye People: for the Lord will be merciful unto his Land, and to his People: Deut. 32.43.
The Lord will give Strength unto his People: the Lord will bless his People with Peace: Psal. 29.11.
For who is God, save the Lord? or who is a Rock, save our God? Psal. 18.31.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting: and let all the people say Amen, Praise ye the Lord: Psal. 106.48.
Glory be to the Father, c. Amen.


The Grand Procession, when it hath been celebrated at Whitehall (or else|where beside Windesor) is for the most and principal part, ordered after the foresaid manner, as may be seen by the following Scheme.

Serjeant of the Vestry with his gilt Rod.
Choristers, in Surplices.
Gentlemen of the Chappel, in Copes.
Sub-Dean, in a Cope.
Dean of the Chappel, in a Cope.
Officers of Arms.
Knights-Companions.
Officers of the Order.
The Sword.
Soveraign, under a Canopy, with his Train carried up.
The Pensioners, as before.

But in what this Grand Procession differs from that celebrated at Windesor, we shall here note.

1. Here the Serjeant of the Vestry leads the Proceeding, and is followed by the Choristers.
2. The Prebends and Choire of Windesor, and the Alms-Knights are here wanting.
3. The Sub-Dean, and Dean of the Chappel, are Collect. W. le N. Cl. taken in, and proceed next to the Gentlemen of the Chappel, to whom sometimes the Soveraign's Collect. W. le N. Cl. Almoner hath joined himself.
4. Whilst the Knights-Companions are descending from their Stalls, the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Gen|tlemen of the Chappel go into the Vestry, to put on their Copes; but the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Dean of the Chappel hath his brought into the Choire, which he puts on below under his Seat.
5. Lastly, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the MS. fol. pen. praef. W. D. N. fol. 20. b. 4. The State and Pomp whereof. Ladies Attendants went with the Pensioners on either side the Soveraign.

The State and Pomp of this Grand Procession, appears both solemn and mag|nificent to the Eyes of the beholders, since the glory thereof is much augment|ed, by the (1.) splendor of the Soveraign's Apparel, Canopy, and Train; the (2.) Lustre in which the Knights-Companions shine; the (3.) various Habits of the rest of the Proceeding; the (4.) rich Apparel of the Retinue attending there|upon; and (5.) lastly, the solemnity of the vocal Musick.
We have already drawn into this Chap. 7. discourse,Soveraign's Under Habit. an account of the Soveraign's whole Habit of the Order, and set forth the glory of his Robes, the richness of his Garter, Collar, and George; what falls to have place here, is only the Apparel

or Vnder Habit, provided for him against this high Festival, and this was here|tofore made of Cloth of Gold, Cloth of Baudkin, and other the richest mate|rials, which in their several times were most in fashion and use; the same be|ing set out and adorned with costly Embroideries of Gold, Pearl, and precious Stones, and sutable thereunto were the ornamental Trimmings.
If we look so far back, as to the time of the Institution of the Order, we shall see, that the Founder caused to be made for him, against the firt Feast of St. George, these Garments following. A Ex Corpo. Io. Coke Cler. mag|na Gadrob.  an. 21. ad an. 23. E. 3. m. 9. Ioump containing 4 Ells of Blue Taf|faty Ex Corpo. Io. Coke Cler. mag|na Gadrob.  an. 21. ad an. 23. E. 3. m. 9. powdred with Garters, the Buckles and Pendants Silver and gilt, and no less than Ex Corpo. Io. Coke Cler. mag|na Gadrob.  an. 21. ad an. 23. E. 3. m. 9. 72 Buckles were used about it, and as many Pendants to adorn it. As also another Ex Corpo. Io. Coke Cler. mag|na Gadrob.  an. 21. ad an. 23. E. 3. m. 9. Ioump of Blue Sattin, containing 3 Ells, powdred with Ex Corpo. Io. Coke Cler. mag|na Gadrob.  an. 21. ad an. 23. E. 3. m. 9. Blue Gar|ters, and fitted with as Ex Corpo. Io. Coke Cler. mag|na Gadrob.  an. 21. ad an. 23. E. 3. m. 9. many Silver and gilt Buckles and Pendants as the former. Besides these, there was also provided for him a Mem. 11. Sattin Coat, a Cloak and Hood, with Mem. 11. 100 Garters, fitted with 100 Silver Buckles, as many Silver Pendants, and Mem. 11. 300 Bars of Silver.
But let this suffice; for in recounting things of this nature, the task would be endless, and the satisfaction but to a few: Nevertheless those who are curious to be informed, of the Robes and Habits of our Kings, throughout the last f Centuries, may meet with sufficient satisfaction (even in the qualities and parti|culars of all the Materials) among the Accompts of the Great Wardrobe, in the Exchequer at Westminster.
The Registers of the Order have in them but light touches of this concern, and not frequent neither; yet such as they afford shall here follow. Upon Saint George's day an. 13. Eliz. it is noted, that the Lib. C. p. 62. Soveraign wearing the Collar of the Order, and the rest of the Habit, was pleased, to the great applause of the Spectators, and satisfaction of all Strangers that were there, to grace the Grand Procession it self with her own presence. In the 26. year of her Reign, she went the Grand Procession, wearing the whole Habit of the Order, and a MS. pen. G. O. Y. pag. 113. Dia|dem of Pearl on her head; and an. 28. Eliz. Lib. C. p. 103. being gorgeously attired, in the rich Habit of the Order, went about the Palace (at Whitehall) according to the custom, in Processional Pomp and Supplication.
But it must be confest, that this Queen (and only she, of all the Soveraigns of this most Noble Order) did sometimes publickly proceed to the Chappel (aswell as to the great Closet) and also passed in the Grand Procession, without wearing the whole Habit of the Order, as in the MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 6. 8. Collect. R. C. Cl. pag. 9. 27. Ex Collect. 29. and praef. W. le N. Cl. 30. years of her Rign. the Feast day of St. George, being then held at Greenwich, and so did she the MS. fol. pene W. D. N. fol. 27. following year, when it was kept at Whitehall.
But this may admit of some excuse; first as a Woman, she thought her self not so strictly tyed, to the exact observation of the Rules of so martial an Order; next, notice is often taken of her indisposition of health, at such times, and the whole Habit, being thought a little too heavy and cumbersom, she only wore the An. 4. Eliz. Collar of the Order. Howbeit her other Apparel, splendid attire, and the Lustre of her Jewels, (at these Solemnities) exceeded both in richness and glo|ry, all that she wore at other times.
Among those things which contribute to the Pomp and State of this great Ceremony,The Canopy. the rich Canopy is not the least; which is born by Knights and Gen|tlemen of Quality, over the Soveraign's head, while he passeth in the Grand Pro|cession, and till he return to the Choire door.
That which was carried an. 18. Eliz. while this solemn Ceremony was in mo|tion, was a certain Ex ed. MS. penes raefat. G. O. Y. p. 12. round Canopy of green Taffaty, and born on the sunny side, to shadow the Soveraign from the heat of the Sun: by which description it should rather seem to be an Vmbrella, than a Canopy; for generally Canopies are of another Figure, viz. an oblong square, and made either of Silk and Gold rich Cloth of Gold, or Cloth of Tissue; and to sute with both, it is sometimes called Lib. C. p. 178.185. Vmbrella aurea, Ibid. p. 190. Vmbraculum aureum, Ibid. p. 99. or Canopium vel Coelum portatile auri, to which there are affixed Lib. R. p. 30. 6 Golden Staves, wherewith it is supported.
The persons appointed to carry the Canopy an. 11. H. 8. were MS. 4 Knights of the Body, when 4 other Knights bore 4 Wax Tapers; but since, they are the

Collect. W. le N. Cl. Gentlemen of the Soveraign's Privy Chamber in Ordinary, who at the time of the Feast are in waiting. Concerning whom, there is this mention made in the Blue Book, an. 26. Eliz. The Lib. C. p. 94. Soveraign was pleased to follow the Grand Procession, certain persons being placed already at the Choire door, who wear to bear the Ca|nopy (woven of Gold and Silk) for her to walk under. In her Reign, there were not above Lib. C. p. 99.  Lib. R. p. 30. 6 appointed for this A sex Equi|tibus in altum extenso. service, but of later times they have been in|creased to double that number; the first mention whereof, that we have met with, is an. Ex praesat. Collect. W. le N. Cl. 8. Car. 1.
The most usual place at Windesor, where the Canopy bearers attend, to receive the Soveraign, when he enters upon the Grand Processions, is at the Choire door (yet once we find they received him MS. penes E. W. G. sub an. 16. Iac. R. without the outer door of the Chappel) and they who bear it make a stand, when the Soveraign returns to the same place, where they received him, while he passeth from under the same into the Choire, to his Royal Stall. At Windesor the Canopy is aswell used, when the Soveraign descends from the Presence Chamber, in the Proceeding to the Chap|pel, on the Feast day in the Morning, as during the time of Procession; but at Whitehall, it is carried over the Soveraign's head, during the time of the Grand Pcession only.
The Train.In this solemn Proceeding (and at all other times of Publick Proceeding, du|ring the continuance of the Feast) the Soveraign hath the long Train of his Man|tle, carried up by several of the young Nobility, appointed to this Service; con|cerning which we shall observe,
That this Custom, of holding up the Train, is a very ancient kind of honor; and derived (some think) from the Erbard. Cel|lii Aur. Equit. Anglo Wirtemb. Lib. 5. p. 145. Roman Emperors, others from the Popes, Cardinals, and Bishops; who, as they used to kneel down to offer at the Altar, or perform any other part of Divine Service, had the end of hindermost part of their Stoles, or long Robes, held up behind from the ground, by their Arch-Daecons, in token of great veneration and honor. But what Erhardus Cellius affirms, as more peculiar to our purpose, is this; Ibid. That as Kings have anciently been accounted Priests, so King Edward, the Founder of this most Noble Order, or|dained this sacerdotal honor of the Train, to be added to the Habit of the Order.
Which Ceremony of carrying up the Train, as it hath been anciently afford|ed to Kings, both in England, France, and elsewhere, so at length, it was drawn down into use, by great Personages of both Sexes, at grand Solemnities, Assem|blies, Marriages, c. whereof the foresaid Author gives Ibid. p. 146.  147. sundry Examples.
A description of the Train, together with the manner of bearing it up, as of the Fashion and Figure, wherein it then shews it self, is also given us by him; for speaking of the Duke of Wirtemberg's Train, that was carried up (ac|cording to the English Fashion) at his solemn reception of the whole Habit of the Order of the Garter, he takes occasion to tell us, that this Appendix or Sup|plement, trailing from the hindermost part of his Mantle, is commonly called Syrma, as being Ibid. pag. 145. in the likeness of the Tail and Wings, which Nature hath gi|ven for ornament to the Peacock. The Pag. 147. Lady Isabell, Daughter to the French King Henry the Second, when she was married by Proxy to Philip the Second King of Spain, Retterbusius. an. 1559. had her Train carried up from the ground, by Mary Queen of Scotland (who had been lately married to the Dauphin of France) and two other young Ladies, Sisters of the Bride.
This being premised, the Persons, together with their quality, who have had the honor to bear up the Soveraign's Train, at the Grand Festival, or other so|lemn Assemblies, relating to this most Noble Order, fall in now to be spoken of; they being appointed by the Soveraign, and notice thereof sent unto them, by the Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold, to the end they may give their atten|dance accordingly.
The ancientest Example we have met with, of performing this Service, in re|lation to the Solemnities of the Order, is that of Ex veteri MS. penes W. le N. Cl. cujus faciei in|scribitur, The Entertain+ment of the King of Castile fol. 295. b. an. 21. H. 7. at the Installa|tion of Philip King of Castile, when the Soveraign's Train, as he went to make his Offring at the high Altar, was Ex veteri MS. penes W. le N. Cl. cujus faciei in|scribitur, The Entertain+ment of the King of Castile fol. 295. b. born up by one of the Canons of the Colledge.
Queen Elizabeth had (for the most part) her Train carried up by great Ladies,

when she proceeded to the Closet at Whitehall, on the Eve of St. George; and in particular, by the MS. penes W. D. N. f. . b. Lady Marchioness of Northampton, in the third year of her Reign, an. 4. by the Idem f. 7. b. Dutchess of Suffolk, an. 5. by the Fol. 9. b. Dutchess of Norfolk an. 6. by the MS. f. 17. b. Lady Margaret Clifford, Wife to the Lord Strange, in the 7. and 9. years by the Ibid. fol. 20.  30. b. Dutchess of Somerset, an. 8. by the Countess of Rutland, and an. 10. on the Eve of the Grand Feast, by the foresaid Dutchess of Ibid. fol. 30. Suffolk.
At other times, this service hath been performed by persons of honor, both men and women together, as on the Grand Feast day an. 19. Eliz. the MS. fol. penes G. O. Y p. 113. Earl of Oxford bore up the Train of the Soveraign's Robe, and the MS. fol. penes G. O. Y p. 113. Countess of Derby that of her Kirtle. But an. 5. Eliz. the Dutchess of Norfolk carried up the Train both of the Ex praefat. MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 10. Robe and Kirtle.
Sometimes the said Soveraign had her Train carried up by the Register of the Order, as on St. George's day an. Collect. W. le N. l. 2.  MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 3. b. 3. Eliz. But of late times young Noble|men have performed this Office, the most honorable person, going on the right hand, as an. 3. Car. 1. Collect. W. le N. Cl. the Duke of Lenox, and Earl of Caernarvon, an. 8. Caer. 1. Collect. W. le N. Cl. Visc. Grandison, the Lord Wentworth, and the Lord Carew of Lepping|ton. So 8. Oct. an. Collect. W. le N. Cl. 15 Car. 1. the Duke of Buckingham and his Brother, with the Lord Buckhurst, and Lord Cavendish.
Assistants have been usually appointed, to those honourable personages, who carried up the Soveraign Train; and in this quality an. 18. Eliz. the MS. penes G. O. Y. pag. 123. Earl of Oxford, Lord High Chamberlain of England, assisted the Countess of Derby, which service the Vice-Chamberlain had before discharged, for many years to|gether, viz. in the Videsis MS. penes praef. W. D. N. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10th Years of Queen Eliz. and since the Gentleman of the Robes, for so did Collect. W. l N. Cl. Mr. Kirke an. 8, 9,  11 Car. 1. The place of the Assistant, in the Proceeding, is upon the left hand of the Train-Bearers.
This honor of bearing up the Train, hath been in like manner afforded to Stranger Kings, at such times, as they have personally been present at Windesor, and in particular to Philip King of Castile, an. 21. H. 7. who in his approach towards the High Altar, to make his Offering, had his Collect. Tho. Wriothesley Mil. Garter, fol. 295. b. Train carried up by his own Chamberlain.
In like manner the Lieutenants or Deputies to the Soveraign, constituted for holding the Grand Feasts of St. George, (and consequently his representatives) have had their Train carried up, in the Proceedings; For instance, the Earl of Arundel, being the Soveraigns Lieutenant for holding St. Georges Feast, an. 31. H. 8. after such times as he had offered for the Soveraign, his MS in Offic. Arm. [L. 1.] fol. 19. Train was let down, when he came to offer for himself, in the quality of a Knight-Companion. And this hath been the usage in all times since.
And not only the Train of the Soveraigns Lieutenant or Deputy, but sometimes that of a Stranger Kings Mantle, hath been carried up, when his Proxy pro|ceeded to Installation; as in the case of the French King MS. fol. 25. b. Charles the Ninth, an. 8. Eliz. when Monsieur Rambouillet, bearing the Mantle of his Principal upon his right Arm, had the Train thereof carried up, by MS. fol. 25. b. Henry Earl of Southamp|ton, assisted by the MS. fol. 25. b. Lord Herbert.
Furthermore, this Ceremony of bearing up the Train, hath been also per|formed unto Stranger Princes, in their own Countries, (and that in reference to the Custom of England) at those solemnities relating to this most Noble Order, whereof Aur. Equiz. Anglo-Wir|temb. Lib. 5. pag. 145. Erhardus Cellius gives us an instance, in Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, who as soon as he was invested with the Surcoat and Mantle, in the great Hall at Studgardt, proceeded thence to the great Church of St. Vlrick, to receive the rest of the Habit of the Order, having his Aur. Equiz. Anglo-Wir|temb. Lib. 5. pag. 145. Train born from the ground, by the Noble and Illustrious Count Lodowick Leosten; Ibid. who likewise carried it after him, throughout the whole Ceremony.
And lastly the Knights-Companions have (in this Proceeding) their Trains car|ried up by their own Gentlemen.
Another piece of Ceremony, in the State of this Grand Proceeding, we find An. 18. Eliz. once added, and that was the bearing of Queen Elizabeth's MS. praefat. pen G. O. Y. pag. 113. Cloak and Hat along with her; the one by Sir William Howard, the other by Sir Christopher

Hatton, then Captain of her Guard: but as this was the first, so was it the last time that either of these, are mentioned to be thus publickly carried.
2 Apparel of the Knights-Companions. In the second place, the Cloths and Apparel (or under Habit) of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, have for many years past, been made of white Sattin, and in the fashion of the times; which the present Soveraign observing to be laid aside, and others introduced, He, to prevent profuseness in Apparel, and emula|tion among the Knights-Companions, as also to beget an uniformity and equality, among them in the under, no less than in the upper Habit of the Order, thought it to appoint a set, and constant Habit of Cloth of Silver, made in the fashion of Trunk Hose, with white silk Stockings, to be worn by himself and them, upon all solemn occasions, relating to the Order; for the observation of which, an Appendix Num. CLXXX. Or|der past in Chapter, an. 13 Car. 2.
As to other Ornaments the chiefest are the variety of rich Jewels, which surround or adorn their Caps, and where else they may appear most conspicuous.
But besides the glory and splendor, which shoot from the Habits and Orna|ments of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, who are principal in this grand Ceremony, there are others, that make up the body of the Proceeding, and may fitly be compared to Stars of the middle and lesser magnitude, since we find them adorned in Robes particular to their Offices, to distinguish and set off the lustre of the show; among whom are, first,
3. The Offi|cers of the Or|der. The five Officers of the Order, namely the Prelate, Chancellor, Register, Garter and Black Rod; of whose Habits we have sufficiently spoken Chap 9. before.
The Provincial Kings, Heralds, and Pursuivants, habited in their rich Coats, and going together in one Body,4. Officers of Arms. appear more conspicuous, from the Royal Arms of the Soveraign of this most Noble Order, richly imbroidered upon them with fine gold, purles, and twist; the ground of the Provincial Kings Coats, being at this day blew Velvet, the Heralds blew Sattin, and the Pursuivants blew Damask.
5. Canons. The Habit in which the Canons of the Colledge proceed, is also peculiar, and more remarkable, because of their particular reference to this most Noble Order: for though as Clergy men, they are vested in Linen Surplices, at all times of Divine Service, or the Celebration of Sacred Offices, yet at the Solemnities peculiar to the Order, they wear a Mantle over those Surplices, which is a Habit appointed for them, from the foundation of the Order.
These Mantles are of Taffety and of the ancient colour, to wit E. 3. Stat. Art. 5. H. 5. Stat. Art. 5. Murry; upon the Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 5. right shoulder of which is a Scutcheon of St. Georges Arms within a Run|delet, imbroidered with Gold and Silk; and bought at their own charge, for we do not find them entred among the Liveries of the Garter, provided by the Soveraign.
6. Gentlemen of the Chap|pel, c. In Habits yet more glorious, do the Gentlemen of the Soveraigns Chappel at Whitehall, the Petty-Canons, and Vicars of Windesor appear; who at this time are also joined in one Body, to augment the Solemnity: for they are all (or the most part of them) Vested in Rich Coaps of Cloth of Gold, Cloth of Bod|kin, or most costly Imbroideries: But the Children of the Chappel, and Chori|sters do always proceed habited, in Surplices of fine Linen.
By a memorial we have met with, a. 22 H. 8. we find how well stored this Colledge then was, with such sacred Vestments; when at one Procession appointed by the Soveraign in honor of St. George, there were MS. in Offic. Arm. [M. 17.] fol. 32. b. 35. Copes of rich Cloth of Gold made use off.
These kind of Vestments, have been in all times worn in the Grand Procession, whether the Grand Feast was kept at Windesor, or at Whitehall, or Hampton-Court, or Greenwich, even to the beginning of the late Wars, in which the covetous barbarism of the then Reformers, sent most of them to the fire; Besides, they are sometimes taken notice of, in the Registers of the Order, to be used in the Grand Procession; as in particular, an. 15 Iac. Reg. it is noted, that the Lib. C. p. 190. whole Choire, being adorned in Copes, (for so we suppose the word Orarium may sig|nify, as well as Dalmatica Vestis) descended from the Altar, and sung the Letany; and to like purpose is that recorded, an. Lib. R. p. 7. ide etiam p. 0. 21. of the same King.
Alms-Knights.7. Lastly, the Habits of the Alms-Knights [a Mantle and Kirtle] are not unre|markable;

they being grave and civil, and both for colour and materials, appear sutable to their Age and Degree. The Mantles are of Cloth, which the Sta|tutes appoint to be of a E. 3. Stat. Art  H 5. Stat. Art  H. 8. Stat. Art. 16. Red Colour, with a Shield of the Arms of St. George, but without any Garter to surround them. In conformity whereunto, when Queen Elizabeth's Orders and Rules, for the establishment of good Government, among these Alms-Knights were An. 1. Eliz. made; It was therein Ordained, that each of them should have yearly for their Livery, a Artic. 4. Gown of Red, and a Mantle of blew or purple Cloth, with a Art. 5. Cross of St. George embroidered in a Scutcheon, (without the Garter) but to be set upon the left shoulder.
In this Grand Proceeding, we observe the Habits so ordered, that the more grave and civil, being placed between those that are rich and gallant, entertain the Beholders with a more delightful prospect. For such we see are the Officers of the Order, who proceed between the Soveraign and Knights-Companions; the Canons of the Colledge, who pass between the Heralds and Gentlemen of both Chappell; and lastly, the Alms-Knights who go immediately before the Choristers.
The Registers of this Noble Order make frequent mention of divers persons of rank and quality,8. The Sove|raign's and Knights Reti|nue. who at this Solemnity of St. George, put themselves upon the duty of attendance on the Soveraign, because, otherwise, related to his Service, although in reference to the Order not so concern'd, as to be taken into the Pro|ceeding. Such are divers of the Nobility, sometimes great Ladies, many consi|derable Officers of the Houshold, and other Courtiers; all richly habited and at|tired, thereby adding to the Gallantry of this solemn Ceremony.
Concerning these it is remembred, an. 35. Eliz. that the Soveraign's Proceed|ing in publick to the Chappel, was not only attended in all points by the Knights-Companions, and Lib. C. p 123. other of her Nobles, but accompanied also with a great Train of her Ladies of Honor, and a numerous concourse of Foreiners and Dowesticks, looking on and wishing all happiness.
Nor may we here omit some other Servants, who attend upon the Soveraign and Knights-Companions at the Feast, they deserving notice, both for their num|ber and rich Liveries. Such were the Henxmen anciently (now called Pages of Honor) who waited on the Soveraign; Upon the Knights-Companions attended divers Gentlemen, wearing Blue Coats, and on their left Sleeves the Cognizances of those Lords whom they waited upon, adorned with valuable Gold Chains: to these we shall add, both Pages and Footmen, always clad in exceeding gallant and rich Liveries.
At the Feast of St. George, an. 11. Car. 1. there was Exceptions taken by the Earl Marshal, at the Earl of Berkshires Servants, for that their Cognizances were adorned with MS. Coronets set over them, and it was thereupon MS. Ordered, to be amended against the next occasion of wearing them, upon a publick account. And by special directions from the late Soveraign King Charles the First, in the beginning of his Reign, MS. the Coats of the Footmen, belonging to the Knights of the Order, were then, and for the future, forbid to have the Garter embroider|ed about their Badges, as being too great an abasement of that first and chiefest Ensign of the Order, to be worn by persons of so mean rank; which excess, for the same reason, deserves reformation, in the Water-mens Badges, too frequently worn within a Garter, in this Age.
The Henxmen followed, in the Grand Procession, neer to the person of the So|veraign, but the Gentlemen, Pages, and Footmen belonging to the Knights-Compa|nions, did not go in this Proceeding, but were Collect. W. l N. Cl. marshalled before it set forward, from the Choire door, on both sides the Processional way, and here and there in|termixt with the Yeomen of the Grard, to keep off the Press.
The Habit wherein the Henxmen were usually drest, was rich and gay, as could be devised, being oftentimes embroidered with ingenious and pretty De|vises, such as best liked the fancy of the Soveraign. We have seen the Ex Lib. cat. Ctom, in Offic. mag. Gardrob. Regis, fol. 74. account for the Apparel of 12 Henxmen, who attended on the Soveraign at St. George's Feast, an. 11. H. 6. the Sleeves of their Gowns being embroidered, each with

three sprigs of Broom, and three Peacoks Feathers bound together, wrought with Silks of divers Colours, and the Soveraign's Motto [Dieu  mon Droit] embroidered thereupon.
9. The Musick. To compleat the pomp of this great Ceremony, we may (in the last place) fitly remember the Musick as a part thereof; it being particularly taken notice of, in most places of the Register, where the Grand Procession is recorded. The Choires both of the Soveraign's Chappel at Whitehall, and this at Windesor, being here (as before is noted) united; all singing the sacred Hymn together, while the Grand Procession devoutly passeth on.
This Hymn was composed and set with Verse and Chorus, by Captain Cook Master of the Children of the Soveraign's Chappel; by whose direction some In|strumental loud Musick was at that time introduced, namely two double Sack|bots, and two double Courtals; and placed at convenient distance, among the Classes of the Gentlemen of both Choires, to the end, that all might distinctly hear, and consequently keep together, in both time and tune. For one Sack|bot and Courtal was placed before the four Petty Canons, who begun the Hymn, and the other two, immediately before the Prebends of the Colledge.
And now behold the Sculp of the Grand Procession, as it was ordered upon this solemn occasion, an. 23. Car. 2. designed and etchedy Mr. Wineslaus Hollar; in which, the Postures and Habits are exprest with singular spirit and freedom.
Return of the Grand Proces|sion into the Choire. Upon the return of the Grand Procession to the Choire door, the Alms-Knights first advance into it, and after double Reverences, ascend above the Haut Pas's to the Altar.
Next the Choristers, and in like manner the Vicars, Petty Canons of Windesor, Gentlemen of the Chappel, and Prebends go to their Seats.
Then the Officers of Arms pass up, and joyn to the Alms-Knights.
After this, the Knights-Companions enter and stand before their Stalls.
The like doth the Black-Rod, Garter, and Register.
As also the Chancellor and Prelate.
Then doth the Soveraign take his Royal Stall.
The Knights-Companions ascend their Stalls.
The Officers of the Order sit down on their Forms: And all this is done in the same manner and order, and with like Reverences, as at their entrance into the Choire on the Eve of the Feast.
Then the Prelate, with two Prebends (appointed to read the Epistle and Gospel) are conducted, the one by the Serjeants of the Vestry, the other by the Verger, up to the Altar (which they approach with usual Reverences) the Prelate pas|sing to the North side, and the Prebends to the South, to finish the remaining part of Divine Service.
Whereupon the Officers of Arms descend into the Choire, and,
The Alms-Knights go down to their Seats. Which, while they are so doing, the two Prebends put on their Copes, at the South side of the Altar,
This done, the Prelate begins the second Service.


SECT. IV. The order of the Second Service.
THE order and course of the Second Service, since the time of Reforma|tion in the Church of England, hath been celebrated according to the directions set down in the Book of Common-Prayer, established by Act of



THE GRAND PROCESSION OF THE Soveraigne and knights Companions ANNO 23 CAROLI 2




Parliament, being the same commonly used on any other Feast-day; excepting that a peculiar Epistle and Gospel, made proper to this Festival, hath been ap|pointed to be read in their due place of the Service. The Epistle being the 33. Chapter of Deuteronomy; next follows the Gospel, taken out of the 5. Chapter of the Gospel of St. Iohn, beginning at the 24. Verse, and ending at the 30. which being read the Creed is sung.
The Office appointed to be used on this Feast day in the Chappel of St. George, in Windesor Castle, before the Reformation, may be seen in the Breviarie and Missale ad usum ac consuetudinem Sarum, which we have transcribed hither; for (in regard that the Colledge of Windesor was situate within the Diocess of Salis|bury) the Statutes of the Colledge did appoint and ordain, Cap. 21. that the use and cu|stom of singing, pronouncing, and celebrating Divine Service, of attending in the Choire and at the Altar, or of celebrating about it the Masses peculiar to the day, or of the Virgin Mary, as also for the dead, as well in celebrating as read|ing, singing, standing, sitting, both in the Choire and without it, and all things whatsoever, which were observed in the Church of Salisbury, should be ob|served in this Chappel of St. George, according to the conveniency of place and exigency of persons: To the observation of this Statute, they were also obliged by the Cap. 6. Injunctions of Iohn Archbishop of York, Chancellor of England, under the penalty of paying 12 d. to the Treasury of the Colledge, by every one, that should be guilty of violating or infringing the same. What difference there is between the foresaid Office, and that appointed to the use of the Church of York (in re|gard it is but small) we shall also note, and then close this Section with the Hymn and Prayer, out of the Primmer of Salisbury.
If any be further curious to know, what alteration hath been made since our Reformation, in this Office in the Roman Church (for since then, they have seen cause to mend and refine divers things, in their publick Liturgie) they may have recourse to the Breviarium Romanum and Missale Romanum, Ex decreto Concilii Tridentini restitutum, wherein the Service is Heylins Hist. of St. George, Part. 2. Sect. 8. noted to be very solemn, and (for the honor of St. George) scarce any Festival there, is celebrated, with more variety of proper and Divine Offices.

Officium proprium Sancti Georgii, prout extat in Portiforio (seu Nota, Quod Breviarium hoc Salisburiense Bedam sequi|tur, qui in suo Martyrologio, ad diem 23. A|prilis, ait Geor|gium Martyri|um fuisse pas|sum sub Daci|ano Rege Per|sarum: Et Vsu|ardus in Mar|tyrologio suo ad diem etiam Apr. 23. ait, Georgium Mar|tyrio coronatum in Perside, ci|vitate Diospoli. Breviario) Salisburiensi Londini excuso 1555. In proprio de Sanctis,In Breviario Sancti Domi|nici. Paris. 1512. p. 44. In Oficio Sancti Georgii occur|rit eadem Ora|tio, quae hic habetur in Bre|viario Salisbu|riensi,  tres Lectiones (ex gesti Sancti Ge|orgii s. cuntum Ecclesiam Gal|licanam, ita e|nim habet Ru|brica) quae quoad sensum, ut pen quoad verba ipsa, eae|dem sunt cum his Lectioni|bus Ecclesiae Salisburiensis. Part. Hiemali, ad diem April 23.

Rubrica.
Sancti Georgii Martyris. Tres Lectiones, cum regimine Chori, duplex Festum.


Capitulum.
Iste sanctus qui pro Lege Dei sui certavit us ad mortem:   verbis im|piorum non timuit: fundatus enim erat supra firmam petram.


Oratio.
Deus qui nos beati Georgii Martyris tui meritis  intercessione laetificas; concede propitius, ut qui ejus beneficia poscimus, dono tuae gratiae consequamur, per dominum nostrum Iesum Christum.


Lectio 1.Vide Nice+phorum Callist. Hist. Lib. 7. c. 15. de Mar|tyrio S. Georgii sub Dioclesia|no.
Sanctus  verus Dei Cultor Georgius Cappadociae regionis oriundus, cum videret multos Deum blasphemantes,  cum Daciano daemones adorantes, spi|ritu sancto repletus in hanc vocem prorupit: Omnes dii Gentium daemonia, Dominus autem caelum fecit. Dacianus ait ei, qua temeritatis andaci, nobis

injuriam irrogans, Deos nostros daemonia vocas? fatere tum ex qua Provinci huc advenisti, vel quo nomine vociferis.


Lectio 2.
Sanctus Georgius dixit: Christianu  Dei servus sum, Georgius nuncu|por, genere Capadocus, patriae meae comitatum gerens. Elegi ver temporali dignitate carere,  immortalis Dei imperio servire. Dacianus ait ei: erras Georgi, accede  immola Deo Appollini. Beatus Georgius respondet, Domi|no enim meo Iesu Christo exhibeo culturam, Regi omnium seculorum, non Apol|lini auctori Daemonionum.


Lectio 3.
Iratus Dacianus jussit S. Georgium in Equuleo levari,  extensum mem|braetim ungulis lacerari. Deinde lateribus ejus lampades ardentes applicari; salem ver in vulnera aspergi,  cilicio plagas ejus fricari; plumbo bullienti Georgium immitti, extractum per vicos ut reum fecit trahi. Cum trahe|retur ad locum supplicii, flexis genibus gratias egit Deo;  sic capitalem pro Christo subiit sententiam.


Rubrica.
Caetera de Communi unius Martyris de Pasc. temporis.
What is set down above, is proper to St. George, but the rest of the Office used on St. George's day (being common to him with other Martyrs) is not set down, but referr'd to that part of the Portiforium, called Commune.


Secundum u|sum Sarm, Misa. Psal. 63.Sancti Georgii Martyris Officium.
Protexisti me Deus  conventu malignantium, Alleluia;  multitudine ope|rantium iniquitatem. Alleluia, Alleluia.


Psalmus.
Ibidem. Exaudi Deus orationem meam cum deprecar:  timore inimici eripe animam meam.


Oratio
Deus qui nos beati Georgii martyris tui, meritis  intercessione laetificas: concede propitius; ut, cujus beneficia poscimus, dono tuae gratiae consequamur. Per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum.


Lectio beati Jacobi Apostoli. 1.
Cap. 1.Carissimi, omne gaudium existimate, cum in temptationes varias incideri|tis: Scientes qud probatio fidei vestrae, patientiam operatur: Patientia autem opus perfectum habeat: ut sitis perfecti  integri, in nullo deficientes. Si quis autem vestrum indiget sapienti, postulet  Deo qui dat omnibus affluenter,  non improperat:  dabitur ei. Postulet autem in fide nihil haesitans. Qui enim haesitat, similis est fluctui maris, qui  vento movetur  circumfertur. Non ergo existimet homo ille, quod accipiat aliquid  Domino. Vir duplex animo, inconstans est in omnibus vis suis. Glorietur autem frater humilis, in exaltatione su: dives autem in humilitate su, quoniam sicut flos foeni tran|sibit: Exortus est enim sol cm ardore:  arefecit foenum,  flos ejus deci|dit:  decor vults ejus deperiit: Ita  dives, in itineribus suis marces|cit. Beatus vir qui suffert temptationem: quoniam cm probtus fuerit, acci|piet coronam vitae, quam repromisit Deus diligentibus se. Alleluia.
Laetabitur justus in Domino,  Psal. 63. sperabit in eo:  laudabuntur omnes recti corde.


Sequentia.
Organicis canamus modulis Georgii solennia. Omnigenis Domino vocibus reddentes odas debitas: Qui in suis sanctis mirabilis nimis, multiplici vir|tutum flore eosdem decorat, ac mirific adornat. Nam  in ipsis quasi in quibusdam musicis instrumentis, digito proprio fides agitat, fides virtutum so|noras; his numeros percurrens singulas. Permiscet singulis diatessaron mel|lifluam melodiam; quam generat virtutum mater illa, quae aliis decenter com|posita reddit suavem symphoniam, qua sine cuncta fiunt dissona, necnon  frivola; qua cum omnia sunt consona, necnon utilia: qua justi ben morati, rite petentes excelsa poli sidera alacres decantant nova cantica, in Cithara Threici: quorum agentes festa, consortia mereamur in coelesti patria.


Evangelium secundum Johannem.
In illo tempore,Chap. 13. dixit Iesus Discipulis suis, Ego sirm vitis vera,  pater meus agricola est; Omnem Palmitem in me non ferentem fructum tollet eum,  omnem qui fert fructum purgabit eum, ut fructum plus afferat. Iam vos mundi estis propter sermonem quem locutus sum vobis. Manete in me,  ego in vobis. Sicut Palmes non potest ferre fructum  semetipso nisi manserit in vite: sic nec vos nisi in me manseritis. Ego sum vitis; vos palmites. Qui manet in me, ego in eo, hic fert fructum multum, quia sine me nihil potestis facere. Si quis in me non manserit, mittetur foras sicut palmes  arescet:  colligent eum  in ignem mittent  ardet. Si manseritis in me,  verba mea in vobis manserint, quodcun volueritis petetis,  fiet vobis.


Offertorium.
Confitebuntur coeli mirabilia tua Domine:Psal. .  veritatem tuam in Ecclesia Sanctorum. Alleluia Alleluia.


Secreta.
Offerimus tibi Domine solemne sacrificium pro venerand Sancti Georgii martyris tui passione, deprecantes clementiam tuam: ut per haec sacrosancta mysteria: antiqui hostis temptamenta, te triumphante, vincamus:  aeternae remunerationis primum, te largiente consequamur per Dom.


Communio.
Laetabitur Iustus in Domino,Psal. 3.  sperabit in eo:  laudabuntur omnes recti corde.


Postcommunio.
Mensae caelestis satiati dulcedine; humiliter te rogamus omnipotens pater: ut intercedente beato Georgio martyre tuo: resurrectionis ejus simus participes cujus sumus morte redempti. Qui tecum, c.
Here note, that it belonged to the Lib. N. p. 109. Abbot of Towerhill to read the Gospel, and to the Prior of Medemenham in Norfolk to read the Epistle; for upon them was this duty imposed, until the Reformation; and in whose absence, a Ibid. p. 112. Ca|non, and a Vicar of the Chappel, supplied their place (Ibid. p. 113. He that read the Gos|pel, (after censing by the Epistoler) presented the Heart of St. George, bestowed upon King Henry the Fifth by Ibid. p. 26. Sigismund the Emperor) to the Soveraign and Knights-Companions to kiss.
The difference between the Office appointed for St. Georges Day, secundum Sarum,  Ebor. is as followeth.
The Office of the Church of York hath the same Officium, Psalmus, Oratio with Salisbury; but it hath another Epistle, viz. 2 Cor. 5.1. beginning scimus quoniam si terrestris; and ends with the fourth verse.
And other verses follow the Epistle, viz.
Versus. Confitebuntur coeli mirabilia tua Domine, etenim veritatem tuam in Ecclesiam Sanctorum.
Versus. Angelus Domini descendit de coelo  accedens revolvit Lapidem  sedebat super eum.
The Sequentia, is the same with Salisbury, But the Gospel is 16 Math. begin|ing at the 24. verse. Si quis vult post me venire, c. to the end of the Chapter.
The Offertorium and Communio, are the same also with Salisbury.
But the Secreta and Post-Communio, the same with the Roman Missal now in use.
The Office secundum Sarum, hath the same Officium, Psalmus, Oratio, Offer|torium, Communio and Gospel, with the Roman Missall.
But it differs in the Epistle, the Verse following, the Secreta, and Post-Communion.
In the Primmer according to the usage of Salisbury, otherwise called Horae beatissimae Mariae Virginis, secundum usum Sarum. Printed in a small Volume by Winandus de Worde, an. 1529. there is this Hymn to St. George among the Suffrages.


Fol. 54.De Sancto Georgio. Antiphona.
Georgi martyr inclite, te decet lans  gloria, praedotatum militi: per quem Puella Regia existens in tristiti, coram dracone pessimo salvatae est. Te ani|mo rogamus  corde intimo, ut, cum cunctis fidelibus, coeli jungamur civibus, nostris ablutis sordibus, ut simul cum letiti tecum simus in glori, nostra reddant labia, landes Christo eum glori.
Vers. Ora pro nobis beate Georgi Christi miles.
Resp. Ut hostes visibiles  invisibiles sint contra no vald debiles.


Oratio.
Omnipotens sempiterne Deus qui deprecantium voces benignus exaudis, ma|jestatem tuam supplices exoramus: Vt sicut in honore beati ac gloriosissimi martyris tui Georgii Draconem  Puell superare voluisti: Ita ejusdem inter|cessione hostes nostrs visibiles  invisibiles, ne nocere valeant,  nobis supe|rari concedas, per Dominum nostrum. Pater noster. Ave Maria.
The same Prayer I find in the Primmers Printed in a Large Quarto at Paris, by Francis Regnault in the Years 1516, 1526, 1527, 1534. and in a small Vol|lume at Roven, an. 1538.




SECT. V. The Offring of Gold and Silver.
Preparation for the Offer|ing.BEing now to speak of this solemn and sacred Ceremony, we shall premise; That, whether it be performed in the Soveraign's Chappel at Windesor, or in

any other Church or Chappel whatsoever, the Ceremony is one and the same, having not any thing peculiarly local to Windesor (except the Soveraign's Offring of Gold and Silver instead of the Bezant) or otherwise varying with the place.
The accustomed time of Offring Gold and Silver on the Feast day, is men|tioned an. 22. H. 8. to be after theMS. in Offic. Arm. [M. 17.] fol. 32. b. Soveraign's return to his Stall, from the Grand Procession, in the time of high Mass; and at this day begins, immediately after this first Sentence of the Offertory is pronounced by the Prelate,
Let your light so shine before men, c.
This said, the Organs begin to play (continuing so throughout the whole Ce|remony) and forthwith a Groom and Page of the removing Wardrobe (with Re|verence first made) unroll a long Carpet, and spread it from before the Altar, downward, upon the Haut pas, ascending thereto, and then stand on each side thereof.
Which being done, the Alms-Knights first, next the Pursuivants, Heralds, and Provincial Kings ascend in usual order, to their wonted Stations before the Al|tar, and dividing themselves, flank the Carpet on both sides.
Then Garter steps from his Seat, and, after his double Reverences, and the usual manner of waving his Rod, the Knights-Companions descend in their ac|customed and regular order, and stand before their Stalls.
After this, the Black Rod goes from his Seat, makes his double Reverences in the middle of the Choire, and ascends neer to the Altar, towards which, making a single Reverence, he turns his back, and immediately the Groom of the re|moving Wardrobe, delivereth unto him a little Carpet, anciently of Silk, now of Cloth of Gold, which he (the said Groom assisting) spreads over that before mentioned, lying on the Haut Pas's to the Altar.
Moreover the said Groom holds upon his arms, a fair Cushen of Cloth of Gold, for the Soveraign to kneel upon, at the time of his Offring, which the Black Rod forthwith lays upon the upper Haut Pas, before the Altar. And note, that as-well in delivering as receiving the Cushen, each of them take the Assay thereof, by kissing it.
These preparations for the Soveraign to offer, being made, the Prelate of the Order takes a large gilt Bason into his hands, to receive the Soveraign's Offring, and placing himself in the middle of the Altar, stands before it with one of the Prebends to assist him.
The Soveraign at this instant arising from his Royal Seat,The Order of the Soveraigns Offering. makes his Reve|rence towards the Altar, and then descending makes a like Reverence below, and ascends towards the Altar, attended as followeth.

Garter.
Register.

Chancellor.
The Nobleman that bears the Sword.
The Soveraign, having his Train born up.
The Knight-Companion, who is to give him his Offring, goes a little behind on his left hand.


Being come into the middle of the Choire, he makes another Reverence, and at the first Haut Pas his last.
And albeit, in other matters of Ceremony, the Soveraign performs his part E. 3. Stat. Art. 13 H. 5. Stat. Art. 13 last, yet at the Offring, first, and before all the Knights-Companions. And in this point, Errhard Celius discoursing of the Duke of Wirtemberg's Offring, is mistaken, where he saith, the Soveraign or his Deputy Offer Eq. Aur. An|glo-Wirtemb. fol. 183. after all the Knights-Companions, and in the last place.
The Officers of Arms were anciently wont to lead on this Proceeding, and pass before the Officers of the Order, and so we find it remembred Ex Veteri MS. pen. W. le N. Cl. f. 295. b. an. 22. H. 7. an. MS. pag. 12. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. 2.  MS. G O. . pag. 113. 19. Eliz. and the like attendance was in those

times given to the Soveraign's MS. fol. pen. W. D. N. fol. 5. b.  fol. 12. Lieutenant by them; but this is now altered, and they directed to proceed up next towards the Altar after the Alms-Knights, as before, and together with them, stand in flank on both sides the Carpet, while the Soveraign approacheth the Altar.
He that bears the Soveraign's Offring, is either the senior Knight, the Prince, or the greatest Estate among the Knights-Companions then present, and no other person (of what Degree soever) if he be not one of this most Noble Fraternity, doth perform this service. And once we find the senior Knight had an Assistant for this service, namely an. 18. Eliz. when the Earl of MS. penes G.O.Y. pag. 123. Arundell went on the Soveraign's right hand, and the Earl of Sussex on her left, to give her the Offring.
The Soveraign being come to the upper Haut Pas, kneels, at which instant, the Black Rod on his Knee delivers (with Assay) the Soveraign's Offring to the senior Knight, and he, kneeling, presents it to the Soveraign, which he imme|diately offers into the Bason, held by the Prelate, assisted as before, who at this instant heretofore also kneeled; but at the Feast celebrated an. 15. Car. 2. the pre|sent Soveraign gave command, that the Prelate and Canon should Lib. Carol. pag. 47. stand, while himself, in the humble posture of kneeling, should make his Offring.
Which having done, he ariseth and passeth down the Haut Pas's, where turn|ing about he makes a Reverence towards the Altar, and thence conducted and attended, as when he came up to Offer, at the entrance into his Stall, he turns about and makes another Reverence, at both which times the Attendants bow towards the Altar also, and ascending into his Stall, doth the like again, and then reposeth himself in his Seat. In that interim the Black Rod takes up the rich Carpet and Cushen, and delivers them to the foresaid Groom, and so descends (with Reverence) to his Form, and stands before it.
In Queen Elizabeth's Reign, it appears the Bezant was Offered by her, and re|deemed of course (so also at sundry times since) and noted (an. 2. Eliz.) to be of Collect. W. le N. Cl. 7 l. value. But at the Installation of the Duke of York at Windesor, an. 11. Iac. R. there was a question proposed to the Dean and Canons, Collect. D. Chr. Wren nuper Ord. Regist. whether if the Soveraign should offer his Bezant, it might be redeemed or not? Their answer then was, Collect. D. Chr. Wren nuper Ord. Regist. that whatsoever was there offered, became the Dean and Canons with|out redemption, whereupon the Soveraign waved offring his Bezant, and offer|ed Collect. D. Chr. Wren nuper Ord. Regist. both Gold and Silver.
And besides, concerning this thing, there is an Entry made of a passage (up|on the Register of the Order) which hapned an. 6. Car. 1. Lib. R. p. 62. That whereas in other places (besides Windesor) the Soveraign is wont to offer a certain golden piece (vul|garly called a Bezant) to be redeemed afterwards, at a certain price; Lib. R. p. 62. The Usher of the Black Rod having sometime been admonished, that in these services there is no redemption to be made, never presents the Bezant at Windesor to the Soveraign, but Gold and Silver of English money.
When the Soveraign is absent,The Lieute|nants Offering and his Lieute|nant offers for him, he performs the Ceremony in manner and order following.
First (after the preparations made for the Offring, as aforesaid, and Garters double Reverence towards the Altar and the Soveraign's Stall, with a third to the Lieutenant) he descends from his Stall with his usual Reverences, and goes to the steps ascending the Soveraign's Stall, and there stands a while; then making his double obeisance, he proceeds towards the Altar (the Officers of the Order go|ing before him) with one other Reverence in the middle of the Choire, and ano|ther at the first Haut Pas of the Altar, having his Train carried up. The MS. penes praef. G.O.Y. p. 114 vide MS. 4. pen. W. le N. Cl. f. 11. Carpet and Cushen is spread and laid for him, by the Collect. A. V. W. Black Rod, and Yeomen of the Ward|robe, with Assay, and the Offring given also with Assay, by the MS. penes praef. G.O.Y. p. 114 vide MS. 4. pen. W. le N. Cl. f. 11. Black Rod, to the senior Knight, or one of the Knights-Companions of highest dignity, at that time present, who attending the Lieutenant up to the Altar, delivers it upon his Knee, and he having put it, kneeling also, into the Bason (held by the Prelate) returns back through the body of the Choire to the MS. penes praef. G.O.Y. p. 114 vide MS. 4. pen. W. le N. Cl. f. 11. Soveraign's Stall, in the same order, and with like Reverences as he came, where standing a while again before it, he makes his single Reverence towards it, and then goes up into his own Stall, where (if it fall out that the Lieutenant is not the senior Knight) he stays to MS. in Bibl Coton. [sub Ef|fig. Iulii E. 11. receive the

Reverences of all the Knights-Companions his seniors, as they go up to offer, and when his own turn and course comes to offer, he descends with a double Reve|rence, and proceeds up with his Fellow (if present) and Ibid. offers for himself in his own place, and as one of the Knights-Companions; but his MS. in Offic. Armor. [L. 1.] p. 19.  MS. pen. W. D. N. fol. 12. Train is now let down, the Assay not given, the Carpet and Cushen taken away, and only two Officers of Arms (but none of the Order) proceeds before him; and assoon as he hath thus offered for himself, he returns to his Stall, by the Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. East end through the Stalls.
But it seems an. 7. Iac. R. that MS. penes E W. G. fol. 148. b. Garter alone on the Feast day, brought up the Prince (then the Soveraign's Lieutenant) when he came to offer for himself, which some of the Knights-Companions observing, alledged that the service ought to have been performed by MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 148. b. Clarenceux and Norroy (he being the senior Knight) yet because Garter had so brought him up the day before, it was thought good he should so continue And this we look on as an oversight in Garter, if not igno|rance, since at the same time we find him guilty of another, as great an Error; for he brought down the Knights-Companions out of their Stalls to offer, MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 148. b. be|fore the Epistle and Gospel were read, which the Relator notes to be done, MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 148. b. con|trary to the use of former times, and in truth very absurd and inconvenient; inasmuch as, besides their long time of standing below in the Choire, while the tedious Ceremonies of the Offring were preparing and performing, the Knights-Companions were now put to exercise their patience, by the inconvenience of a longer standing there, even while the Epistle and Gospel were read, and the Creed sung, and all this before the Offring did begin. But the foresaid mistake was an. 11. Iac. R. rectified, and when the Prince (being the Ibid. f. 11. b. Soveraing's Lieu|tenant) came to offer for himself, he was then brought up by Clarenceux and Norroy, and not by Garter.
When the Soveraign's Lieutenant hath offered for himself, he MS. in Offic. Armor. ut su|pra. returns to the lower end of the Stalls, and passeth thence towards his own, where having paid his usual Reverences, he enters it again, and is there ready to receive the Re|verences of all the rest of the Knights-Companions, his juniors.
This ceremonious course of the Lieutenant's returning up to his Stall, after he had offered for the Soveraign, and there remaining, until his own turn came to offer, and then to descend again, and offer for himself, and so return to his Stall, was first appointed to be observed by Collect. A. V. W. Decree in Chapter an. 7. Eliz. though the entry thereof into the Register of the Order, was (we know not how) neglected; and this return hath been since duly observed, albeit the se|nior Knight (as very usual) was made the Soveraign's Lieutenant, and then (there being no other Knight that possessed a higher Stall than himself, to offer before him) he, resting a while there, arose, and with usual Reverences came forth a se|cond time from his Seat, and went up to offer for himself, attended as is before mentioned.
Assoon as the Soveraign (or his Lieutenant) is returned to his Stall,The Knights Offering. the two Provincial Kings pass down into the middle of the Choire, where making a Re|verence jointly towards the Altar, and next to the Soveraign, Clarenceux turns himself to the senior Knight, and makes him a third Reverence, while Norroy, at the same instant, doth the like to the next junior Knight, and to both, as an in|timation of their going up to Offer; then each King retires a little backward, to|wards the Stalls.
In the mean time, the two senior Knights-Companions draw neer together, and make their double Reverence, and upon the last turning of themselves, Clarenceux and Norroy step forth and pass up before them, until they arrive neer to the Prelate (but where the senior Knight wants his opposite Companion, the two Kings bring him up alone, and he Offers single) then making their Reve|rences, first towards the Altar, next to the two Knights, Clarenceux retires to the right side, and Norroy to the left, and make themselves ready for a present return, before the Knights-Companions; who in the interim are kneeling toge|ther, on the upper Haut Pas before the Altar, making their Offring.
This humble posture in Offring, was not (it seems) heretofore generally ob|served by the Knights-Companions, and therefore an. 4. Car. 1. it occasioned the

passing a Decree to this effect; That in all Offerings to be thenceforth made Lib. R. p. 44. every one of the Knights-Companions (in honor of God, and in testimony of their obedience and Christian Piety) should most humbly bow their knees.
The Knights-Companions Offrings are both of Silver and Gold, which they put into the foresaid Bason, held to them by the MS. penes E. W. G. sub an. 1 Iac. R. vide Lib. R. pag. 52.  8. two Prebends before-mentioned, or by Collect. D. Ch. Wren nuper Ord. Regist. one Prebend and the Chantor, and anciently by the Stat. Colleg. Art. 37. Chantor only, when the Offering is made at Windesor; but by the Ex Collect. Rob. C. Cl f. 2. Subdean of the Chappel, when they Offer at Whitehall.
The Offering being made, the Knights-Companions rise, and forthwith divide themselves, Clarenceux conducting the Senior Knight to the MS. penes G. O. Y. pag. 113. lower end of the Stalls, on the Soveraigns side, and there at parting from him makes a Reverence to him; and Norroy conducting the next Junior Knight to the lower end of the Stalls, on the Princes side, with a Reverence also leaves him, and forthwith both Kings return to their Stations, before the Altar.
As soon as the Knights-Companions are MS. penes G. O. Y. pag. 113. entred in, at the nethermost end of the Stalls, they make their double Reverences together; and then pass along the Stalls, till they come to their own, where making the like Reverences, they take their seats.
But if any Stranger King be present at the Offering, he retires not to his Seat (after he hath offered) by the lower end of the Stalls, as is before observed, by other Knights, but along the Choire (like as doth the Soveraign) the same way that he proceeded up: for so did the MS, fol. in|dorsed Pa|tents, pen. eund. Geo. Owen. Y. King of Denmark, an. 4. Iac. Regis, but the MS, fol. in|dorsed Pa|tents, pen. eund. Geo. Owen. Y. Prince and all the other Knights-Companions, who Offered at the same time, went back to their Seats by the nether end of the Stalls: viz. at the end nearest the high Altar, which sometimes is called the MS. penes E. W. G. upper end, and sometimes the MS. penes E. W. G. East end, and often the lower end; for so did Prince Lib. N p. 174. Arthur an. 15. H. 7. and Ex Collect. R C. Cl. fol. 27. Francis Duke of Montmorancy, an. 14 Eliz. the like did MS. penes E. W. G. f. 155. b. Prince Henry an. 16 Iac. Reg. and the Duke of York an. 19  23 Car. 2.
The Ceremonies of the two Senior Knights Offering being finished, the two Senior Heralds, observing the end of the said Knights last Reverences, pass down into the Choire, after the same manner as did Clarenceux and Norroy, to bring up the two next Senior Knights-Companions to Offer, (for all Offer MS. pag. 12. according to the Seniority of their Stalls) who ascend in the same manner, and with the same Reverences, as did the two Senior Knights, and after they have Offered, are con|ducted to the lower end of the Stalls, and with usual Reverences take their Seats.
In like manner, do the next two Senior Heralds go down, and bring up the two next Senior Knights to Offer in the before-mentioned Order; which being done, they return to their Stalls as aforesaid. And after them the two Junior Heralds descend, and bring up the two next Knights to the Offering, who re|turn as did their Seniors.
And if there be yet more Knights-Companions to Offer, then Clarenceux and Norroy begin again, and go down to bring them up to Offer also. After them the Heralds, again by turns, fetch up the rest of the Knights, who proceed up, paired or single, as they have or want their Fellows, until all have made their respective Offerings: for we find not, that the Pursuivants at Arms have at any time performed any part of this Service. But to make the Ceremony more apparent, we shall insert the Order in which the Knights-Companions were con|ducted up to the Offering, at the Grand Feast, celebrated at Windesor, an. 13. Car. 2. together with the Officers of Arms that proceeded before them.

Duke of York. conducted to the Of|fering by Clarenceux and Norroy.
Earls of Salisbury and Berkshire. conducted to the Of|fering by York and Lancaster.
Earl of Northumberland. conducted to the Of|fering by Windesor and Richmond.
Dukes of Ormond and Buckingham. conducted to the Of|fering by Chester and Somerset.
Earl of Southampton. conducted to the Of|fering by Clarenceux and Norroy.
Duke of Albemarle. conducted to the Of|fering by York and Lancaster.
Earls of Sandwich and Oxford. conducted to the Of|fering by Windesor and Richmond.
Duke of Richm. and Earl of Lindsey. conducted to the Of|fering by Chester and Somerset.
Earls of Manchester and Strafford. conducted to the Of|fering by Clarenceux and Norroy.

And it is to be noted, that where any Knight hath his opposite Companion absent, he goeth up to Offer singly and alone, and so returneth; nevertheless with two Heralds before him (as may also be seen by the precedent Scheme) who conduct him to the lower end of the Stalls, and there, with a joint Reverence take their leave.
In this solemn Ceremony, the order wherein the Knights-Companions Offer, is always according to the Dignity of their Stalls, wherein they sit; for they obtain the honor and title of Seniority, according as their Stalls stand in Order, nearer to the Soveraigns Stall.
As touching the Offerings themselves,The Offerings belong to the Dean and Prebends. which the Soveraign and Knights-Com|panions do at any time make, in the Chappel at Windesor, they, of right, belong to the Dean and Prebends of that Colledge; having been conferred on them by the A. t. 33. Statutes of the Colledge. And it was also Ordained, that Art. 37. the Chantor should see, that all the Offerings there made should be received, collected, and faithfully kept, and at the end of every Month, or weekly if the Colledge required it, give a faithful account of what was so received. By which it appears, that they were not only given to the Dean and Prebends, but care was also taken, by whom they should be received, and when an Account should be rendered. All which was confirmed by King Edward the Third, by the Bishop, and Dean, and Chapter of Salisbury, to whose Jurisdiction the Colledge of Windesor doth belong, and also by the Bishop of Winchester, Prelate of the Garter, the last Day of Novem|ber, 1352.
Nor do we find but that in pursuance of these Statutes, the Dean and Prebends of the said Colledge, have constantly enjoyed them, until Dr. Mountague came to be Bishop of Winchester and Prelate of the Order; who, it seems, challenged a right to the Offerings, which he had received at the Feast of St. George celebra|ted at Windesor an. 21 Iac. Reg. Whereupon in a Chapter held on the last Day of the said Feast, the Lib. R. p. 10. Dean and Canons made their complaint against the said Prelate, for not only receiving the Knights-Companions Offerings, but for detaining them, as also the Soveraigns and Princes Offerings: Of which, the said Prelate being demanded, by the Soveraigns Lieutenant and Knights-Companions present in the said Chapter, he acknowledged, and further answered, that he had left them in the hands of the Subdean of the Chappel, tanquam in deposito. But the Chapter being ready to rise, the matter was not then further debated, but referred to the next Feast.
Autogr. in Aea. Coll. Winds. Bishop Andrews did also de facto, both receive and keep the Offrings, when|soever he, as Prelate, Officiated at Windesor; but his Executors to avoid Suit, Autogr. in Aea. Coll. Winds. compounded for them.
It appears by the Pag. 43. Red Book of the Order, upon Complaint of the Dean and Prebends of Windsor, in a Chapter held the 24. of Sept. an. 4. Car. 1. that Pag. 43. power was given to the Knights-Commissioners of the Order, to determine this contention about the Offering, and withal it is there noted, that Bishop Neyle the Pag. 43. then Prelate himself also desired, that a Chapter might determine the matter.
But we have not met with any account of what these Commissioners (so im|powred) did, though by an Expression in the Pag. 52. same Book, an. 5 Car. 1. one would guess, as though the thing had been determined against the Prelate. For an Offering having been then made in the Chappel at Windesor, and the Sove|raigns Offering received by the Pag. 51. Bishop of Norwich, that Officiated for the Pre|late, and the Knights-Companions Offering by the two Prebends, who assisted at the Altar, it is added: Ibid. pag. 52. That what was Offered, fell according to Law of the place, to the share of the Dean and Prebends: And yet it appears, that the controversy was not ended, since by a subsequent Order of Chapter, (6 Oct. an. 6 Car. 1.) Lib. R. p. 64.  65. the matter was again referred to the nine Knights-Commissioners of the Order, or any four of them, who were to hear both Parties, and make their Report, that so the same might receive a determination. But here also it is immedi|ately noted, That the Ibid. next Morning the Prelate (nequid nimis deni suae sententiae tribuere videretur) voluntarily delivered to the Dean, 9l. 4. that sum being the moity of the Offerings he had received from the Soveraign and

Knights-Companions. The next Feast after held at Windsor, viz. Pag. 73. 4. Oct. an. 7 Car. 1. the controversy was again Pag. 74. resumed, and after some arguments urged by the Prelate, and answered by the Register, it was Pag. 75. Decreed, that the Dean should attend the Knights-Commissioners, at their next sitting, with the Statutes, and other Grants to the Colledge, and that from them the controversie should be deter|mined. After this, there is another Memorandum made in the same Register, which informs us, that the Pag. 91. Prelate by the hands of the Chantor delivered all the Offerings received at the Feas Pag. 91. an. 9 Car. 1. to the Canons, upon condition of restitution, if it chanced they Pag. 91. should be adjudged to him, and not to the Ca|nons. And whether any final determination was afterwards made herein, we have not hitherto found. But since the return of the present Soveraign, the Offerings received at the Feast of St. George at Windesor, an. 13 Car. 2. were divided between the Dean and Canons resident, the Prelate not disputing the right.
And now that we may see, what hath ordinarily been Offered in Gold and Silver, this following Account of the Offring received by the Bishop of Win|chester, (attested under his hand, and delivered to the Dean and Prebends of Windesor) will give us some Information.

Ex ipso Au|togr. in Aerar. praedict. Coll. Sept. 24.1628. The Offring at St. Georges Feast at Windesor, besides the Kings Offring of the Bezant not yet redeemed.



l.
s.
d.


The whole Offring of the eight Knights 
04
15
00.




Viz.
in Gold.
in Silver.



s.
s.


The Lord Steward
10
01.


Lord Chamberlain
10
02.


Earl of Kellie
10
02.


Earl of Salisbury
10
02.


Earl of Dorset
10
02.


Earl of Holland
10
02.


Earl of Suffolk
10
02.


Earl of Berk-shire
10
02.



04 15 00.




The Offrings on Thursday the 25th Day.



s.
s.


His Majesties Offrings
20
10.


Lord Steward
10
01.


Lord Chamberlain
10
02.


Earl of Kellie
10
02.


Earl of Salisbury
10
02.


Earl of Dorset
10
02.


Earl of Holland
10
02.


Earl of Suffolk
10
02.


Earl of Berk-shire
10
02.



06 05 00.





l.
s.
d.


The sum of both, besides the Kings Besant unredeemed is 
11
00
00.


Of which, given to Mr. Cotton who waited at the Altar by me 5 s. for the rest I am answerable.
R. Winton.
When all the Knights-Companions have Offered, and are returned to their Stalls, then doth the Chancellor of the Order make his Reverences; and after him the Register, Garter, and Black Rod, theirs together, and take their Seats.
Upon this the afore-mentioned Groom, and Page of the removing Wardrobe, roll up the long Carpet (spread for the Knights to kneel on) close to the fore|side of the Altar; which done, the Provincial Kings, Heralds, and ursuivants next, and last of all the Alms-Knights, make their Reverences, and pass down into the Choire, and take their stands before the Stalls, where they remain un|til the Prelate hath finished the Second Service: and then the Prelate, conducted by the Serjeant of the Vestry, comes down from the Altar, with his accustomed Reverences to his Seat. After whom, the two Prebends are brought down by the Verger of the Chppel, who make a Reverence towards the Altar before they descend, next a double Reverence below the first Haut Pas; and lastly ano|ther towards the lower end of the Choire, and so take their Seats.



SECT. VI. The Return to the Presence.
IMmediately after, all prepare to pass out of the Choire, and to proceed back to the Presence-Chamber, which is done in every point and circumstance, as is set down to have been observed, in the Soveraigns return from the first Vespers.
That is to say,
The Alms-Knights ascend to the Rails before the Altar, and divide themselves on either side.
The Pursuivants, Heralds, and Provincial Kings pass up to their usual station, on the Haut Pas's before the Altar, and there divide themselves likewise.
Then Garter summons down the Knights-Companions, who orderly descend into the Choire.
Next, the Officers of the Order stand up before their Forms.
All this being done,
The Alms-Knights descend, and pass out of the Choire.
The Prebends follow.
Next, the Officers of Arms.
Then the Knights-Companions.
After them the Black Rod, Garter, and Register.
Next, the Chancellor and Prelate.
Then the Sword; and lastly
The Soveraign himself, being attended, as when he entred the Choire; at the Choire door he is received under the Canopy, by the Gentlemen that bear it, and from whence the Band of Pensioners follow his person.
The Proceeding passeth on through the South door of the Chappel, and here, the Trumpets are taken in, and placed before the Alms-Knights, who found all the way up, till they arrive at the stairs foot, going up to the Guard-Chamber: and assoon as they cease, the Drums and Fises begin to beat and play.
Thence the Proceeding passeth into the Presence-Chamber, whither it first ought to go, before the Soveraign pass into the Great Hall to Dinner, and being there arrived, the Knights-Companions take their stands as usually, and after the Soveraign's salutation and their Reverences, the Soveraign retires into the Privy-Chamber for a little while, and the Knights likewise retire themselves, till notice be given that Dinner is ready.
When the Feast was heretofore held at Whitehall, the return of the Soveraign (or his Lieutenant) and Knights-Companions, from the MS. pen. G. O Y. pag. 113. second Morning Service

on the Feast day, was through the great Hall and Guard-Chamber into the Pre|sence, and thence they retired into the Privy Lodgings till Dinner was ready. But since the Grand Dinner hath been prepared in the Banquetting house there, the Proceeding hath passed from the Chappel, through the said great Hall, over the Terrace (while it stood) and since, from the Chappel, up the Stairs into the Guard-Chamber, down into the Great Court, and so through the covered Walk into the said Room; where being entred, and the Soveraign arrived neer the State (after Salutation and Reverences made, as usually done in the Presence-Chamber) the Soveraign and Knights-Companions retired till Dinner was ready; and hereupon in this Room now, as formerly in the Presence, doth the Proceed|ing from the Chappel take its termination.


SECT. VII. Of the Dinner on the Feast Day.
THE Soveraign and Knights-Companions having for a while retired, after their return from Morning Service on the Feast day, they make ready to go into St. George's Hall to Dinner; where all things are prepared against their coming. But more particularly, the Soveraign's Proceeding to the Hall is, when he hath notice given him, that the Collect. W. le N. Cl. MS. pen. eund. W. le N. fol. 20.  27.  MS. penes G. O. Y. p. 113. first Mess is set upon his Table: the Dishes be|ing brought up in the following order; Wind Instruments, from the Gallery at the lower end of the Hall (where the rest of the Soveraign's Musick is placed) sounding all the while.

4 Serjeants at Arms, two and two.

Controller.
Treasurer.

Sewer.

The Messes carried up by the Pensioners.
Master of the Houshold.
A Clerk Controller.
Second Clerk of the Kitchin.
Cofserer.
A Clerk Controller.
Chief Clerk of the Kitchin.




But in the Plate representing the Soveraign's sitting at Dinner, the Serjeants at Arms, and Clerks that usually follow the Messes, are omitted, for want of room.
This Dinner hath several Names given to it in the Registers of the Order, all describing and setting forth its magnificence, as Lib. N. p. 166. Mensa splendida, Lib. C. p. 108. Regium Epu|tum, Ibid. p. 194. Epulum solenne, and the like: and for the Provisions made for it, they are said to be Ibid. p. 184. most costly and delicate, Lib. R. p. 108. compleatly royal, and set forth with all befitting state and grandeur.
Upon the foresaid notice, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions come forth of the Privy-Lodgings into the Presence-Chamber, with the Officers of the Order before him, and passeth to the Collect. W. le N. Cl. middle of the State; where turning about, he makes a stand, while the Knights place themselves on either side, in their Collect. W. le N. Cl. usual order, the Officers of the Order Collect. W. le N. Cl. retiring a little on the one side and on the other. And assoon as the Knights-Companions have put themselves into rank and ordr, they make their Collect. W. le N. Cl. Reverences to the Soveraign, according to the usual manner, who thereupon re-salutes them, as is accustomed.
It seems, the Prebends of the Colledge had, in King Henry the Eighth's Reign, discontinued the duty of their attendance on the Soveraign, aswell at the Grand Dinner, as at other the Services of the day, which caused an Order to pass for the performance of their accustomed services, particularly at such times; for

at a Chapter holden at Windesor, the Ex Lib. M. 17 f. 25. b. in Offic. Arm. 12. day of May, the 24, year of the said King, it was Ordained by the Earl of Arundel, then being the Kings Lieutenant, with the assent and advice of the Knights of the Order there present; Ex Lib. M. 17 f. 25. b. in Offic. Arm. That the Canons of the Colledge of Saint George, being present at the Feast, should have their Mantles according to the Statutes of the Order, and give their attendance the day of the Feast, as well at Dinner and Grace, as at other the Divine Service, and as of old time hath been accustomed, in avoiding the displeasures of, c.
Immediately after the Knights-Companions have made their Reverences, the Alms-Knights, Prebends, and Officers of Arms pass on before the Knights-Compa|nions, through the Guard-Chamber into St. George's Hall, the Officers of the Or|der following; after whom comes the Soveraign, having his Train carried up as at other times. And being entred a little way therein, the Alms-Knights first, next the Prebends, and then the Officers of Arms, fall off one after another, on the side opposite to the Knights-Companions Table, Clarenceux neerest to the State.
Then the two junior Knights pass a little above Clarenceux, and there facing their Table make a stand, and the rest of the Knights-Companions coming up after, do in like manner make a stand, according to their seniority, the senior neerest the State; through which Lane, the Officers of the Order proceed, con|ducting the Soveraign till he draws neer to the State, and then do the said Offi|cers Collect. W. le N. Cl. retire, as did the former part of the Proceeding on the side opposite to the Table; the Soveraign in the mean time passeth on to the Collect. W. le N. Cl. State, and there turn|ing himself about, receiveth the Reverences of the Knights-Companions, and re-salutes them as usually.
After this the Soveraign, yet standing directly before the State, hath Collect. W. le N. Cl. Water brought him up with three Reverences, by the Noblemen assigned to that service: the Lord Chamberlain, if he be not a Knight of the Order, otherwise the Vice-Chamberlain, going before them; for so did the Earl of St. Albans at the Grand Feast, an. 23. Car. 2. so also did Sir George Carteret an. 19. Car. 2. But an. 3. H. 7. some of the MS. penes Arth. Com. An|glesey, fol. 167. Knights-Companions served the Soveraign with Water. And to be more particular in the Ceremony of the Soveraign's washing, it is noted an. 2. Eliz. that the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Earl of Arundel held the Towel, the Earl of Pembroke the Water, the Earl of Derby, and Marquess of Winchester Assistants, the Bason, and the Earl of Derby gave the Soveraign the Assay of it. Again an. 7. of the same Queen, the MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 20. b. Duke of Norfolk held the Towel, the Earl of Derby received it, the Earl of Sus|sex brought the Water, and the Earls of Northumberland and Shrewsbury Assisted; all these being Knights of the Order.


In like manner also, is the Soveraign's Lieu|tenant served with Water before Dinner (but not by any of the Nobility) of which there are many Examples: among the rest, that an. 3. Eliz. when Sir Ibid. fol. . Tho. Berenger gave him the Water kneeling, and Sir  Radcliff the Towell; as also an. 7. Eliz. when Sir Et fol. 20. Nicholas Poynes brought him the Towell, and Sir Tho. Be|renger the Water.
When the Soveraign hath washed, the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Pre|late of the Order says Grace, being assisted with some of the Soveraign's Chaplains; an. 7. Eliz. the MS. pen. W. D. N. fol. 20. b. Register of the Order assisted him, and an. 9. Eliz. the Ibid. f. 27. b. Bishop of Rochester, then the Sove|raign's Almoner.
Grace being said, the Soveraign sits down in his Chair, placed in the middle of his Table under the State; for there is the most hono|rable Seat, and the place where the State is held: And here we have occasion to offer to the Readers view, a draught of the old Wooden Chair, said to be the Founders, yet

remaining in St. George's Hall at Windesor, in which the Soveraigns heretofore sat at Dinner.
Most usually the Soveraign sat alone, though sometimes heretofore, he hath been pleased to admit some of the Knights-Companions to sit at his Table with him: For instance in a few, Sigismond the Emperor, when he received a Per|sonal Installation at Windesor, at the Grand Feast held there an. 4. H. 5. it is re|membred, that the Soveraign out of great civility Lib. N. p. 57. offered the chief place at the Table to him (which hitherto the King, as Soveraign, had retained in the Lib. N. p. 57. Chappel, and Lib. N. p. 57. in all the Proceedings) which whether the Emperor accepted of it or not, is not clear enough expressed in the Pag. 57. Black Book, but we have met with an anci|ent memorial which is more particular, and faith, that at Dinner the Emperor MS. in Offic. Armor. [F. 9. Interments] fol. 12. b. kept the State, that is, sat in the middle, and another that saith the MS. in Bibl. Cott. sub effig. Vitell. A. 16. sub an. 4. H. 5. King sat on the Emperors right side, and the Duke of Collect. Tho. Rowe nuper Canc. Bedford, the Lord Chancellor, the Bishop of Duresme on the Emperors left hand; the Duke of Briga, and Collect. Tho. Rowe nuper Canc. another Duke of the Emperors Train, sat both on the Soveraign's side, and all of them on one side of the Table.
Moreover an. 11. E. 4. (the Soveraign then keeping the Feast at Windesor) the MS. in Offic. Arm. [M. 15.] fol. 12. b. Prelate of the Order sat on his right hand, and the Duke of Gloucester and Earl of Essex on his lest. So an. 3. H. 7. the Lib. N. p. 166. Prelate sat alone on the Soveraign's right hand, at the end of the Table. And in the 24. year of the same King (who then celebrated the Feast at Greenwich) there sat with him at the Boards end the Dukes of MS. in Offic. Arm. [M. 17.] fol. 35. b. Norfolk and Suffolk the Marquess of Exceter, and the Lord Stephen Gardiner Prelate of the Garter.
It is also noted, that at the Feast held at Windesor an. 11. H. 8. only the Lord Ex eod. MS. fol. 27. b. Richard Fox then Prelate, sat on the right hand of the Soveraign, neer to the Boards end, being served with his MS. Carver, Sewer, and Cupbearer, Mess, Course, and Service, as the Soveraign had. In which MS. p. 13. place sat also the Bishop of Win|chester, an. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar. And an. 22. H. 8. Ibid. fol. 32. b. four of the greatest States (be|ing Knights-Companions) sat at the Soveraign's Table, and the residue of the Knights at their own.
An. 2. Eliz. the Soveraign admitted the Earls of Collect. W. le N. Cl. Arundel and Derby, toge|ther with the Marquess of Winchester, to her Table, who sat at the end thereof on the left hand; and the following year the Duke of MS fol. penes W. D. N. fol. 3. Norfolk, the Marquess of Northampton, and Earl of Arundel, sat also at the Tables end. So an. 7. Eliz. the Duke of Ibid. f. 20. b. Norfolk, and Marquess of Winchester; and an. 9. the Earls of Et fol. 27. b. Arundel and Pembroke, whilst the other Knights-Companions sat at their own Table.
But this favour and honor was not afforded to any of the Knights-Compani|ons, since her Reign, no, not at the Installation of the present Soveraign, though a Ceremony carried on with designed indulgence and honor; but we find him then placed at the same Mess with the Palmer's large Iourn. pag. 14. senior Knight, at the upper end of the Knights-Companions Table.
Assoon as the Soveraign is sat down, the Knights-Companions Collect. W. le N. Cl. put on their Caps, and remaining so covered, forthwith retire against the Tables prepared for them; where standing a while, Water is brought to them, and they also Collect. W. le N. Cl. wash; there being to MS. pen. W. D. N fol. 20  MS pen. G.O.Y. pag. 123. each pair a Bason and Ewer, and a Towel allowed, which are brought in by Gentlemen of quality; and having washt, they all sit down.
The order of passing to their Seats at the Table an. 19. Car. 2. was on this manner (and appointed so to be observed for the future) first his Highness the Duke of York entred within the Rails at the upper end of the Table, and so passed down the hither side, to the lower end, and thence up along the Bench side to his place; in like manner followed all the other Knights, according to the seniority of their Stalls; for it is ordained, that they shall sit in Hen. 8. Stat. Art. 11. that order, not according to their Estates or Degrees (except the Sons or Brethren of Stranger Kings, Princes, and Dukes, who shall keep their place or rooms after their Estates) and all on the Lib. N. pag. 166. Hen. 8. Stat. Art. 11.  MS. p. 13. right hand or further side of their Tables (not one over against another) two and two at a Table, to one Mess. But those whose Companions are wanting sit alone, and have a whole Mess allowed to each of them.
Their meat is usually brought up by the Yeomen of the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Guard, Collect. W. le N. Cl. and are at|tended by some of the Gentlemen Pensioners, and others of the Soveraign's Ser|vants; two to each Table.
And now to descend to the Officers of the Order,3. Officers of the Order had a Table in the great Hall. who though they sit not at this day in the great Hall at Dinner, yet anciently it appears, they had a Table allowed them there. For first the Lib. N. p. 166. Black Book rendring an account of the mag|nificent Feast of St. George, held at Windesor an. Lib. N. p. 166. 3. H. 7. and having spoken some|what of the Soveraign's splendid and sumptuous Table, as also of that, of the Knights-Companions, placed on the right side of the Hall, it tells us, that a Lib. N. p. 167. little beneath the said Knights-Companions, there sat on both sides the Table, the Lib. N. p. 167. Dean, the Register of the Order, the Prebends, the Choire and Alms-Knights.
The said Register informs us further, that at the Table set in the Lib. N. p. 167. middle of the Hall, sat the Lord Bothville Ambassador from the King of Scots, the Lords Edmond of Suffolk, Grey, Morley, Latimer, La Ware, and Barness; a little beneath whom sat the Choire of the Soveraign's Chappel.
At another Table, on the Lib. N. p. 167. left hand side of the Hall, sat the President Kussem|burg, with the Ambassadors of the King of the Romans, and the Duke his Son; over against whom on the other side sat the Lord Malpart, Ambassador from the Duke of Britagne, the Lord Housey and others, MS. penes Ath. Com. An|glesey, f. 167.  Knights, Esquires, and Officers which had given their attendance at the high Mass.
Moreover at the Feast holden at Windesor, MS. in Of|fic. Ar. [M. 17.] fol. 28. an. 11 H. 8. we meet with an account of several other Tables set in St. Georges Hall, beside those of the Sove|raign and Knights-Companions: For on the MS. in Of|fic. Ar. [M. 17.] fol. 28. Southside, opposite to the Knights-Companions Table, was a Table placed for the Lord Steward, at which then sat certain French Gentlemen, being Hostages of France, accompanied with Earls and Lords, and none at that Board under the Degree of a Lord. At MS. in Of|fic. Ar. [M. 17.] fol. 28. the second Table of the said Southside, sat the Dean of Windesor, Doctor Vescy Register of the Order, the Abbots of Towerhill and Medemenham (who that Morning read the Epistle and Gospel) and the Choire or Chappel. And at the MS. in Of|fic. Ar. [M. 17.] fol. 28. West end of the same Table (which was all joined together as far as to the Choire) sat the other Officers of the Order, as MS. in Of|fic. Ar. [M. 17.] fol. 28. Register, Garter, and Vsher of the Black Rod, accompanied with the Legas Brother, and four other Strangers, and beneath the Strangers sat divers Knights, next to them sat the MS. in Of|fic. Ar. [M. 17.] fol. 28. Officers of Arms, then several other Gentlemen filled up the Table, unto the Chappel adjoining to the Hall; the residue of Officers sat in the MS. in Of|fic. Ar. [M. 17.] fol. 28. Chappel at divers Tables.
In the eighth year of King Charles the First, the Dinner being then prepared in the Banqueting-House at Whitehall, we find a particular mention of a Table for the Officers of the Order, and in what part of the Room it was then set, namely on the Lib. R. p. 78. right hand side of the Banqueting-house, over against the Table of the Knights-Companions: who all sat after the manner of the Knights-Companions on the further side of the Table; having their Meat brought and served up to them by the Yeomen of the Guard, and some of the Soveraigns-Servants. And at the Soveraigns command, signified by the Treasurer of the Houshold, they sat covered all Dinner while, the Prelate and Register in their four cornerd Caps, and the other three in their Hats. So also at the next Great Feast viz. an. Ibid. p. 8. 9 Car. 1. at Windesor, these Officers (Dining in the Great Hall) sat covered, but not till such time as the Soveraign (by the Treasurer of the Houshold) had given com|mand for it.
And though it was by the Soveraigns command that they sat covered at this time also, yet the following Afternoon it was moved against in Chapter, as a thing unfit to be permitted; Ibid. pag. 98. because some of the grand Nobility always ser|ved the Soveraign at this Feast uncovered, and therefore not sitting that the Officers (being all of far lower Degree excepting the Prelate) should sit with their Hats on. Whereupon it was Ordered, Lib. R. p. 88. That it should be referred to the fur|ther consideration of the Knights-Commissioners.
Afterwards we find it was Ordered in Chapter on the Eve of the Feast, an. 10 Car. 1. Ibid. pag. 94. That these Officers should be at their choice, either to keep the Feast privately by themselves, or sit uncovered where the Soveraign Dined. They there|upon

thence forward, forbore sitting in the Hall, or where else the Soveraign and Knights-Companions sat; and at the Grand Feasts, celebrated at Windesor, since the present Soveraigns Happy Return, they had their Messes served up into the Chappel, at the end of St. Georges Hall, and there Dined.
By what is before spoken, touching the order of sitting at Dinner, an. 11. H. 8. it appears, that the Officers of Arms did then also sit at a Table in St. Georges Hall, which joined to that, where the Officers of the Order also sat. And among the memorials of the Feast held an. 19 Eliz. it is noted that on the MS. pen. prae|fat. G.O.Y. pag. 113. Eve thereof, the Heralds had at Supper, their allowance as accustomed, viz. 16 Dishes of Meat at the first course, and 8. at the second.
A Collect. W. le N. Cl. little before the Soveraigns second course is sent for, all the press of Peo|ple (which throng towards the Knights-Companions Tables, out of curiosity to behold them sitting at Dinner and observe their Services) are to be removed away towards the side Tables; whereby a place may be left spacious enough, for the Soveraign to take all the Knights-Companions in view; which being done, the Soveraign Collect. W. le N. Cl. stands up and drinks to them (and so is it remembred to be done by MS pag. 13. King Philip and Queen Mary) they standing all the while unco|vered, and which they do altogether, till they have pledged him.
And Collect. W. le N. Cl. immediately before the said course is brought in, The manner of proclaiming the Soveraigns Style. the Press is again removed, from the Knights-Companions Table, to make another spacious lane from the lower end of the Hall up to the State. At which Collect. W. le N. Cl. lower end the Officers of Arms assemble, and there make themselves ready to proceed up in the following Order.

Garter,
Clarenceux and Norroy.
Heralds, two and two.
Pursuivants, two and two.

Having put themselves in the foresaid Order, they Ibid. altogether make their Reverence to the Soveraign, and proceed near the side of the Knights-Compani|ons Table, until they come to the Ibid. middle of the Hall, where after another Reverence made, they go still forward, and when Garter hath passed about Ibid. two yards beyond the Knights Table, and come near the Haut Pas ascending the Soveraigns State, they jointly make the like Reverence again.
Then Garter with a loud and audible voice, crys Larges thrice, (though anciently but Collect. W. le N. Cl.  MS. fol. pen. G.O.Y. pag. 114. twice.)
Upon Garters beginning to cry Largess, Lib. C. p 193. all the Knights-Companions (except Kings and Great Princes, if any be present) stand up uncovered (so did the Lib. R. p. 85. Officers of the Order when they Dined in the Hall) until he hath made an end. Which Custom it seems had been, an. 7 Car. 1. for some years Ibid. pag. 74. discontinued. Then Garter proceeds, and proclaims the Soveraigns Stiles and Titles of Honor; first in Latin, as followeth.
Serenissimi, Excellentissimi,  Potentissimi First Intro|duced at the Feast, an. 19. Car. 2. the word Princi|p being used before. Monarchae Caroli Secundi Dei Gratia Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris,  Supremi Nobilissimi Ordinis Garterii.
Which done, He and all the Officers of Arms, make another Reverence, and Garter Proclaims the Soveraigns Stile in French.
Du Treshault, Tres-excellent  Tres-puissant Monarque Charles le Second par le Grace de Dieu, Roy de la Grande Britaigne, France,  d'Irelande, Defenseur de la Foy,  Soveraign du Tres-noble Ordre de la Irtiere.
Then Garter and the rest of his Fellows, make another Reverence, and lastly he Proclaims the Soveraign Stiles in English.






Of the most high, most Excellent, and most mighty Monarch Charles the Second, by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France, and Ire|land, Defendor of the Faith, and Soveraign of the most Noble Ordre of the Garter.
At the end of which (but not before) Garter and the rest join together, in crying Largess thrice, and then they all make Reverence together.
Hereupon, sometimes the Treasurer of the Houshold puts the Soveraign's Lar|gess, (which is 10 l. in Gold) into Garter's Hat; and this is afterwards divided among the Officers of Arms, according to Custom. But an. 23. Car. 2. the Lord Book intituled St. George's Feast, in the Lord Chamber|lain's Office. Chamberlain sent his Warrant to Sir Edward Griffin Knight, Treasurer of the So|veraign's Chamber, to deliver this Largess Money to the Black Rod, and he put it into Garter's Hat, so soon as the last Largess was cryed.
The proclaiming the Stile being finished, all the Officers of Arms retire about Collect. W. le N. Cl. 3 yards backward, keeping their Faces towards the Soveraign, and there make another Reverence, and then retyring yet backward, about the same distance, they jointly make another Reverence, after which they retire out of the Hall and go to Dinner.
This Ceremony ended, the Soveraign's second Course is brought up, in the following order, first the Serjeants at Arms, next the Treasurer and Comptroller of the Soveraign's Houshold, next the Sewer, then the Gentlemen Pensioners bearing the Messes, then the Cofferer and Master of the Houshold, the two Clearks of the Greencloth, the two Clearks Controllers, and lastly the two Clearks of the Kitchin following all in the rear, habited in their Gowns, and holding their Caps in their hands; and after the Soveraign's Table is compleatly furnished, then is the second Course served up to the Knights-Companions Tables, by the Yeomen of the Guard, in such order as was the first.
The order of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions sitting at Dinner on the Grand Feast day, an. 15. Car. 2. The order in proclaiming the Stile, and bring|ing up the second Course, with an exact prospect of the inside of St. George's Hall at Windesor, we have here drawn together for the Readers better view.
But where any Knight-Companion happens to be Installed at this Grand Feast, and is present at Dinner, then Garter, and the Officers of Arms, proceed in or|der (after they have proclaimed the Soveraign's Stile as before) from the lower end of the Hall, till they come before the new installed Knights Mess, and there he crys Largess once, and proclaims his Stile in English only, after which they retire backward, and go to Dinner. Concerning which, we had a full and remarkable instance in the 13. year of the present Soveraign, when the Duke of York and other Knights were Installed: For after Garter had proclaimed the Soveraign's Stile, and he, together with the Officers of Arms, had retired to the lower end of the Hall, they all proceeded again, as at proclaiming the Soveraign's Stile, to the upper end of the Knights-Companions Table, where his Highness the Duke sat, and there Garter cryed Largess twice, and proclaimed his Stile in English; then after a joint Reverence made, Garter and the Heralds now joining with him cryed Largess twice. This done, they went backward, as before, to the next senior Installed Knight, and proclaimed his Stile, and cryed Largess but once, the like to all the rest installed at that Festival, and so they departed out of the Hall to Dinner.
It seems to have anciently been the custom of other great Feasts, besides this of St. George, at the second Course, when the Soveraign's Stile was to be proclaim|ed, for Garter and the Officers of Arms, to proceed in order up to the Kings Table, and there to cry Largess, and upon the receipt of the Kings Largess (in the name of all the Officers of Arms) first to make some short Oration to the King, and then to proclaim his Stile; for so MS. intitul. King Hen. . Proceedings pen. und. W. l Neve. an. 20. H. 7. when the King kept his Easter in great State at Greenwich, have we met with the following Speech (among some Collections of Sir Thomas Wryothesley then Garter) made to the King in humble thankfulness, for the Largess at that time bestowed upon the Officers of Arms.
Most high mighty and excellent Prince, most victorious and Christian King and also our most drede Soveraine and naturell Lord, by whom, through Gods provison, vertue ys greatly incressed and vice oppressed, juxta illud sapientis abhominabiles Regi agunt Impii qui Justitia formatur solium, the which to your Highnesse is,Prov. 16. viz. Incressing of vertue and honor perpetual, and to your subjects continuall Welth teste Salustio, quia diviciarum  forme gloria fluxa at fragilis est virtus clara perpetua habetur and as concerning us your Officers of Armes, and Servants of honour and of Noblesse, in as moche as in us ys, we humbly thanke your good grace of the grete and abundant Largess geven unto us, in the honour of God and of his most glorieuse Resurrection: and for as moche as wee suffice not to geve graces condigne unto your Highness, Nam quod praestare tanto, c. Wee meekly beseech almighty God long to preserve maintaine and encresse your most noble and royall Estate, which ys the singuler Welthe and comfort of this your realme, and of all your trewe subjects; and to send you the perfict knowledge and victory over all your enemys.
Nor was it unusual for Poets, in former times, to present the Soveraign with the issue of their Fancies, having a subject so noble as this of the Grand Feast; among whom, the following Verses were presented to King Henry the Seventh, at the Feast of St. George celebrated at Windesor in the 3. year of his Reign, pro|bably by Mr. Iohn Skelton (after made Poet Laureat) who about that time began to be of some esteem.

MS. penes Arth. Com. An|glesey, fol. 169. O moste famous Noble King! thy Fame both spring and spreade,
Henry the Seventh our Soverain in eiche Regeon,
All England hath cause thy grace to love and dread,
Seing Embassadores sethe fore protectyon,
For Ayd, helpe, and succore, which lyeth in thie Eleyone.
England now Rejoyce for Ioyous mayess thou bee,
To see thy Kyng so florethe in Dignetye.


This Realme a Seaforte stoode in greate Iupardie,
When that Noble Prince deceased King Edward;
Which in his Dayes gate honore full nobly,
After his decesse nighe hand all was marr'd,
Eich Regione this Land dispised mischefe when they hard:
Wherefore Rejoyse for joyous mayst thou be,
To see thy Kynge so floreth in high dignetye.


Fraunce, Spayne, Scoteland, and Britanny, Flanders also,
Three of them present keepinge thy Noble Feaste,
Of St. George in Windsor, Ambassadors comying more,
Eich of them in honore bothe the more and the lesse,
Seeking thie grace to have thie Noble begesse;
Wherefore now Rejoise and joyous maisse thou be,
To see thy Kynge so florishing in dignetye.


O Knightly Ordere clothed in Robes with Gartere,
The Queen's grace and thy Mother clothed in the same;
The Nobles of thie Realme Riche in araye, Aftere
Lords, Knights and Ladyes, unto thy greate same,
Now shall all Embassadors know thie Noble Name,
By thy Feaste Royal; nowe joyeous mayest thou be,
To see thie King so florishinge in dignety.


Here this day St. George Patron of this Place
Honored with the Gartere, these of Chevalrye,
Chaplenes synging processyon keeping the same,
With Archbushopes and Bushopes beseene nobly,
Much people presente to see the King Henrye;
Wherefore now St. George all we pray to thee,
To keepe our Soberaine in his dignetye.

At the Grand Feast held at Windesor, MS penes Ed. Fau|conb. gen. an. 4. Car. 1. the Queen (her Ladies at|tending) was conducted into St. George's Hall, a MS penes Ed. Fau|conb. gen. little before the Soveraign's Stiles were proclaimed, to see the Soveraign and Knights-Companions sit at Dinner.
At the Feast there celebrated by the present Soveraign,The Queen's coming into the Hall, to observe the Order of the Feast. in the 15. year of his Reign, the Soveraign's Stiles were not proclaimed (as many times heretofore) until the second Course was set upon the Table, but it was by the Soveraign's special direction, because he expected the Queens coming into the Hall, to see the state and glory of the Feast; who staying something long, and the second Course being already brought to the lower end of the Hall, and the Sove|raign seeing it stand there, gave command it should be set upon the Table, but that the proclaiming of his Stiles should be yet forborn. Immediately after, the Queen attended with her Ladies, entred St. George's Hall, and passing up the middle, came to the Soveraign's Table, where she was seated on his right hand. Hereupon Garter, accompanied by his Fellow Officers of Arms, proceeded up the Hall, and with usual Ceremonies proclaimed the Soveraign's Stiles, in Latine, French, and English.
In like manner, when the Duke of York was Installed at the Grand Feast, an. 13. Car. 2. his Dutchess, desirous to see the order and grandeur of it, was brought into the Hall, assoon as the Soveraign and Knights-Companions were set, and passing to the upper end of the Table, where the Duke sat, she stood on his left hand all Dinner while.
And it appears to be no new thing, that the Queens of England, have been desirous to behold the magnificence of this solemn Feast; since we also find it recorded an. 11. H. 8. that a MS. in Of|fic. Armor. [M. 17.] f. 28. little while before the second Course was carried in, Queen Katherine and her Ladies came to the MS. in Of|fic. Armor. [M. 17.] f. 28. Gallery, at the end of the Hall (which was nobly prepared for her) to see the honorable Services and Ceremo|nies there performed.
But besides the Queens of England, the Ambassadors of Foreign Kings and States have counted it an honor, to have view of this Grand Feast; and amongst others, we find the Sir Iohn Fenets Ob|serv. touching foreign Ambas|sadors. p. 34. French Ambassador was an. 15. Iac. R. conducted into the Banquetting-house at Whitehall, by Sir Iohn Fenet (then Assistant Master of the Ceremonies) about the Sir Iohn Fenets Ob|serv. touching foreign Ambas|sadors. p. 34. middle of Dinner, where he placed himself at the left hand of the Soveraign; and having staid there about an hour, he descended to the Knights-Companions Table, and there saluted the Prince, and the rest of the Knights of the Order, as he passed along before them, and so departed.
At the Grand Feast kept at Whitehall an. 19. Iac. R. to the sight of which the Ex eod. lib. Observ. p. 79. Polonian Ambassador Osalinskie, Count Palatine of Sindomerskie, having recei|ved an invitation, he went, about the middle of Dinner, to see and Ex eod. lib. Observ. p. 79. salute the So|veraign, the Prince, and Knights-Companions as they sat at the Table; and thence retired into the Council Chamber, where he and the Ex eod. lib. Observ. p. 79. Arch Dukes Agent, Van Mab, had been before treated.
The next following year, on the Ibid. pag. 106. 22. of May, which was the day assigned for holding the Grand Feast at Whitehall, the Prince (being the Soveraign's Lieutenant) supplied his place in the Banquetting house at the Table, whither Ibid. pag. 106. Don Carlos de Coloma the Spanish Ambassador, and Pag. 102. Philip a second Son to the Lantgrave of Hesse (sent hither on a negotiation of his Father) were conducted: the Spanish Ambassador Pag. 18. standing at his Highness right hand, and the young Lant-grave at his left, most part of the Dinner.
An. 3. Car. 1. the Pag. 107. Ambassador of Denmark, Paul Rosenkrantz, and Ioachimi, and Monsieur Catz, the Ambassadors and Deputies of the States, were conducted altogether, in the Pag. 107. time of the second Course, to the Soveraign's Table, and there presented themselves, at that side next the Soveraign's left hand; and after, pas|sed down along before the Knights-Companions (with their respects bestowed personally on each Knight as they deemed fitting) and then returned by the way they entred.
But in this last instance, where there were more Ambassadors than one, and from several Princes, a Question arose, Ibid. whether they were to perform this Ce|remony of seeing the Feast, and presenting themselves at the Dinner, singly and alone, or jointly and together; insomuch that the Danish Ambassador was of the mind to perform it by himself, Ibid. which course was approved by the Lord Chamberlain: But the States Ambassador Ioachimi, telling him that he and the French Ambassador had been joint spectators, at a Feast two or three years be|fore, at which time he was employed a Commissioner hither, the Ambassador of Denmark came in along with the others.
Lastly (for we would not be over tedious with Instances) when the Grand Feast was held at Whitehall an. 19. Car. 2. the Swedish Ambassador had not only a place assigned him in the Choire, at the North side of the Altar, to behold the Solemnities on the Feast day in the Chappel, and when the Grand Procession passed into the Court, he also went out at the little door on the North side of the Chappel, up to the Greencloth Chamber, whence he had a fair prospect of it, and thence returned to behold the Ceremonies of the Offring. But when the Soveraign was at Dinner, he entred the Banquetting-house from the Privy Gallery, and passing to the Soveraign's Table, stood there on the left hand of the Queen, thence he went to salute the Knights-Companions at their Table, beginning with his Highness the Duke of York; and at all these places was attended by Sir Charles Cotterell Master of the Ceremonies.
In the last place comes in the Banquet, brought up to the Soveraign's Table by the Pensioners, in the same order, and with the same Attendant as are the Sove|raign's Messes; only, in the place of the Clerk of the Kitchin, the chief Clerk of the Spicery waits, but the Banquet for the Knights-Companions, is brought up by the Yeomen of the Guard.
And now, that the Soveraign and Knights-Companions have dined, the Knights Collect. W. le N. Cl. first rise, and having washed, place themselves a little below the State, in their usual order, and there make their Reverences to the Soveraign; and hereof we find particular mention made an. 24. H. 8. in these words, MS. in Offic. Arm. [M. 17.] fol. 35. The Knights-Compa|nions sat upon their Forms, notwithstanding their Boards were taken up, and until the Lords, which at that Feast sat at the Soveraign's Table, were also taken up, and then they immediately arose, and went together, and made their obeysances to the Soveraign.
After this, the Soveraign hears Grace, said by the Prelate, then is Collect. W. le N. Cl. Water brought up with the usual Ceremony, and the Soveraign washeth.
The Sove|raign's return to the Pre|sence. This being done, the Knights-Companions making again due Reverence to the Soveraign, he puts off his Cap, and salutes them as usually, and forthwith proceeds back to the Presence-Chamber, with the Knights and Officers of the Order before him, and being arrived at the step before the State, he again saluteth the Knights-Companions; who having made their Reverences to him, he appoints the MS. pen. G.O.Y. pag. 114. Hour for their attendance again, to go to the second Vespers, and forthwith passeth thence into his Privy Lodgings, taking the Officers of the Order before him, and the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Knights-Companions following after; thus they all retire till the time ap|pointed, to go to the second Vespers.
In like manner doth the Soveraign's Lieutenant proceed from the Presence to the Hall, or such other Room where the Dinner is prepared; only his place of Session at the Table, is MS. pen. G.O.Y. p. 114.  MS. pen. W. D N. fol. 8. b. a little on the left hand the Cloth of State, or at the Col. Rob. C. Cl. fol. 7. end of the Table; and after Dinner he returns to the Presence, in the same order as doth the Soveraign.
But what order was taken in King Henry the Eighth's Reign, for the enter|tainment of the Soveraign's Deputy at Windesor, during the continuance of the Feast, may be seen by these following directions, which, to this particular, are ve|ry observable.

MS. penes Rob. Com. Ay|lesbury. Memorandum, that the Saterday at Wyndesor, the Lords and Knights of the Garter keepe the Chamber, and in like case the Sonday at Souper.
First the President, at the Board hys messe allone.
Item, the Lords or Knights at the said Bordesende 2. Messe or 3. as the case requireth, Wafers and Ipocras the said Nyghts.
Item, the sayd nyght ther ys oon halle kept for the Lords Servants, and so servede when the Lords be at Soupere.
Item, the Sunday following, the President, with all the Knyghts of the Garter, doo breke their falls with the Dean of Wyndesor, at hys Gods, except 2. or 3. Chynes of Beif, which be sende from the Castle thythere.
Item, the sayd Sondaye, when the President with the Knyghts be at hyght messe, then there is a fyrste halle kepte in the Castle for their Ser|vants and othere.
Item, the sayd Sonday at Dinner, the President keepeth the hall, with the Knyghts at the Boardsend at Dynner; but the President sytteth not in the There of Estate, but by.
Item, the sayd Sonday, the Deane of the Colledge with those Colledge, sytting in thall at the lattere dynere, and no more.
Item, the sayd day and dynner, the Lords and the Deane with the Colledge, the Heralds and the Marshall be served with Wafers and Ipocras.
Memorandum, that the President, and the Knyghts of the Garter, have both the Saterday at night and Sonday, voyde.
Memorandum, that there be sent the Monday following to the Colledge for the Knyghts brekefasts, Brede, Ale, Wyne, a certeyne. 3. Chnes of Beife, a Surloyne of Beif, 4. Capons good, 18. Rabbetts, 18. Pgions, 18. Chyk. And other suche, as the Stewarde of the Feaste thin be. And all the rest, to be at the charge of the Deane.



SECT. VIII. The Ceremonies belonging to the second Vespers.
SInce the Ceremonies relating to the second Vespers at Windesor, are but the Repetition of those, which have been performed on the Eve of the Feast; we shall pass them over with more brevity, being very unwilling to cloy the Reader with needless recitals.
The time for Proceeding to the Chapter-house, hath most usually been about four a Clock in the Afternoon of St. George's day, but sometimes not before five; and so long did the services of the Dinner hold, when the Feast of St. George was celebrated at Windesor, the MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 154. b. 14. of September, an. 15. Iac. R. that the Knights-Companions proceeded by MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 154. b. Torch light to the Chapter-house.
The place from whence the Proceeding begins is (as at other times) the Cham|ber of Presence; in reference to which the Sword is there laid in readiness, on the Chair under the State, and all other things put in order, as on the Eve of the Feast.
The Persons whereof the Proceeding is composed, the manner and order there|of, the publick Processional way to the Chapter-house, is the very same as on the Eve; and when the Soveraign and Knights did at any time proceed to the Chap|pel on Horseback, on the Eve and Morning of the Feast day, MS. penes Arth. Com. An|glesey, fol. 167. MS. in Offic. Armor. [M. 17. b.]  MS pen. W. D. N. fol. 16. b. they have, in like manner, proceeded to the second Vespers.
It hath been customary, for the Soveraign and Knights-Companions to hold a Chapter before the second Vespers, and therein, for the most part, have been trans|acted all Affairs relating to this most Noble Order; as the making new Consti|tutions, regulating things amiss, reading Petitions, making Orders thereupon, de|termining Controversies and Disputes referring to the Officers of the Order, Alms-Knights, c. and such like matters, either ordinary or extraordinary; for instance,
An. 28 H. 8. we find it recorded, that the Soveraign and Knights-Companions (having performed all the Ceremonies of the Feast (then held at Greenwich)

viz. on the Eve, Matins, and solemn Offring on the Feast Day, in the Morn|ing) Lib. N. pag. 69. at the second Vespers, before they entred the Choire, they went aside to the Soveraigns Closet, and there debated the ordinary affairs relating to the Order: but besides this Instance, many other are scattered up and down the Registers.
And frequently, both at Whitehall and Greenwich, (this Feast being there celebrated) hath this Chapter been held in the Soveraigns MS. penes W. D. N. vi|de etiam MS. penes G.O.Y. pag. 113.  Collect. praefat. R C. Cl. fol. 9. Closet, near the Chappel; from whence, at the breaking up thereof, the Soveraign hath now and then in MS. penes W. D. N. vi|de etiam MS. penes G.O.Y. pag. 113.  Collect. praefat. R C. Cl. fol. 9. Person, proceeded into the Chappel, to the second Vespers. But gene|rally Ex eod. MS. penes eund W. D. N. fol. 8. b. remained in the Closet, during the celebration of those Divine Offices: and in such case, the Ex eod. MS. penes eund W. D. N. fol. 8. b. Lieutenant supplying the place of the Soveraign, hath pro|ceeded from the Closet, through the Hall into the Chappell. Where note, that the Ex eod. MS. penes eund W. D. N. fol. 8. b. Proceeding from the Presence to the Closet before the Soveraign, and thence into the Chappel Ex eod. MS. penes eund W. D. N. fol. 8. b. before the Soveraigns Lieutenant (as also the returns thereof) are ordered in all points, as on the Eve of the Feast.
But, if the Soveraign do not proceed to the second Vespers, then is this Chap|ter held, in some convenient Room of the Soveraigns Privy Lodgings, before the Proceeding begin, for so it was an. Ex eod. MS. penes eund W. D. N. fol. 8. b. 6 Eliz. and an. Palm. Iourn. pag. 25. 13 Car. 1. when (at the hour of Tierce) many things were Decreed in a Chapter there celebrated.
As soon as the Chapter riseth, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, proceed to the West Door of the Choire, where the Alms-Knights being arrived, first they, after them the whole Proceeding enters, in the usual order, and with the accustomed Reverences and Ceremonies; all placing themselves, as they ar|rive at the Stations and Seats formerly mentioned, and in that manner and Or|der, as they did at their Entry into the Choire, to the first Vespers.
Which Ceremony of the Soveraign and Knights-Companions entrance and Ses|sion in their Stalls, being finished, the Prelate ascends to the Altar as before, and begins the Divine Service, during which, the Scruteny for Election of Knights is most commonly taken; of which we have spoken at large in the Chapter of Elections.
When the second Vespers are finished, the Proceeding passeth out of the Choire, the Knights-Companions and the Soveraign following, and returns to the Presence Chamber, whence He and the Knights-Companions retire till Supper be ready; all things being done, as when they past out of the Choire, and Proceeded to the Presence at the finishing of the first Vespers.
But an. 15 Car. 1. it hapning to be late, ere the second Vespers were ended, the Soveraign went Palmers Iourn. pro an. 1639. p. 33. not to the Presence Chamber from the Chappel, but marched directly to the great Hall to Supper, by Torch light.
When the Feast hath been kept at Whitehall or Greenwich, if the Soveraign went MS. pen. W. D. N. fol. 10.  26. b. into the Chappel to the second Vespers, the return of the Proceeding was immediately thence through the great Hall, and up into the Presence. But if the Soveraign proceeded no farther then the Ex fol. 8. b. vide etiam MS. penes G.O.Y. pag. 113.  114. Closet, and there staid, both holding the Chapter and during Divine Service; then the Soveraigns Lieutenant as he came from the Chappel, past also through the Great Hall, and up into the Guard Chamber and thence to the Closet, where receiving the Soveraign, they all proceed|ed thence before him into the Presence in the usual order; where the Proceeding ending, all retired till Supper was ready. Nevertheless if the Supper on the Feast Day at night was prepared in the Banquetting-House; then the Soveraigns return from the Chappel or Closet, was over the Terrace, into the said Room, and up to the State there.


SECT. IX. Of the Supper on the Evening of the Feast Day.
IT hath been very seldom seen, that the Soveraign hath supped publickly in St. Georges Hall, on the Feast Day; but when he doth (as  an. 14 Car. 1.)

the Proceeding thither, the Ceremonies and attendance there, and return thence, are in all respects performed, as at the Supper on the Eve.
But if the Soveraign's Lieutenant hath on this night supped publickly (as for|merly it often hapned at Whitehall) then this Meal was made in the MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 4.  8. b.  MS. pen. G.O.Y. pag. 113. Presence Chamber, where the Lieutenant sat alone at the Soveraign's Table, on the left hand of the Cloth of State, as was usual at other times, and the Knights-Compa|nions at a Table set along the side of the Room; all being served after the ac|customed manner.
Sometimes, at Greenwich, the Soveraign's Lieutenant and Knights-Companions have supped in the MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 4.  8. b.  MS. pen. G.O.Y. pag. 113. Council Chamber, as an. 8. Eliz. (and also in the Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. 9. Great Cham|ber, at the end of the Guard-Chamber on the Eve, as an. 27. of the same Queen) And when Supper was ended, they all proceeded back to the Presence-Chamber, and there (having appointed the Hour of meeting the next morning) took leave one of another, and departed to their several Lodgings, to put off their Robes.



CHAP. XXII. THE Ceremonies OBSERVED ON THE Last Day OF THE FEAST.

SECT. I. Of Proceeding to the Chapter-house in the Morning.
IT is observed by the Author of the Rationale, upon our Book of Common-Prayer, Pag. 128. That great Solemnities have some days after them, to continue their memory in Prorogationem Festi, which are Ibid. 174. added as Attendants in honor of the Feast. And it may be well enough presumed, that upon this ground, the Founder lengthened out the Feast of St. George with part of the following day; one being too little to contain all the Ceremonies, design|ed by him to set forth the State of this high Festival.
Among the Iob. 7. v. 39. Iews, the last day of the Feast of Tabernacles was taken for the greatest day; but though it be not so to be understood here, yet doth this last day share in a very great part of the Solemnity of the Feast; for in the distri|bution of the Ceremonies, there are appointed to it particulars, both Civil and Solemn. As first, the Affairs transacted in Chapter, chiefly concerning the Election of Knights, with their Proceeding to the Chappel; and secondly, the Services used in the Chappel, viz. the Offring of Gold and Silver, and Hatchments of deceased Knights-Companions.
The bringing of the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Sword into the Presence, the setting the Proceeding in or|der, and the manner of the Soveraign and Knights Proceeding to the Chapter-house, is performed in the same sort as it was on the Eve of the Feast; the So|lemnity differing only in this, that then the Soveraign and Knights-Companions are obliged by the Statutes, to proceed in full Robes; here, by the indulgence of King Henry the Eighths Art. 12. Statutes all are dispensed with, saving the upper Robe or Mantle: and where then, the Image of St. George was worn pendent at the Collar of the Order, now a blew Ribband sufficeth; and in lieu of their Caps and Feathers, they now wear only their ordinary Hats.
First, therefore the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Knights-Companions and Officers of the Order, repair to the Soveraigns Privy Lodgings, and there attend his going into the Presence Chamber.
The Officers of Arms, Prebends, and Alms-Knights, as also the Knights-Compa|nions Servants, (habited as the Day before) meet in the several places they then did, and there wait the Soveraigns coming forth.
The Soveraign attended with his Train-bearers, enters the Presence, and takes his Stand before the State.
The Proceeding advanceth towards the Chapter-House, in the accustomed Order.
Generally, and for the most part, the Proceeding passeth on foot (and some|times on Horseback) the publick way: yet the late Soveraign King Charles the First, used now and then, to pass the private way, An. 7. Car. 1. MS.  an. 14. Car. 1. Palm. Iourn. pag. 20. over the Terrace. But an. 15 Iac. Reg. there was no solemn proceeding at all, for the publick way was so MS. penes E. W. G. f. 154. b. pestered with Carts, that the Soveraign and Knights-Companions were con|strained to pass to the Chapter-House in their ordinary Apparel, and put on their Mantles there.
It was the ancient Custom, to celebrate a Chapter in the Morning of the last Day of the Feast, before the Soveraign proceeded to the Chappel, whereinto the Soveraign and Knights-Companions entring and opening the same, have given dispatch to such affairs relating to the Order, as were, either not finished or treated of in the Precedent Chapters: but the chief business then is to make Election of Knights, where any Stall is void.
Which Chapter, hath sometimes (when the Soveraign did not go to the Chap|pel) been kept in the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Privy Chamber, and the present Affairs dispatcht in that Room; and then the Soveraigns Lieutenant waving the Chapter-House, hath pro|ceeded straight on to the Chappel, and entred in at the South Door thereof.


SECT. II. Of the Elect Knights Proceeding into the Choire.
WHere an Election hath been made of a Person then present at Court, he is called in to the Chapter-House by Garter according, to the usual manner. Where the Garter is buckled about his Leg, and the George put about his Neck; (of which particular Ceremony we have Chap. 10. already spoken) this being done, it hath been usual for the Elect Knight to receive the further honor of passing

immediately in the Proceeding to the Chappel, whether it were from the Chapter-House, or Presence-Chamber, which he doth in his Ex Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. . vid. etiam MS. pen. E. W. G. ordinary apparel, always bare|headed, as did the MS. Earl of Northumberland, an. 11 Car. 1. and without any other Ornaments of the Order, saving the foresaid Garter and George: and the place allowed him in the Proceeding, is between the Knights-Companions and the Offi|cers of Arms, of which there are a multitude of Presidents.
In this place MS. fol. pen. W. D. N. fol. 16. b. Sir Henry Sydney rode, in the Proceeding to the Chappel at Windesor, an. 6 Eliz. and here went the Lord Ibid. MS. fol. 3. b. Hunsdon immediately after he was elected, an. 3. Eliz. so also the Ibid. f. 10. b. Earl of Northumberland the 5th of the same Queen.
But where two Knights have been Elected, they then proceed together before the Knights-Companions, (the Senior being taken on the right hand) as did the Earl of MS. penes E. W. G. Arundel and Visc. Rochester, an. 9 Iac. Reg. and the Earl of MS. penes E. W. G. Rutland and Sir George Villars, an. 14 Iac. Reg. Howbeit Charles Duke of York, being elected at the same time, went in the Proceeding MS. penes E. W. G. next before the Prince his Brother, then the Soveraigns Lieutenant.
When the Proceeding is arrived at the Choire Door, the Alms-Knights, Pre|bends, and Officers of Arms, the Knights-Companions and Officers of the Order, enter with usual Ceremony, and take their several Stations, as on the Eve; and lastly, the Soveraign, if present. The Elect Knight also enters in tourn as he proceeded, and is Ex Collect. A. V. W. placed by Garter next before the lowest Stall; or if there be two newly Elected, and both proceed to the Chappel, the one is placed under the lowest Stall on the Princes side, the other under the lowest Stall on the So|veraigns. But if any great State pass in the Proceeding, he then is placed be|fore such Stalls as is designed for him; and so was MS. penes E. W. G. f. 149. b. Charles Duke of York, an. 9 Iac. Reg. to wit, before the Stall next below the Princes.
Being thus placed, they are there to Collect. A. V. W. stand all Service time; for so did the Earl of Lib. R. p. 35. Suffolk, an. 3 Car. 1. the Earl of Ibid p. 46. Northampton, an. 4 Car. 1. and the Earl of MS. Northumberland, an. 9 Car. 1. nor are they to make any more Reverences than at their MS. coming into the Choire, and passing out, unless a Stool be brought in and they permitted to sit down, and then are they obliged to make their Reverences MS. upon all occasions, when they either sit or rise.
Nevertheless, by reason of the length of the Ceremonies, and in case of Age or Infirmity, the Knights Elect, have obtained Licence from the Soveraign, or his Lieutenant, to sit down and be covered. So, for like cause, the Lord MS. Burleigh in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and the Earl of Southampton, an. 13 Car. 2. were permitted to sit. The like indulgence had the Earls of MS. penes E W. G. fol. 147. b. Dunbar and Penbroke, an. 6 Iac. from the Prince, (then the Soveraigns Lieutenant) and also the Earl of MS. penes E W. G. fol. 147. b. Rutland, and Sir George Villars from the Soveraign, an. 14 Iac. Reg. and lastly Iames Duke of York, Palm. large Iourn. pag. 421 an. 17 Car. 1. But, though the favour of reposing at this time is allowed, the MS. Stool may not to be brought into the Choire, before the Soveraign has been pleased, by some publick signal, to give him leave to sit down, and then to be called for and not before; though it ought to be in readi|ness, in some place near and unseen.


SECT. III. Of the Ceremonies performed at Divine Service.
AND now to pass on: When the Soveraign, hath ascended his Royal Seat, The Knights-Companions in due order take their Stalls.
The Officers of the Order their Seats; and then
The Prelate (with the Serjeant of the Vestry before him) goes up to the Northside of the Altar, and begins the Morning Service.
After him, the Verger of the Colledge proceeds up before two Prebends; who put on their Copes on the Southside of the Altar, and assist in the Divine Offices.
But whereas the late Soveraign King Charles the First, of ever Blessed Memory, had throughout all his Raign, a Sermon preached before him, on every Tuesday Morning, it sometimes fell out that this latter Feast day, hapned to be on a Tuesday, (as it did an. 8. of the same Soveraign at Whitehall) and then Collect. W. le N. Cl. at such time as the Prelate was otherwise to proceed up to the Altar, the Pulpit was brought into the Choire, and placed in the Collect. W. le N. Cl. middle of the lowermost Haut Pas, and immediately the Sermon began: which being ended, it was removed, and forthwith the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Prelate proceeded up to the Altar as usually, and began Service.
Mass of Requiem. In this Morning Service (before the Reformation of our Church) was the Lib. N. p. 109. Mass of Requiem solemnly sung by the Abbot of Tower-hill, for the Souls of the Knights-Companions and all faithful Souls departed; and this was taken care for by the E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 14. H. 8. Stat. Art. 12. Statutes.
As also, that at the Celebration thereof, E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 14. H. 8. Stat. Art. 12. all the Knights at the Feast should be present, unless any one were hindered by some reasonable cause, or in spe|cial manner Licenced by the Soveraign.
At this Celebration were the deceased Knights-Companions Atchievements also Offered, with solemn Ceremony; concerning which we shall discourse at large Chap. 25. anon.
Offering of Gold and Sil|ver.Another Ceremony belonging to the service of this Morning, is the Offring of Gold and Silver, which when the first Sentence of the Offertory hath been pronounced, is again performed by the Soveraign (or his Lieutenant) and Knights-Companions present.
The Ceremonies and Circumstances appertaining thereunto at this time, are the same throughout in all particulars, as are set down to be observed at the like Offering on the Feast Day; and therefore for avoiding Repetition, we shall refer the Reader to the place where that is treated on Chap. 21. Sect. 5. before.
Proceeding out of the Choire. After all the before-mentioned Ceremonies in the Chappel, and Divine Ser|vice are ended, the Prelate descends from the Altar to his Form; Whereupon all prepare to go out of the Choire (which is exactly performed in the usual order, as on the Eve of the Feast) from whence, the Soveraign and Knights-Companions most commonly proceed to the Chapter-House, where being entred, they immediately MS. pen. W. D. N. fol. 16. b.  MS. penes E. W. G. de an. 15. Iac. R vide porro Lib. R. pg. 20.  30. MS. pag. 14. put off their Mantles, and therewith the Ceremonies of this Grand Feast take ending.
Heretofore, when the Feast was held at Whitehall, the Soveraigns Lieutenant and Knights-Companions were accustomed, to put off their Mantles Ex eod. MS. penes W. D. N. f. 3. b.  26. b. vide etiam Collect. W. le N. Cl. de an. 10. Eliz. Et MS. penes G.O.Y. pag. 113. without the Chappel-Door, assoon as they returned from Morning Service. But an. 13 Car. 1. at the finishing of this Morning Service, the Lib. R. pag. 126. Proceeding went back before the Soveraign to the Presence-Chamber, so also an. 19 Car. 2. and in like manner an. 17 Car. 1. Palm. Iourn. pag. 45. it marched before the Soveraign in order, from the Cathedral Church in York, to the Soveraign Palace, before they put off their Mantles.


SECT. IV. The Diets at some of the Grand Feasts.
WE were unwilling to interrupt the Course of the Ceremonies relative to this Grand Feast, with what some will esteem perhaps improper, if not tri|vial: nevertheless since others judge it may contribute to the setting forth the Grandeur and Magnificence of it, if the particulars of the Diets be made known, we shall add for Corolary, an account of some of them here.


An Ordinance for the King,Lib. MS. penes Rob. C. A|lesbury, fol. 1. the Queen, and the Knights of the Garter at Windesor, for Saturday Supper and Sunday Dinner, the 28. and 29. days of May, an. 11. Reg. Henrici Octavi.

Saturday Supper
Sunday Dinner


first Course.
first Course.


Canell. Soppus to Potage.
A George on Horseback.


Organs of Ling Standerd.
Chikins in brewel.


Salmon Calver.
Pestel of Hert for gr. sh.


Pyke in Erblade.
Capons in Erblade.


Plece.
Cignets.


Bremes mar.
Carpes of Venison.


Cunger gr.
Capons of halt gr.


Solles in solemsauce.
Herons.


Moletts in grave.
Pyke in Latum sawce.


Tenches in Gresell. sawce.
Salman Calver.


Carpe in sharpe sawce.
A made Dish.


Creves mar.
Pies of Paries.


Dowsetts desire.
Custard planted with Garters.


Tart covered.
A Tart closed with Arms.



Fritor Lion.



Prewne Orangs.



Vno eq. per pero



Leche.




Second Course.
Second Course.


Mainem Royal.
A Sotelte.


Halebut in engrailed.
Iely Ypocras.


Fresh Sturgion.
Kind Kid.


Base.
Fesants.


Sowre Moletts.
Brewes, or Mewes.


Bremes aque dulc.
Godwits.


Perches in soyle.
Birds of the Nest.


Eliis gr. rost.
Chikens.


Chines of Salmon r.
Peions.


Porpos in Armor.
Rabets.


Crevesdozen.
Peres made.


Orangs bak.
Sturgion r.


Tart melior.
Creves dd.


Leche Cumforte.
Quales.



Venison in past.



Tart party.



Orangs bak.



Leche.



For the Knights Dinner on Sunday.

First Course.
Second Course.


Chikins in brewel.
Iely Yppocras.


Pestels or gr. schare.
Kyd or Lambe peru.


Capon in Erblade.
Fesaunts.


Cignets or Green-Geese.
Quales.


Carpis of Venison or Veal.
Chikins.


Herons or Gullys.
Pigeons.


Pyke or Lampre p.
Rabets.


Salmon Calver.
Sturgion r.


Pies of Paris.
Creves dd.


Custard Plancyd.
Venison in past.


Fryttors.
Tart party.



Bawdrets or Orangs bak.



Leche.



This Fare followeth the Knights at the second Table.

First Course.
Second Course.


Potage.
A Viande.


Gr. Schare.
Lambe.


Capon boiled.
Chikins or Pigions.


Green Geese.
Venison bak. or Tart.


Veal rosted.
Creves dd.


Pies or Custard.
Leche or Frittor.


Lampre pr.



Frittor or Leche.




This Fare is for the first Hall.

First Course.
Second Course.


Potage.
A Viand.


Gr. Schare.
Lamb.


Capon boiled.
Chikins or Pigions.


Green Geese for 12 or 16 Mess.
Venison bak.


Veal.
Leche or Frittor.


Pies or Custard paru.



Frittor.



Waste to be given by the great Officers Cxx, Mess.Ibid. fol. 3.
Beef, Veal, Geese, and Capon.
Waste to be dealt at Gate, viz. CCCC. Mess.
Beef, Veal, and Bakemeats, Venison or other.
This course for giving Waste, was continued until an. 12. Car. 2. that the Pur|veyances and Provisions for the Kings Houshold, were taken away by Act of Par|liament.

A Proportion made for the foresaid Feast of St. George.Ibid. fol. 4

Beef
24


Moulton
92


Veales.
74


Pykes
24


Lampre pr.
240


Cygnets
3 doz.


Green Geese
18 dd.


Herons
8 dd.


Fesants
4 dd.


Brewz or Gullys
6 dd.


Goddwitts
5 dd.


Birds of the Nest
200.


Pigeons
50 dd.


Chikins
52 dd.


Rabits
36 dd.


Capon of gr.
12.


Capon k.
8. dd.


Capon cos.
16. dd.


Hens.
40. dd.


Kyds
14


Lambs Sukkers
14


Lambs gr.
96


Young Cranes
3 doz.


Dottrells
5 dd.


Quails
15 dd.


Creme
16 gall.


Crude
60 g.


Milk
60 g.


Butter and Eggs plenty.



Peacocks with their Tails Pastry.
16


Creme
24 g.


Crude
80 g.


Milk
76 g.


Aples
200.


Oranges.
300.


Butter to serve the said Feast.



Eggs to serve the said Feast.






l.
s.
d.


The charge of the whole came to
431
03
09


For the Feast of St. George, held at Whitehall, on Munday the 22. and Tues|day the 23. days of April, in the 19. year of the Reign of our Soveraign Lord King Charles the Second, An. Dom. 1667.
The Supper for the Soveraign on the Eve (being Munday night) was prepared and set upon the Table in the Banqueting-House, two by two, beginning at the East end of it, and the rest of the Dishes were set upon the other Dishes, as Ri|nders in the middle.



First Course.



1. Ducklings boyled xij.
21. Petty Paties.
2. Veal Arago.


3. Salmon boyled j. case.
22. Rabbits fryed xij.
4. Pidgeon Pye.


5. Green Geese xij.
23. Sallet.
6. Gammon Bacon with iiij Pullets greatcourse.


7. Pike with Prawns, Cockles, and Oysters.
24. Capon good per Sal|lets iiij.
8. Bisk Pigeons xij.


9. Venison Pye.
25. Rabbits marrionated
10. Chines Mutton and Veal iij.


11. Chickens boyled xij.
26. Hashed Sallet.
12. Hens with Eggs hasht vj.


13. Carps Great iij.
27. Cold Sparagras.
14. Oyster Pye.


15. Tongues and Vdders iiij.
28. Pickled Sallets.
16. Capons boyled ij.


17. Kid j. case.
29. Sweet breads Arago.
18. Pullet a Granow iiij.


19. Beatilia Pye.

20. Capons fat. v.



Second Course.



1. Veal Soust ij.
21. Tongues iiij.
2. Salmon col.


3. Pullets Great vj.
22. Leich.
4. Tongue Pye.


5. Ducklings xij.
23. Anchovis, Caveare, and pickled Oysters.
6. Leverets vj.


7. Lobsters vj.
24. Eggs of Portugal.
8. Chickens fat xij.


9. Pheasants with Eggs vj.
25. Blamange.
10. Skerret Pye.


11. Partridges xij.
26. Creame Pistache.
12. Turky Chicks xij.


13. Crabs buttered vj.
27. Sparragrass.
14. Tarts sorts.


15. Gammons Bacon ij.
28. Ielly.
16. Pigeons tame xij.


17. Chickens marriona|ted xij.
29. Prawnes.
18. Lamprey Pye.


19. Pullets Soust vj.

20. Sallet.


Four Mess of Fare served to Supper on the Eve to the Knights-Companions Ta|bles, viz. one to the Duke of Yorks Table, and three to the other six Knights then present, and one Mess of the same fare to the Prelate and the other Offi|cers of the Order.


First Course.
Second Course.


Capons boyled ij.
Pullets great vj.


Wildboar Pye.
Gammon Bacon ij.


Kid j. case.
Ducklings xij.


Carpes great iij.
Carpes Soust ij.


Chicken Pye frosted.
Partridges viij.


Gammon Bacon with 4. Pullets great.
Lamprey Pye.


Oyster Pye.


Bisk of Shelfish.
Turkey Chicks xij.


Venison Pye.
Prawnes.


Bisk Pigeons xij.
Pidgeons tame xij.


Tongue and Vdders iiij.
Tongues iiij.


Pike great.
Chickens fat xij.


Capons fat iiij.
Tongue Pye.


Turkey Pye.
Rabbets xij.


Jegot Multon ferst.
Anchovis Caveare and pickled Oy|sters.


Veal Arago.



Green Geese x.
Leich.


Beatilia Pye.
Lobsters vj.


Chickens boyled xij.
Sparagrass.


Sweet Breads Arago.
Tarts Sorts.


Sallets.
Ielly.



Sallets.



Blamange.



The Soveraigns Dyet on St. Georges Day Dinner.


First Course.



1. Wild-Boar Pye.
21. Line Veal larded and col. iij.
2. Veal Arago.


3. Chine of Beef.
22. Cold Sparagrass.
4. Haggest Puddings.


5. Beatilia Pye.
23. Hasht Sallets.
6. Capons fat v.


7. Ducklings boyled xij.
24. Almond Pudding.
8. Gammon Bacon and Pigeons.


9. Chines Multon and Veal iij.
25. Sweet Breads.
10. Capons boyled ij.


11. Venison boyled.
26. Sallet.
12. Pikes rosted ij.


13. Carpes great iij.
27. Petty Pattyes.
14. Pigs rosted ij.


15. Venison Pye.
28. Puddings white and Black.
16. Green Geese xij.


17. Turbut.
29. Rabbets fryed xij.
18. Chicken Pye.


19. Turkey Pye.

19. Chicken marriona|ted xij.



Second Course.



1. Pullets Soust vj.
21. Pickle Sallet.
2. Tongue Pye.


3. Salmon col.
22. Tongues iiij.
4. Blamange.


5. Rabbets rosted xij.
23. Eggs Portugal.
6. Crabs butter'd vj.


7. Phesants with Eggs vj.
24. Shardoones.
8. Pidgeons tame xij.


9. Chickens rosted xij.
25. Leach.
10. Bisk shell fish.


11. Oysters, Skerets, and Sweet-Breads.
26. Luke Olives.
12. Ducklings rosted xij.


13. Tart sorts.
27. Sparagrass.
14. Lobsters rosted vj.


15. Gammon Bacon.
28. Pickeld Oysters.
16. Piggs soust.


17. Lamprey Pye.
29. Prawnes.
18. Veal hasht.


19. Salmon boyled j. case

20. Peacock Pye.



Four Mess of Fare served to the Knights-Companions, and one Mess to the Prelate, c. on St. Georges Day Dinner.


First Course.



1. Sallet.
17. Green Geese x.
2. Chickens boyled xij.


3. Loin of Veal larded with coll.
18. Carpes great iij.
4. Turkey Pye.



19. Haggest Pudding.
6. Salmon j. case.


5. Piggs ij.
20. Beatilia Pye.
8. Venison Pye.


7. Chine Beef.
21. Pullets great vj.
10. Shoulder Multon in blood with Steaks.


9. Gammon Bacon and iiij. Pullets great.
22. Sallett.
12. Capons fat iiij.


11. Bisk Pidgeons xij.

14. Kid j. case.


13. Chicken Pye frosted.

16. Veal Soust.


15. Wild Boar Pye.





Second Course.



1. Sallet.
17. Leach.
2. Piggs Soust.


3. Gammons Bacon ij.
18. Sparagrass.
4. Salmon col.


5. Ducklings xij.
19. Crabs butter'd vj.
6. Chickens fat xij.


7. Oysters, Skerrets, and Sweet-bread.
20. Lamprey Pye.
8. Bisk Shelfish.



21. Ielly.
10. Lobsters vj.


9. Pidgeons tame xij.
22. Blamange.
12. Tarts sorts.


11. Rabits xij.
23. Sallet.
14. Pullets soust.


13. Peacock Pye in Pride.

16. Anchovis, Caveare, and Pickled Oysters.


15. Dried Tongues iiij.





The Banquet served at the Feast of St. George, the 22. and 23. of April an. 19 Car. 2.

Supper on the Eve.
For the Soveraigns Table, 8 Basons, 20 Boxes in each Bason, one pound in each Box. Preserves 4 Dishes, two pound in a Dish. Creams 2 Dishes, and one pound of Eringoes, and one pound of Rocks to garnish each Bason.
For 4 Mess of the Knights-Companions, and one Mess for the Prelate, c. to each Mess 2 Basons, 16 Boxes in a Bason, 3 quarters of a pound in a Box. 2 Dishes of Preserves, 2 pound in a Dish, and 2 Dishes of Creams, and half a pound of Eringoes, and half a pound of Rocks to garnish each Bason.



The like for Dinner on St. Georges Day.
After Dinner and Supper, when the Soveraign and Knights-Companions wash, 6 Bouls, one for the Soveraign of 6 pound of Comfits, and  other Bouls for the Knights-Companions and Prelate, c. 4 pounds in each Boul, arnished with Erin|goes, and Rocks and Violet Cakes, half a pound of each to each Boul.
We have seen several Bills wherein the Diets belonging to the Officers of Arms are set down, both for their Supper on the Eve, and Dinner on the Feast Day, which were not less than 20 Dishes, and sometimes 24 Dishes besides the Ban|quet: These Bills were usually given to the Junior Pursuivants, by the Clearks of the Kitchin, by which they called for the Dishes.
Among the memorialls of the Grand Feast held an. 19 Eliz. it is noted, that on the MS. penes G. O. Y. pag. 113. Eve, the Heralds had at Supper the Diet as was accustomed, viz. MS. penes G. O. Y. pag. 113. 16 Dishes at the first Course and 8 at the second: but see here their Diets at the Grand Feast at Whitehall, an. 19 Car. 2.

Monday Supper 22 April.

First Course.
Second Course.


Sallets.
Pullets great iij.


Veal and Capon boyled.
Chickens fine viij.


Chickens boyled viij.
Pidgeons fat. xij.


Multon rosted.
Rabbits vj.


Veal Rosted.
Lobsters iiij.


Turkey.
Prawns CCC.


Capons good ii.
Turkey-Pye.


Lamb, side.
Tart Sorts.


Pigeon-Pye.
Sparagrass CC.


Stump-Pye.
Gamon Bacon.


Green Geese vi.
Tongues ii.



Ielly.




Manchets fine
x.


Cheate fine
vi.


Course
x.


Beer
viij Gallons.


French Wine
ii. Gallons.


Sack
ii. Quarts.


Ale
iiij. Bottles.


The same served the next day Dinner, only the roast Veal was exchanged for boiled Beef.
For Supper on Sunday night, at Windesor, the 28. of May 1671. being the Eve of the Grand Feast, there was prepared for the Soveraign, the Dyet here|after mentioned, and set upon his Table in St. George's Hall, in the order following, two by two, beginning at the South end of the Table; which being fill'd, the rest of the Dishes were set upon stands in the midst.



First Course.



1. Chickens boiled xii.
21. Petty Patties.
2. Salmon boiled.


3. Veal Arago.
22. Rabits fryed viii.
4. Lamb stewed.


5. Vmble Pye.
23. Sallet of Herbs.
6. Bisk Pigeons xii.


7. Green Geese vi.
24. Mullets soust vi.
8. Pikes with Pawnes, Oysters, and Cockles.


9. Chine Multon  Veal iv.
25. Rabits marrionated viii.
10. Venison Pye.


11. Ducklings boiled xii.
26. Hasht Sallet, with iv Capons.
12. Carpes great iii.


13. Hens hasht v
27. Soales marrionated two pair.
14. Turkies aladob vi.


15. Venison boiled q.
28. Sallet of Pickles.
16. Bisk Shelfish.


17. Capons boiled ii.
29. Sweet breads arogo.
18. Pullets a granoul vi.


19. Beatilia Pye with Patties.

20. Capons fat v.



Second Course.



1. Pullets fat rosted vi.
21. Tougues iv.
2. Veal and Pigs soust.


3. Cold Salmon.
22. Pease.
4. Ducklings x.


5. Tongue Pye.
23. Anchovis Caveare  pickled Oysters.
6. Leverets vi.


7. Chicks fat xii.
24. Egs of Portugal.
8. Lobsters rost vi.


9. Pheasants with Egs vi.
25. Blamang.
10. Turkey Chicks xii.


11. Gaudwitts x.
26. Creame Pistache.
12. Crabs buttered vi.


13. Quails xxiv.
27. Scollops.
14. Pigeons tame xii.


15. Tarts sorts.
28. Ielly.
16. Gamons Bacon ii.


17. Crawfish butter'd.
29. Prawnes.
18. Egg Pies.


19. Ruffs xii.

20. Pullets soust vi.


Seven Mess, or several Services of Fare, served on the Eve of the Feast to the Knights-Companions; each Knight having a several Mess to Supper, and one Mess of the same fare to the Prelate, c.



First Course.



Capons boiled ij.


Chickens boiled xij.



Crabs vi.
Sallets Pickles.



Pikes great ij.
Jegget Multon ferst.
Chicken Pye.



Rabbets fryed viij. Pullets hasht iv.



Buck baked q.
Capons fat iv.
Salmon.



Second Course.



Quails xviij.


Turkey Pye.



Tarts sorts.
Ielley.



Tongue Pye.
Carpes large iij.
Rabets xij.



Anchovies, Caveare and pickled Oysters.
Blamang.



Chicks fat xij.
Lobsters vi.
Pullets great vi.



The Soveraign's Diet on the Feast day, when the Table being made less, the Diet was reduced as followeth.


First Course.



1. Wild Boar Pye.

2. Salmon.


3. Chine of Beef.
15. Sallet.
4. Haggest Puddings.


5. Beatilia Pie with Patties.
16. Sweet-breads.
6. Gamon Bacon with xij tame Pigeons.


7. Ducklings boiled xij.
17. Almond Pudding.
8. Chickens boiled xij.


9. Chine Multon and Veal iv.
18. Petty Patties.
10. Pikes rosted ij.


11. Buck baked q.
19. Hasht Sallet with 4 Capons.
12. Green Geese vi.


13. Carpes great iij.
20. Chicks marrionated.
14. Chicken Pye frosted.



Second Course.



1. Pullets soust vi.

2. Tongue Pye.


3. Rabbets rosted xij.
15. Sallets of Pickles.
4. Cream Tarts.


5. Pheasants with Egs vi.
16. Eggs of Portugal.
6. Crabs buttered vi.


7. Quails xxiv.
17. Ielly.
8. Pigeons tame xij.


9. Lobsters vi.
18. Luke Olives.
10. Chicks fat xij.


11. Gamon Bacon with ij Tongues.
19. Pease.
12. Ruffs xij.


13. Tarts sorts.
20. Prawnes.
14. Ducklings xij.




Seven Mess, or several Services of Fare served to the Knights-Companions, and one Mess to the Prelate, c.


First Course.



Ducklings boiled xii.


Chicks boiled xii.



Rabbets fry'd viij.
Carpes great iij.



Chine of Beef.
Gamon of Bacon with iiij Pullets great.
Buck baked q.



Stump Pye.
Sallets of Pickle.



Wild Bore Pye.
Shoulder of Multon in blood with Steaks.
Capons fat iiij.



Second Course.



Phesants iiij.


Quails xviii.



Artichokes.
Anchovis Caviare and pickled Oysters.



Chicks fat xii.
Tarts sorts.
Ducklings vi. and Green Geese vi.



Lamprey Pye.
Ielly.



Gamon Bacon with ii Tongues.
Pigeons tame xii.
Red Dear Pye.



A Diet served to the Lords, that attended the Soveraign at Supper, on the Eve of the said Feast.

First Course.
Second Course.


Capons boiled ij.
Quails xviij.


Chicks boiled xij.
Turkey Chicks x.


Crabs buttered vi.
Tarts sorts.


Sallets of Pickle.
Ielly.


Pikes Great ij.
Tongue Pye.


Iegget Multon ferst.
Carpes large iv.


Chicken Pye.
Rabbets xij.


Rabbets fryed viij.
Anchovies Caviare, and pickled Oysters.


Pullets Hasht iv.
Blamang.


Buck baked q.
Chickens fry'd xij.


Capons fat iv.
Lobsters vi.


Salmon.
Pullets greese vi.


Veal.
Ducklings xij.


Soals large ij pair.
Pigeons tame xij.



For the same Lords Dinner on the Feast day.

First Course.
Second Course.


Ducklings boiled xij.
Pheasants iv.


Chicks boiled xij.
Quails xviij.


Rabbets fryed viij.
Artichokes.


Carpes great ij.
Anchovies Caveare and Pickled Oysters.


Chine Beef.
Chickins fat xij.


Gamon Bacon with iv Pullets.
Tarts sorts.


Buck baked q.
Ducklings vi. and Green Geese vi.


Stump Pye.
Lamprey Pye.


Salletts of Pickles.
Ielly.


Wild Boare Pye.
Gamon Bacon.


Shoulder of Multon in blood with Veal.
Tongues ii.


Capons fat iv.
Pigeons tame xii.


Veal.
Red Deer Pye.


Pullets of Greese iv.
Crabs buttered vi.



Blamang.




The Banquet served at the said Feast.

The Soveraign's Table on the Eve.
One Charger of China Oranges, containing 50.
Seven Chargers of Confections, in each Charger 20 Boxes; in each Box one pound of dried Confections.
Two Plates of Duke Cherries, 4 pound in each Plate.
One Plate of Red Strawberries, containing one Gallon.
One Plate of White Strawberries, containing two Gallons.
One Plate of Ice Cream.
Three Plates of liquid Sweetmeats, in each Plate 3 pound.

The same for the Feast day at Dinner.

To each of the 7 Tables for the Knights-Companions, on the Eve.
Two Chargers of Confections, in each Charger 14 Boxes.
One pound of dried Confections in each Box.
One Plate of Duke Cherries, containing 2 pound.
One Plate of Red Strawberries, containing 1 Gallon.
One Plate of liquid Sweetmeats, containing 3 pound.

The same for the Feast day.

For the Prelate of the Garter, c. on the Eve.
Two Chargers, 14 Boxes in each Charger.
One Plate of Duke Cherries, containing 2 pound.
One Plate of Red Strawberries, containing 1 Gallon.
One Plate of liquid Sweetmeats, containing 3 pound.

The same Service to the Lords who attended the Soveraign,
And so the same to the Prelate and Lords the next day.
One Charger of Confections for the Heralds, containing 10 Boxes each Meal.
The Dyets provided for the Officers of Arms at Supper and Dinner, were at each Meal 20 Dishes:

The same Diet served in the same manner.
To the Prebends
xx Dishes.
To the Alms-Knights
xx Dishes.
To the Petty Canons
xx Dishes.
To the Choristers
xx Dishes.


The Diet served to the Officers of his Majesty's Board of Greencloth was xiv Dishes.
To the Chief Cleark of the Kitchin
vii Dishes
To the Gentlemen of the Chappel
xiv Dishes
To the second Cleark of the Kitchin
vii Dishes
To the Vestry
iij Dishes
To the Officers of the Iewel-house
iij Dishes.
To the Yeomen Vshers
x Dishes.
To the Children of the Chappel
vi Dishes.
To the Officers of the Confectionary
iii Dishes.



The Total of the Proportions of Provisions for the foresaid Feast.
Beef xx Mess.
Chines Beef ix.
Multon xvij. Cases.
Veal x. Cases.
Tongues and Vdders xxxij.
Piggs xlv.
Lambs xx.
Capons fat lxxx.
Capons good ix doz.
Pullets fat xx doz.
Hens and Pullets course vj. doz.
Chickens fat xx. doz.
Chickens fine Lviij. doz.
Pidgeons tame xxiiij. doz.
Green Geese xv. doz.
Ducklings xxxv. doz.
Turkey Chickens ix. doz.
Gaudwits ij. doz.
Quails xxx. doz.
Ruffs xxiiij.
Pheasants iiij. doz.
Leverets vj.
Rabbets xxxv. doz.
Kids xvij. cases.
Cocks-Combs and Stones ij. doz.
Peas xx Bushel.
Sparagrass vj. M.
Artichoaks CC.
Beef for Gravy, CCxlix l.
Multon ij. Cases.
Veals iiij.
Pork j. case.
Bacon Lxxiiij l.
Lard Cxxiiij l.
Sweet Breads xviij. doz.
Lambstones xx. doz.
Pallats x. doz.
Marrow-bones vij. doz.
Sheeps Tongues ix. doz.
Veal Cauls xiiij.
Haggest bags xij.
Galves Caldrons xviij.
Ox Suet Lxviij l.
Sheeps-feet vj. Gang.
The small Guts of an Ox.
Neats-feet vj. Gang.
Caules and blood vj.
Salmons xiiij.
Soals large xxiiij. pair.
Lobsters large Cxxxvj.
Crabs large Cxviij.
Mullets Lx.
Prawnes xij. M.
Cockles viij. Quarts.
Scollops iiij. C.
Lampry Pies xij.
Sturgeon xxij. Mess.
Whelks vj. Quarts.
Pikes great xiiij.
Carpes great Lxxx.
Trouts large xxiiij.
Crawfish MD.
Oysters xij. Quarts.
Westphalia Gammons Lxx.
Dried Tongues C.
Pickled Oysters xvj. Barrels.
Anchovis xij l.
Caveare viij l.
Butter CCCLxx l.
Eggs MM.
Barberies ij. Gallons.
Onions xij. Ropes.
Cream ij. Gallons.
Milk vj. Gallons.


Bake-meats for the said Feasts both hot and cold.
Hot. Steak Pyes xiij.
Hot. Stump Pyes xxj.
Hot. Vmble Pye j.
Hot. Beatillia Pyes with Patties vj.
Hot. Venison Pyes xviij.
Hot. Petty Patties ij. Dishes.
Hot. Tarts sorts xxxviij.
Hot. Single Tarts xx.
Hot. Egg Pies ix.
Hot. Chicken Pies frosted ix.
Hot. Cream Tarts j.
Cold. Tongue Pyes xxvij.
Cold. Capon Pyes xxvij.
Cold. Lamprey Pyes xij.
Cold. Wild Boar Pyes xij.
Cold. Red-Deer Pyes xij.




l.
s.
d.


The whole charge of this Grand Feast amounted to 
2394
17
08







CHAP. XXIII. THE OBSERVATION OF THE Grand Feast BY Absent Knights.

SECT. 1. Absent Knights enjoined to observe the Grand Feast.
WIth what state and magnificence, and in what solemn order, the Grand Feast of St. George hath been, and ought to be observed, by the Soveraign and Knights-Companions, either at Windesor Castle, or any other place, where the Soveraign then happens to keep his Court, hath been already laid down at large; yet were not all the honors due to this high Festival, paid to those places alone, but communicated sometimes (though in a less measure) to such other, where any of the absent Knights resided at that time, and had obtained the Soveraign's Let|ters of Dispensation, for non-attendance with the rest of the Knights-Companions.
We have also shewn how strictly the Statutes oblige the Knights-Companions to appear annually at the Grand Feast, and what severe penalties they inflict upon such as are absent: Yet lest the honor of the Order might receive diminu|tion, from too small an appearance at its publick Solemnities, when perhaps some of the Knights might then be employed in the Soveraign's service, both in remote parts of the Kingdom and beyond Sea, or others sick, or not without a reasonable excuse: it was further at the Institution of the Order Decreed, E. 3. Stat. Art. 28. H. 5. Stat. Art. 29. That none of them should depart out of the Kingdom, without first acquainting the So|veraign, and obtaining his special leave and license. Nevertheless such as di|sposed themselves to undertake any military Expedition, or other honorable de|sign in the service of Foreign Princes, whence any glory of Knighthood might

be hoped for, upon such renowned undertakings, the Ibid. Soveraign of his special grace, and for his favour towards and confidence in the Knights-Companions, was wont to give them preference before the rest of his Subjects, and grant them License to go beyond Sea.
But whatsoever the occasion of absence might be, it was then also ordained, Art. 11. That wheresoever any of the Knights-Companions resided, during the said Feast, they should wear their Mantles of the Order, from the hour of the first Vespers, on the Eve of St. George, till the second Vespers on the Feast day were finished: as they should have done, had they been present in person with the Soveraign or his Deputy, during the whole celebration of the Feast (in case they were not deprived of their Li|berty) the H. 5. Stat. Art. 11. Prorogation of the Feast notwithstanding.


SECT. II. More particular directions for their observation of it.
BUT perchance, because the custom of these Celebrations at home began to be neglected, at least seemed indifferent to the absent Knights-Companions, either to observe or not to observe them, it was thought needful by King Henry the Eighth to revive, as also to enlarge the Law in this particular, and therefore in the 11. year of his Reign, first in explanation of the said 11. Article of the Statutes of Institution, He declared, and enjoined the wearing of the whole Ha|bit upon the Eve of St. George, viz. the 22. day of April, whether it should hap|pen to fall within the Feast of Easter, or without, if the Knight-Companion were at liberty, and not under restraint. Then he enumerated the times for wearing it, to wit, on the Eve, at all times of Divine Service, Dinner, and Supper; and all this to be observed, unless in case of War, Sickness, Iourney, or other just impediment, when if the absent Knight did wear the Garter and George, either in a Gold Chain, or Silk Ribband, it should be accounted sufficient.
About three years after, when the same Soveraign made a general reforma|tion and explanation of the Statutes, he enjoined some other particulars to be done and observed by the absent Knights-Companions (whether, by Hen. 8. Stat. Art: 3. License or otherwise, any of them were in his own House, or any other place, and not under restraint) that is to say, he should be bound to prepare a Capital Stall in the Church or Chappel, where he designed to hear Service, to the honor of the Soveraign: In which Capital Stall should be set up the Arms of the Order within a Garter.
He should be likewise bound, to erect another Collect. W. le N. Cl. Stall, that should be as far in di|stance (according to the proportion and length of the said Church or Chappel) from the Stall of the Soveraign, and on the same side, as was the said absent Knights Stall in the Castle of Windesor, and therein should place his own Arms. More|over he should wear the Collect. W. le N. Cl. whole Habit of the Order, and should hear Collect. W. le N. Cl. Divine Service, such as by the Church is ordained for the said time; aswell the Even, the Morning, as the Afternoon on the Feast day. Then, that he should first do Collect. W. le N. Cl. Reverence towards the Altar, in the honor of God, and after towards the Stall, wherein was fixed and set up the Arms of the Soveraign, aswell and as often at his coming in, as at his going out of the said Church or Chappel; as also as often as he should pass before the said Arms. But Collect. W. le N. Cl. Emperors, Kings, Princes, or Electors, are excepted, who may in this case so place their Seats, and Stalls, as it shall seem most convenient to them.
In which Decree (being still in full force) we may observe, first the Injuncti|on upon an absent Knight, that doth oblige him to celebrate the Feast of Saint George, wherever he shall be, even then when the Soveraign and the rest of the Knights-Companions hold the same; and next, the manner and order thereof,

that being at large set down, both in reference to the preparations made in the Church, and his own deportment during the whole Ceremony. In relation to which, it is to be understood, that much of the ordering and adding to the glory of the Festival, and the absent Knights peculiar Honor, is left to his own pleasure and disposal; as namely,

1. The Collect. A. V. W. vide MS. pen. Arth. Com. Anglesey, fol. 237. a. adorning the Church or Chappel with Arras, or other rich Hangings, and furnishing the Soveraign's Stall; nevertheless with this caution, that it be always prepared on the right hand the entrance into the Choire, but if there be no Choire, then ought a partition of Hangings to be made, reserving an en|trance in the middle, and on the right hand a Cloth of State, whereon to be fixed the Soveraign's Arms (impaled with those of St. George) and Stile, the Seat furnish|ed with Cushens, and a Carpet and long Cushen, to lye on the Desk before it.
2. In placing his own Stall (with his Arms over it) at its just distance from the Soveraign's; to which purpose it is necessary, that Garter send him a Scheme of the Stalls on both sides the Choire.
3. In proceeding to the Church, both at 3 a Clock on the Eve of the Feast (where, habited in full Robes, he must behave himself in all things, as if he were at Windesor) and all other times while the Solemnity continues. That he be attended by a convenient number of Gentlemen before him, well habited, with the Officers of his Houshold, and also his inferior Servants in Liveries; two and two together, according to their Qualities and Degrees, bare-headed; who are to return in the same order as they go; the Gentlemen-Vshers also are to go bare-headed, and the Herald, if present, to take place next before the Knights person.
4. In his Dinner on the Feast day, that it be noble, and his Attendance at the Table sutable; and that he dine and sup alone at all times, unless there happen to be a Knight-Companion with him.
5. In his Offering of money, that he make it not only on the Feast day in the morning, but the next morning also, assoon as the first sentence of the Offertory is pronounced.
6. That at Evening Prayer on the Feast day, and also at the Supper following, he observe all things, as on the Eve.
7. In wearing his Habit of the Order, until after Supper on the Eve, and all the Feast day, until supper be ended at night.
8. That on the Morrow after the Feast, he proceed to the Church in his Man|tle only, and when Divine Service is finished, then to put it off at the Church door.

And if any thing else, in the before recited Article seem short or obscure, the large account in the Preparations for the Grand Feast, and course to be ob|served in the celebrations thereof (before laid down and handled) will suffici|ently clear and explain, without the assistance of any further Comment.
But here we must note, that though the Statutes seem not to oblige the absent Knights-Companions, to hold the Ceremonies of the Feast, longer than the Even|ing on the Feast day, yet by the practice of ensuing years, they were extended to the Morrow after, and consequently observed by the absent Knights, so long as the Soveraign and Knights-Companions performed them at Windesor, or else|where.
If the absent Knight be a person of eminent Degree, he is to be attended by a Herald, or Pursuivant at Arms, or both, during the Solemnity of the Feast; to adde the greater lustre thereto. Thus was Lib. N. pag. 173. Prince Arthur an. 15. H. 7. attended at Hereford; and the like honor was designed to the Earl of Collect. W. le N. Cl. Leicester, when he kept the Solemnity of the Feast in the Low Countries, and had been performed, but that the Herald dyed before St. George's day.
The nature of this Officers Employment on such an occasion, will partly ap|pear out of the Instructions, given by Ex Autogr. pen. Rob. Com. Aylesbur. Sir Gilbert Dethick Garter (pursuant to the directions of the Statute) to Henry Rees alias Berwick, Pursuivant at Arms, the 3. of April an. 1565. which were to this effect.
1. That he should see a Capital Stall provided for the Soveraign (though not there) with a Cloth of State, and before it a Carpet and Cushen,

with a Scutcheon of the Soveraign's Arms, impaled with those of St. George fixed thereon.
2. That the Knight's Stall should be decently trimmed, with a Scutcheon of his own Arms, fixed at the back of it, and that this Stall should be placed a good distance from the Soveraign's Stall, according to the largeness of the Chappel.
3. That he should go before the Knight-Companion, to and from the Church, both on the Even of the Feast, and Feast day, in his Coat of Arms; using such Reverence as is meet and convenient, and sit on a Form before the Soveraign's Stall.
4. That on the Feast day at Dinner, after the second Mess shall be served up (having on his Coat of Arms) he shall proclaim the said Knight's Stile in French.
5. And lastly, when the Knight puts off his Mantle, either in the Church, or where Service is said, then he to put off his Coat also, and return home (in his ordinary Apparel) with him.


SECT. III. How to be observed in case of Sickness.
BUT in case of Sickness, and such as hath confined the absent Knight to his Bed, or would not permit him with safety to go out of his Chamber; the custom was to prepare a Capital Stall for the Soveraign of the Order, with a Cloth of State, Carpet, Cushens, and a Scutcheon of the Arms of the Order, im|paled with the Arms of the Soveraign, and his Stile underneath, in the Ex MS. per|gam. penes Io|hannem Vin|ent gen. Chamber where he lay; as also another Stall for himself, placed according to the before mentioned directions, which were there to remain during the Feast. In which Room also were the Divine Offices celebrated, both on the Eve, the Feast day, and the Morrow after. And if the Ib. see also Rowes Iourn. pag. 10. absent Knight were so sick that he kept his Bed, then was his whole Habit of the Order laid thereon, during the time the rest of the Knights-Companions are enjoined to wear theirs, More Majo|rum, Lib. C. pag. 119. according to the ancient Custom and Statutes; and upon this account, Ambrose Earl of Warwick falling ill at Greenwich, when St. George's day was there celebrated an. 30. Eliz. retired to his Chamber, and there Collect. W. le N. Cl. sat in his Robes.


SECT. IV. In what manner the Feast hath been observed by absent Knights.
IN relation to the Celebrations performed by absent Knights, the Black Book gives us a punctual account in a considerable Precedent; namely, of the Feast of St. George holden in the Palace of Hereford, by Lib. N. p. 173. Prince Arthur, an. 15. H. 7. he being then in the Government of his Principality of Wales, and had with him Sir Richard Pool, one of the Companions of the Order, then his High|ness Chamberlain; this worthy Knight took care, that all those things, which the Solemnity of the Feast required, and the Soveraign and Knights-Companions did observe, according to the form of the Statutes and accustomed manner, should be most exactly performed; and indeed Lib. N. p. 173. there was nothing intermited in the Mass, in the first and second Vespers, which solemn custom required should be

done, in Censing, Fuming, Proceeding and Offering, aswell the Prince as the said Sir Richard, but it was undertook and performed with much exactness.
Besides, the Princes Sword was born and held before his Stall, and his Herald performed his Service with all gence; also the Soveraigns Herald stood all the while before the Soveraigns Stall, which was adorned with accustomed Or|naments: and lastly, the Ibid. p. 174. Bishop, who celebrated Divine Service, had his Seat erected near to the high Altar.
But the publick memorials of Sir Henry Sydneys holding two several Feasts of St. George, the one at Shrewsbury, and the other at Ludlow, is worthy of a place here; since these two Corporations, have caused them to be conspicu|ously recorded in their Town Hall; and from whence I made Transcripts, when I accompanied William Dugdale Esq Norroy King of Arms, in his Visitation of Shropshire, An. Dom. 1663.
That at Shrewsbury, being written in large Letters, upon a pain of Wainscot over the Chimney, in the Chamber of Concord, in the Town-Hall, is as fol|loweth.
Be it remembred, that in the Year of our Lord 1581. and in the 23d. Year of the Reign of our most dread Soveraign Lady Queen Elizabeth, the Feast of the most noble Order of the Garter, was right honourably kept, in the good and right renowned Town of Salop, by the Right Honourable Sir Henry Sidney, then Lord President of the Council, established in the Principallity of Wales and Marches of the same, one of the Companions of the same Order: the Arms of the Soveraign and others, Kings, Princes, and Nobles, then Instal|led, in the said Noble Order, were fixed in the Church of the same Town, during the Service and Ceremonies, belonging to the same Order.
Be it further remembred, that at that time then was Elected but not Instal|led, these Princes following, Rudolphus the 2d. of that name Emperor of the Romans, King of Hungary and Bohemia, Arch-Duke of Austria, Henry the 3d. French King, Christian King of Denmark, and the most Noble Prince John Casimire Duke of Bavaria and Palatine of the Rhien; then be|ing Bailiffs, William Jones, and William Hering, who together with the Chieftains of the several Companies of that good Town, did in most decent sort attend upon the said Lord President, during the said Feast, together with the Aldermen and Bailiffs, Peers, in their Scarlet Robes, and other Chieftains.
In the Gallery of the New-House at Ludlow are yet remaining, the several Scutcheons of those Knights-Companions, which were set up in the Chancel of St. Lawrence Church in Ludlow, in the 24. Year of Queen Elizabeth, when the Feast of St. George was solemnized there; before which the following memo|rial is also fairly written.
Be it remembred, that in the Year of our Lord God  and in the 24th Year of the Reign of the most Excellent and Famous Princess, Elizabeth by the Grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland; The Feast of the most antient and most Noble Order of the Garter, was honourably kept in the Town of Ludlow, at the usual days for keeping of the said Feast, by the Right Honourable Sir Henry Sydney Knight, Lord President of the Coun|cil established in the Principallity of Wales and Marches of the same, and one of the Companions of the same Order. The Arms of the Soveraign, and all the Princes and Nobles, being Companions of the same Noble Order, and Enstalled, were fixed in the Church of the said Town; and there remained during the Ceremonies. And be it further remembered, that before the same Feast there were Elected and not Enstalled, these Princes whose names follow, Rudolphus the Second Emperour of the Romans, King of Hungaria and Bo|hemia, Arch-Duke of Austria, Henry the Third the French King, Christian King of Denmark, and the most Noble Prince John Casimire Duke of Bavaria,

and Palatine of the Rhien,  manifestly fixed in the Church  then Bailiffs in their own persons did honour the Feast, with their attendance.
Moreover the Town of Ludlow, to shew their due respects to Sir Henry Sidney, and readiness to contribute to the Triumphs of this Solemnity, met and drew up the following Order, which we found entred in the Town Register.

10th day of March 1581. an. 24 Eliz.
IT is agreed upon by this Assembly, that Mr. Bayliffs shall call before them, the six persons undernamed of their Brethren, as soon as conveniently may, and they all to confer and lay down a place, how my Lord President shall be gratified by the Town, towards the keeping of St. George's Feast, if it be kept here, and the said Bayliffs and their Associates, have Commission upon their meeting, to call afore them at convenient time, two out of every Occupa|tion in the Town, and confer with them how the charges may be levied, and the same two to be of this Company, or other of the best sort of every occu|pation.
Thomas Blashfield. Richard Farr. Thomas Cauland. William Poughnell. Richard Rascoll. Thomas Langford. Richard Bayly.

In pursuance of which we also found, there was delivered out of the Trea|sury to Mr. Bayliffs, the very same day, 10 l. and the 18 of April fol. 10 l. 19 s. 2 d. more, towards defraying the charges of such Preparations, as the said Town made, upon that solemn occasion.
As to the manner used at the observation of the Feast by a Knight beyond Sea, we have an instance in Robert Earl of Leicester, Grimston's Hist. of the Ne|therlands, pag. 982. Lieutenant for Queen Eli|zabeth, Governour and Captain General of the United Provinces, who kept the Celebration of St. Georges Feast in the Netherlands An. Dom. 1586. of which we have met with these broken Memorials.
He had a Collect. W. le N. Cl. Scutcheon of the Order impailed with the Soveraigns Arms, fixt to the front of his House, so also upon the back of her Stall in the Church; and his own Arms at the back of his Stall.
He Proceeded on Horseback to the Church, William Seager, then Portcullis Pursuivant at Arms, (by his appointment) riding before him wearing a Collect. W. le N. Cl. King of Arms Coat, which Iohn Cocke Lancaster Herald, (both of them See Wevers funeral Monuments, p. 676.  682.  MS. fol. pene E. W. G. fol. 144. imployed to attend the said Earl) had brought over thither, for that days service, but it seems he dyed a little before St. Georges Day.
After Sermon, Portcullis proceeded before him to the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Offering, which the Earl made for the Soveraign and returned, and stood a little while before the Soveraign's Stall, and then Offered for himself; which done, he returned by the lower end of the Desk to his own Stall, with his due obeysances.
Service being ended, he returned to his own Lodgings, and there dined.
At the Collect. W. le N. Cl. second Course, Portcullis went up before it, between the Gentleman Usher, and proclaimed only the Soveraign's Stile and retired; during which Pro|clamation, the Earl (sitting at a Table alone, on the left hand of the State) and divers eminent persons (who sat at a side Table) stood up and were bare.
The Collect. W. le N. Cl. Soveraign's Trencher was laid under the State, and the whole Service performed to that, with due Reverence, by divers of her Servants there present, and the Earl took his meat therefrom, as by the by.
Lastly, a learned Io. Leslaeus de rebus gestis Sco|torum, Lib. 9. p. 439. Romae 1578. quarto, vide Iohannem Iac. Chester. in sais lumini|bus novis prae|rogativis ad Vindictas His|panica. umi|ne 13. p. 439. Scotch Historian takes notice, that King Iames the Fifth,

having been honored, not only with the Order of the Garter by King Henry the Eighth, but next with that other Order of the Golden Fleece (by the Emperor Charles the Fifth) and not long after of St. Michael (by the French King Francis the First) kept the several Feasts of the Patrons of those Orders, with great So|lemnity an. 1534. And to signifie to the several Soveraign's, as also to proclaim to the world, the great account he made of those Honors, he not only adorn|ed himself on those solemn Festivals, with the Ensigns of each Order, but fixed on the Gates of his Palace at Lithgoe his Royal Arms, encompassed with the Collars of each of them, together with that of St. Andrew, Patron of the King|dom of Scotland.


SECT. V. Dispensation for Absence granted during life.
SOmetimes upon special favour of the Soveraign, and where Age or Infirmity of any of the Knights-Companions hath been made known to him by Petition, they have obtained Letters of Dispensation for absence, not only from the Feast approaching (of which we have Chap. 19. Sect. 2. before discoursed) but also during life. Such indulgence was granted to the Lord MS. in Offic. Arm. [H. 12.] Dacres an. 26. H. 8. and to the Earl of Derby an. 14. Car. I. both which Precedents we have thought fit to insert in the Num. CLXXXI.  CLXXXII. Appendix. The like with that to the said Earl of Derby, was likewise grant|ed to the Earl of Moulgrave, and under the same date, but both upon the fol|lowing conditions, as they are contained in a Decree passed in Chapter, the 18. of April an. 13. Car. 1. which was this,
Rowes Iour|nal, pag. 10. vide Lib. R. pag. 119. That no Dispensation shall be granted, but with condition, that the absent Knight shall send to Garter King of Arms, for his Scutcheons, at the same time that he sends his excuse, and Petition for Dispensation. And shall so|lemnly keep in his own House or abiding, the Feast, with all the sacred Rites and Ceremonies, in his Robes and other Ornaments, if health permit; and in case of Sickness, upon his Bed, according to the ancient Statutes.
This Act was thought of so great importance to be observed, that the then Chancellor was commanded to transcribe and Rowes Iur|nal, pag. 10. send it (with the Soveraign's plea|sure) to each of the Knights-Companions within the Realm, not only to remind those, who were present at making the Decree, but also to inform the rest of the Fellowship, who were absent, of what had been done.
The execution of which command was accompanied with a See before pag. 486. Postscript of a Letter, whereby he acquainted them with the Penalties they should be liable to, for their neglect and omission of due observation.
And we find, that in the following year, when the Soveraign (being at Ber|wick) had prorogued the Feast to Windesor, the Letters of Notice, which Sir Iames Palmer (then Deputy Chancellor) issued out, to the Knights-Companions, contained a Clause to the foresaid purpose; Palm. Iourn. pro an. 1639. pag. 8. That those Knights-Companions, who could not then come to Windesor, should take notice of the prorogation, and so|lemnize the said Feast at their own Houses.




CHAP. XXIV. THE Degradation OF A Knight-Companion.

SECT. I. Of the Degradation of a Knight-Batchellor.
SO hainous an Offence as that of High Treason, hath been thought deser|ving the loss, not only of Life and Estate, but Honor also: and thereup|on when Sentence hath been to be given against a Knight, for so great a Crime, sometimes Degradation from his Degree hath preceded: and this as our Learned Selden faith, is done Titles of Ho|nor, pag. 787. as a respect of Honor to Knighthood in general; lest so much ignominy as accompanied the Iudgment for such an Of|fence, should lye on any that were a Knight, when he suffered it.
In the Example of Sir Andrew Harclay, created Earl of Carlisle by King Ed|ward the Second, whose Degradation is reported in the Pag. 788. Titles of Honor, it may be observed, that the principal part of the Ceremony was, a solemn taking from him his Sword, and chopping off his Spurs, the chief Ensigns of his Honor. And in that of Sir Ralph Grey, an. 4. E. 4. (one of whose Crimes was for MS. in Offic. Arm. [L. 15.] fol. 33. be|traying Sir Iohn Astley, a Knight of this Order, into the hands of the Kings Ene|mies, where he remained Prisoner for many years) besides the striking off his Spurs, the tearing his Coat of Arms from his Body, and putting on another Coat, whereon his Arms were reverst, was appointed to be done; but by the Kings favour, the Iudgment was not pronounced: To these, Sir William Segar adds the Honor Milit.  Civil. Lib. 2. cap. 13. bruising every piece of the Knights Armor, and casting it aside: be|side which, some Lib. 2. C. 4. other Ceremonies of Degradation are mentioned by him, to have been more anciently used.



SECT. II. The manner of Degraing a Knight-Companion of the Garter.
THE Ensigns of this Noble Order, are not to be withdrawn from a Knight-Companion so long as he lives, unless he be found guilty of some of those points of Reproach, set down in King Henry the Eighth's Art. 8. Statutes, to wit, He|resie, Treason, or flying from Battel: We also find, that Prodigality was made a fourth Point, where a Knight had so wasted his Estate, that he was not able to support his Honor. And the not being a Gentleman of Blood, both by Father and Mother, was the pretence, for devesting William Lord Paget, an. 6. E. 6. But Fellony comes not within the compass of this Statute, as not being particu|larly specified among the Reproaches there reckoned up, and so it was adjudged in a Chapter held the 6. of Iuly an. 14. Iac. R. in the case of MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 153. Robert Earl of So|merset, then lately condemned for that Fact; whereupon his Hatchments were not removed.
When a Knight-Companion is found guilty of any the Offences mentioned in King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, he is usually degraded at the next Chapter after; and therefore, where the Soveraign intends to have this Ceremo|ny put in Execution, after he hath acquainted the Knight-Companion there|with, he commands Garter to attend such of them, as are appointed to go to the convict Knight, who in a solemn manner, first takes from him his George and Ribband, and then his Garter. And at the following Feast of St. George (or sooner if the Soveraign appoint) Publication of his Crimes and degradation is made by Garter (a Appendix, Num. CLXXXIII. Warrant in the mean time issuing out to him, for taking down the Atchievements of the Knight) in the ensuing order.
First Garter, in his Lib. N. pag. 316. vide Col|lect. A. V. W. Coat of Arms, (usually before Morning Prayer, if the Grand Feast, or Feast of Installation be then held) standing on the highest step ascending to the Brazen Desk, placed in the middle of the Choire in St. George's Chappel at Windesor, the Officers of Arms standing about him, and the MS. vet. pen. G. O. Y. f. 71. b. Black Rod also present, reads aloud the Instrument for Publication of the Knights Degra|dation; a Precedent whereof we have placed in the Num. CLXXXIV. Appendix.
In which form, run all other Instruments in this kind, that have come to our view, and only varied in the Preamble, where the nature of the Offence is particularly set down for which he hath deserved Degradation.
This being read, Lib. N. loco citat. one of the Heralds deputed thereunto (a Ladder being raised to the backside of the convict Knights Stall, and he, in his Coat of Arms, placed there before hand) when Garter pronounceth the words, Expelled and put from among the Arms, c. Collect. A. V. W. takes his Crest, and violently casts it down into the Choire, and after that his Banner and Sword, and when the Publica|tion is read out, all the Officers of Arms spurn the Atchievements out of the Choire into the Body of the Church, first the Sword, then the Banner, and last of all the Crest, so out of the West-Door, thence to the Bridge, and over into the Ditch, and thus was it done at the degradation of Ibid. Edward Duke of Buckingham the 8 of Iune, an. 13 H. 8.
In reference to the degradation of Thomas Percy Earl of Northumberland, he was first MS. in Offic. Arm. [M. 6.] fol. 85. Proclaimed Traitor (the 26 of November an. 12 Eliz.) at Windesor Castle: which Proclamation was directed to the Constable of the Castle, and made by sound of a Trumpet and the voice of an Herald, other of his Fellows assisting: and on the day following, the Sentence of his degradation was pub|lished, and Chester Herald (after Rouge Croix Pursuivant had read the Sentence) threw down the Atchievements, Ibid. first his Banner, next his Sword, then his Crest, and lastly his Helm and Mantlets, which Garter, assisted by the Officers of Arms, spurned out of the West-Door of the Chappel into the Castle Ditch.
But in the case of Lib. C. p. 145 Robert Earl of Essex (25 of May, an. 43 Eliz.) his At|chievements

were only thrown down; and those of Ibid. pag. 153. Henry Lord Cobham (12 Febr. an. 1 Iac. Reg.) only spurned out of the Church Door, but by the Kings Clemency not into the Ibid. pag. 153. Ditch.
But Degradation was not alone thought sufficient, and therefore an. 32 H. 8. it was considered in Chapter, Lib. N. p. 283. what course should e taken with the Names of such of the Order, as were convicted of High Treason, and whether they should remain in the Registers, or be razed out; for it seemed just, that Traitors, who had deserved to have their Atchievements disgracefully thrown down, should also have their Actions and Names extinguished, and the Books wherein they were entred, to be esteemed as polluted.
This being debated before the Soveraign: He, keeping a mean between both extreams, determined, Ibid. That wheresoever the Actions and Names of such Of|fenders should be found, these words [vah Proditor] should be written in the Margent; by which means the Registers would be preserved fair, and not defa|ced with razures and blots.


SECT. III. Of Restauration into the Order after Degradation.
SOme of the Knights-Companions, who have injuriously suffred Deprivation of the Ensigns, and Degradation from the Order, have lived to enjoy the Ho|nor of Restauration, and both re-elected and re-invested, and their Atchieve|ments again set up, as were the Lord Pagits, an. 1 Mar. and the Marquess of Northampton's, an. 1 Eliz. whose Cases we have Pag. 28   287. before Reported.
Another Instance there is of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, who being Degraded by King Edward the Sixth, was, upon Queen Maries's coming to the Crown, restored into this Noble Fellowship, as will fully appear by the Order for his Restauration, which was this,

By the Queen.
Trusty and wellbeloved we greet you well; And whereas our Right Trusty and right entirely beloved Cousin and Councellour the Duke of Norfolk, for the good and valiant service by him of long time done to the King our Father, of most famous memory King Henry the Eight, as well here within the Realm as abroad with Foreign Princes, both in Peace and in War, and in respect of other his good qualities and vertues, was by our said Father elected into the Company of the most Honourable Order of the Garter, and duly invested in the same, from which nevertheless afterward, in the time of our late Brother King Edward the Sixth, whom God assoil, the said Duke was by our said late Brother and other the Companions of our said Order of the Garter, through wrong information and accusation cleerly expelled and removed, and his Hatch|ments to his no small slaunder and dishonour openly cast down, and taken from the Stall appointed for him in our Chappel at Windesor. We let you wet, that we, minding to do Iustice to all men, have sythence our coming to the Govern|ment of the Realm, called a Chapter for the redress of the Injuries aforesaid, and such like, and at the same holden at our Mannor of St. James the 27. day of Sept. last, by the advice and consent of the Companions of our said Order, have restored the said Duke of Norfolk to his former room and place, among other the Companions of our said Order, as one that was injuriously put from the same, wherefore like as we have willed him to use and wear the Garter, Col|lar, George, Robes, and other the Apparel of our said Order, in such sort as he was wont to do before his said wrongful deprivation. So have we also

thought good to will and require both you the Register of our said Order, to cancel and utterly to put out of your Register all Writings, Records, or other mynyments making mention of the said deviation: And you also Garter King of Arms for our said Order, to see his Hatchments honourably set up in the place appointed for them, and his Banner to be of such Arms as his Father bare and had set up aforetime, being late Knight of the said Order, there to remain and continue among the Hatchments of other our Companions of our said Order, according to the ancient Ordinances and landable usages here|tofore accustomed, at the seting up whereof, our Pleasure is these our Letters shall be openly read, for a more plain Declaration of our pleasure in the pre|mises. And these our Letters shall be to you and either of you, for the doing of the premises, and every part thereof a sufficient Warrant and discharge.
Given under our Signet of our said Order, at our Palace of Westminsterthe 7. of March, the first year of our Reign.

To our Trusty and Well-beloved the Dean of our Chappel at Windesor, Register of our Order of the Garter, and Sir Gilbert Dethick alias Garter Knight King at Arms for our said Order, and to either of them.





CHAP. XXV. Honors PAID TO DECEASED Knights-Companions.

SECT. I. Of the celebration heretofore of Masses, for the defunct Knights-Companions.
WE observe it to have been the Custom in all Religious, and most Military Orders, that, A. Men Disq. 16. n. 8.9, c. when any of the Knights departed this life, the several Members of them should contribute their de|votions, for the benefit of their departed Souls, according to their different qualifications; some in celebrating Msses, or causing them to be celebrated; and others in the recitation of Divine Offices,

and Alms-giving; as it were to satisfie the World of the honor they had, from their being enrolled in their several Fraternities and Societies.
But the Order of the Garter hath outvy'd all others in this particular; for as the reputation which the Knights-Companions, while living, derived from their admission into so renowned and illustrious a Body, specially Knights-Subjects, who were thereby advanced to a Fellowship with their King and Supreme Lord, and made Companions to Emperors, Kings, and Princes, was very great; so were the several Honors paid to their memory after their decease, particularly in the Royal Chappel of St. George at Windesor, very remarkable; not including the Solemnities at their publick Funerals, many times hapning elsewhere; and these we find reducible to five heads. (1.) The number of Masses celebrated for their Souls departed. (2.) The fastning Plates of their Arms, at the back of their Stalls. (3.) Offering up their Atchievements at the Altar, and (4.) Depositing Mantles in the Chapter-house at Windesor.
As to the celebrating of Masses for the deceased Knights-Companions, though it might suffice to say, that it was done consonantly to the perswasion of those times, yet we shall not think it much to give the reasons thereof, as we find them laid down in the Preface to the Black-Book of the Order, in direct relation to this solemn Ceremony performed for them.
Lib. N. p. 8. It was the general opinion then, That Monasteries, Convents, and Colledges, were founded out of this motive, that, among devout, charitable, and well di|sposed Christians, there should be a continual harmony of Prayer, as well for the living as the dead. For the Living, that, in Peace and War, they might manage all their Affairs with piety, prudence, and good success: For the Dead, that having obtained remission, they might reign together in eternal bliss. Ibid. pag. 9. And not knowing what dangers might surround them, the living thought themselves obliged the more servently to assist them with their Prayers; supposing it un|certain, whether they were in glory or torment. Pag. 11. That by pious Prayers, they might endeavour to turn Gods vengeance, due for the many sins committed in this life, into clemency; inasmuch as continual supplication was indeed very prevalent, and might reach the ears of the Almighty. That this kind of com|memoration moved the greatest Princes, to be so expensive in sumptuous Stru|ctures, for the assembling such as should continually pray therein, as also infe|riour persons, according to their abilities, to promote their own and others sal|vation. And that the Princes reflecting on the uncertainty of their own lives, and considering, that many were in their Services cut off, amidst the hazards of War, and how doubtful such a departure was, endeavoured to assist them in the next World, since they could no longer do it in this; which, if by any thing, was to be performed by Prayer. Out of these perswasions, that this was availa|able, they had their recourse thereto, and so began to institute persons and pla|ces, for the making of Prayers to that end.
With what hath been delivered concerning the motive of this Office for the dead, it may be also observed, that the Founder of the Order admitted into its Institution, the commemoration of the departed Souls of the Knights-Companions; and thereupon it came to be ordained, E. 3. Stat. Art. 17 H 5. Stat. Art. 17 Lib. N. pag. 223. That assoon as the Soveraign should have true and certain intelligence brought him of the Death of any of the Knights-Com|panions, he should cause to be celebrated for the Soul of a Defunct Knight a thou|sand Masses.
And that all the rest of the Knights-Companions might (upon like notice) con|tribute to the relief of the Soul of their deceased Fellow and Companion, the Proportions were in like manner stated in the same Article of the Statutes, thus.


A Stranger King
800. Masses.


The Prince
700. Masses.


Every Duke
600. Masses.


Each Earl
300. Masses.


Every Baron
200. Masses.


And a Knight Batchellour
100. Masses.


Afterwards, when the Titles of Marquess and Viscount were introduced among us, the proportion of Masses imposed upon the former was 450. as being a De|gree of Dignity between those of a Duke and an Earl, on the latter 250. And the numbers of all these Masses were Lib. N. p. 97. rated proportionable to the Fees, enjoin|ed to be paid, for setting up the Knights-Companions Atchievements over their Stalls.
Now to prevent the neglect in performance of this duty incumbent upon the Soveraign, and surviving Knights-Companions, by this Article of the Statutes; it was thought fit to set down for penalty, a compleat E. 3. Stat. Art. 17. H. 5. Stat. Art. 17.  Lib. N. p. 223. doubling of the number of those Masses, to which at first they were enjoined (according to their quali|ties and Degrees) if they were not celebrated within three Months, after no|tice given of the deceased Knights Death, as aforesaid. And if the neglect ex|tended to half a year together, they were obliged, to E. 3. Stat. Art. 17. H. 5. Stat. Art. 17.  Lib. N. p. 223. quadruple their num|ber, and E. 3. Stat. Art. 17. H. 5. Stat. Art. 17.  Lib. N. p. 223. so from time to time, until the years end. But if after all this, they should not within the whole year perform what they were so enjoined; the Statute further bound them, to E. 3. Stat. Art. 17. H. 5. Stat. Art. 17.  Lib. N. p. 223. double the Masses from year to year, after the foresaid manner.
But to provide against any omission of the Soveraigns part, it was added to the Registers Duty, an. 31 H. 8. to Lib. N. pag. 109. put the Soveraign in mind, of giving Order herein, if at any time it should happen, to be forgotten by him; to the end he might forthwith take care to have the Masses celebrated, according to the said Injunction.
And because it was at length thought convenient, to withdraw this burthen from Stranger Kings and Princes, that branch of the Statute relating to them, was made null, and in a Chapter held at Windesor, the 8. of May, an. 13 H. 6. the same was by the Lib. N. p. 91 Soveraign placed upon himself and his Successours, Soveraigns of this most Noble Order.
But because all the surviving Knights-Companions, might the better perform this Injunction, and cause the full number of Masses to be celebrated, care was taken by the Soveraign to send Letters to every one of them, (at first, as well to Knights-Strangers as Subjects) immediately after the decease of any Knight, to signify the time of his Death, and put them in mind of the Injunction, which the Statutes laid upon them. Of which Letters, some Precedents may be seen in the Numb. CLXXXV. CLXXXVI.  CLXXXVII. Appendix.
The difference between those Letters sent to the Knights-Companions beyond Sea, and these at home, was only this, that in these directed to the latter, (in regard of their nearness to the Court, and consequently in greater readiness to appear at an Election.) The Letters contained a summons also, to come to the Election of a new Knight, on such a day as the Soveraign had therein appointed.
And it seems it was the custom for those Religious Houses, whether the Sove|raign sent directions, to celebrate either part or all the Masses due to each deceased Knight, to make a formal Numb. CLXXXVIII. return in writing, under their Lib. N. pag. 254. Common Seal, of what they had done therein: which Certificates, were, also by the Register, re|ported in Chapter to the Soveraign or his Lieutenant. For an. 18 H. 8. we find Lib. N. p. 254.  Regist. Char|tac. fol. 65. him acquaint the Soveraigns Lieutenant, with several such Certificates, signify|ing the Celebration of 1000. Masses (upon the Soveraigns account) for each of these Knights defunct; namely the Earls of Lib. N. p. 254.  Regist. Char|tac. fol. 65. Arundel, Shrewsbury, Essex, and Rutland, the Viscount Fitz-walter, and Lord Abergaveny, and at other times, (sit|ing the Chapter) there wre brought in Ibid. p. 171.268.  272. such like authentick Letters, certify|ing the celebration of the Masses, for the Souls of other defunct Knights.
This course of celebrating these Masses for defunct Knights, was constantly observed and so continued, until the 32d. year of King Henry the Eighth; at which time, upon a motion made concerning those suffrages for the Dead, in a Chapter held in his Palace at Westminster, on the 24th of May, in the aforesaid year this Decree passed. Lib. N. p. 283. See also H. 8. Stat in English, Art. 18. That every one of the Knights-Companions, in lieu of the said Masses, should for the future, after the Death of any of their Brethren, ac|cording to the rates of their Degrees hereafter mentioned, and immediately upon

demand made for the same, by the Register and Dean of Windesor, or one of them, pay the several sums of money here specified.



l.
s.
d.


Lib. N. p. 283. See also H. 8. Stats in English, Art. 18. The Soveraign,
08
06
08.


A Stranger King,
06
08
04.


The Prince,
05
16
08.


A Duke,
05
00
00.


A Marquess,
03
16
00.


An Earl,
02
10
00.


A Viscount,
01
01
08.


A Baron,
01
13
04.


A Batchellor Knight,
00
16
08.


The monies collected upon this Account (called Obit monies) were by the aforesaid Decree, appointed Lib. N. p. 283. to be distributed and imployed in Alms Deeds; of which sort, (as they are there mentioned) are the Lib. N. p. 283. reparation of High-ways, the relief of the Poor, and other things of like nature, as the Soveraign should from time to time limit and appoint.
And of the Ibid. receipt of these sums, and their disbursements, it was also de|creed, That the Dean and Register, or either of them, should yearly in Chapter, present his Account to the Soveraign under the penalty of Ten pounds, to be imploy|ed, for such like use, for every such default. And, Ibid. p. 284. that Knight-Companion whose portion did appear to be then unpaid, should by way of penalty or fine, add unto his former duty, another third part of the same; and so for every year that he should be behind, to pay a third part more, than he was at first enjoyned to pay, according to the rate before set down.
This charitable distribution, in a Chapter held at Greenwich, the 24. of April, an. 5. E. 6. was enlarged to the Lib. N. p. 306. relief and succour of the Poor, where most need was, in the Town of Windesor, and other Towns, Villages, and Places, at and by the discretion of the Dean of Windesor, Lib. N. p. 306. he advising with some honest men, who could best give an account of such as were truly poor and indigent.
To the bringing in of these Collections, the Soveraigns have sometimes vouchsafed to cast their eyes, and an. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar. by an Order in Cha|pter, a Lib. C. p. 14. Scedule was appointed to be made, of all the monies due and in arrear, upon the decease of Knights-Companions, to the end they might be imployed to publick and pious uses.
But though the foresaid Decree was confirmed by Lib. R. p. 87. King Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, yet for many years, had the Collection of these Obit monies been neglected, even till the 9. of King Charles the First; and then the noble Earl of Ibid. pag. 86. Portland, inflamed with zeal, for the restoring of so pious a work, did in full Chapter held at Windesor, on the Ibid. pag. 83. 5. of Nov. in the aforesaid year, put the Soveraign in mind of the Decrees, anciently made in this case. Whereupon it was ordained by the Soveraign, with the consent of all the Knights-Companions present, Ibid. p. 87. That the said Constitution, so honorable and cha|ritable in it self, and to which they were all sworn, at their entrance into the Order, should be revived, and put in practice, and for ever hereafter observed, under the penalty contained in the Statutes, both towards the Knights that were to pay the same, and towards the Dean of Windesor, who was to collect it: And further, Ibid. p. 87. That the same should begin for the five Knights, whose Atchievements were at that Feast offered: that is to say, for the King of Sweden, the Prince Elector Palatine, the Earls of Northumberland, Banbury, and Rutland. And concerning Ibid. p. 87. Stranger Princes, it pleased the Soveraign to express himself, That, as by the Statutes they are left to perform these payments by themselves, if they would, so, if the same were not done by them, that them, and thenceforwards the same should be paid by the Soveraign himself.
The Soveraign, whose total for these five deceased Knights, amounted to 129 l. 3 s. 4 d. caused the same to be paid to Doctor Christopher Wren, the then

Register of the Order: so did the Earls of Arundel and Surry, Salisbury, Dorset, Holland, Berks, Portland, and Lindsey, the Total of each of theirs amounting to 12 l. 10. s. But from the rest, (as the said Register himself complained in his Dated 24. May 1637. Letters to Sir Tho. Rowe, the then Chancellor of the Order) all his endeavours could not obtain their proportions.
Afterwards, Ex Collect. Doct. Chr. Wre aper Ord: Re|gist. all the Sums of money, to be collected by vertue of this Decree, (together with the Knights-Companions duties, at their first entrance into this Order) were imployed, towards the providing Plate for the Altar, within St. George's Chappel in Windesor Castle; of which we have Chap. 19. Sect. 6. already treated.


SECT. II. Of fixing on the Stalls, Plates of their Arms, and Stiles.
THE next thing, provided for by the Statutes of Institution, was the de|ceased Knights Honor; in commemoration whereof, among other things conducing thereunto, it was ordained, E. 3. Stat. Art. 23 H. 5. Stat. Art. 23 That when any one of the first Founders should dye, there should be made in metal a Scutcheon of his Arms, with his Helm or Crest, and fastned at the back of his Stall, for a Ord. Stat. in Bibl. Haon. Art 23. mark of Honor to him that bore them. E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 2. And in like manner, that their Successors, should have a like Scut|cheon fixed on the backs of their Stalls; and to difference them, from those of the first Founders, they were appointed to be made in bigness, E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 2. less than theirs, and to be placed somewhat underneath them.
But this Article relates only to the Knights-Companions, not to the Soveraigns of this most Noble Order; nor do we find, that any of them had Plates of their Arms and Stiles set upon the back of their Stalls, in manner as is before pre|scribed, to the rest of the Knights-Companions.
King Henry the Eighth in his Body of Statutes, alters this Article in three par|ticulars; first, as to the time of setting up their Plates, he appoints it to be (not after their death, but) Art. 25. within a year after the Installation of every Knight-Companion: Secondly, as to the nature of the Metal, that it may be such Art. 25. as the Knight shall please himself: And lastly, as to the size, though he also restrains the Knights Subjects to a lesser, than those of the first Founders, yet gives he li|berty to Knights Strangers, to Art. 25. use their Plates and fashions at pleasure.
As to the first of these, we find not, but that it hath been duly observed. But the last (the size of the Plates) as will appear upon sight, hath been little re|garded: For the very Plates of those Knights, who were installed soon after the confirmation of these Statutes, and thence downwards, are bigger than those of the first Founders. As to the other, relating to the Metal they are off, it is to be acknowledged, that the succeeding Knights-Companions, did prudently follow the example of their Predecessors, who appointed their Plates to be of Copper, and thereby unexpectedly defeated the design of Avarice and Rapine. Of which we have an instance in the Duke of Wirtemberg's Plate, for that be|ing of Silver and large withal, gave so great a temptation, that in the late Wars it was forced from the back of the Stall whereto it was fixed, with some dif|ficulty sure, since they could not get it thence, without carrying away some part of the Wainscot along with it.
But if the Metal of these Plates, were of small value, the workmanship about them, was extraordinary, especially of late; the Plate it self being gilt over, and the colours of the Armory and Supporters richly enamelled: all which, though it added much lustre to the Shield, yet did it nothing contribute to the advantage of the Thief.
In tract of time, many of these noble and remarkable Memorials were by sacrilegious hands torn off and imbezelled; which the late Soveraign of ever

pious memory having taken notice of, and desirous to put a stop to a mischief, not in his power to prevent, as also to preserve the remembrance of the prece|dent Knights-Companions, commanded the Dean of Windesor to describe the Stiles of those that remained in a Book, which he accordingly did, and laid it up in the Colledge. But what became of this Book, our most diligent enquiry, could never find out. So that in May, An. Dom. 1659. by the civil permission of Colonel Whichcott, then Governour of Windesor Castle, all we could do, was, to draw the Arms and coppy out the Stiles, engraven on the Plates, then remaining (whilst Mr. Wineslaus Holler was imployed by us to take several Pros|pects of the Castle and Chappel) from which, we have drawn these following ob|servations.
First, That for many years after the Institution of the Order, the Plate whereon the Shield was engraved, bore no other Inscription, but the deceased Knights name set at the foot thereof, under the Scutcheon of his Arms. After|wards his Chief Title of Honour began to be added, though now and then in these first and elder times, both were omitted, as also their Crests. But about the beginning of King Henry the Eighth's Reign, not only the Knights chief Title, but all other his Titles of Dignity, whether Honorary, or Officiary, (and every thing in that kind due) were drawn together in one Inscription, conclu|ding with that of Knight of this most Noble Order, and which, about the same time, the Knights-Companions used to insert into both publick and private In|struments of writing, wherein any of them were concerned, a custom observed by the Knights of other Soveraign Orders abroad. For in an MS. in Offic. Arm. M. 14. fol. 49. b. Instrument, da|ted at Bulloign, the 20 th of Febr. an. 1549. by the Noblemen and others that were appointed to treat of a Peace, between King Edward the Sixth, and the French King Henry the Second, we find, that such of them, as were Knights of the Orders of either Kingdom, had the additions of their Orders, (as also the Register of the Order of St. Michael, that title of his Office) joyned to their other Titles, in this manner.
Iohn Earl of Bedford, Knights of the Order.
William Pagit, Knight also of the Order.
Francis de Mountmorency Seignior de Rochepot, Knight of the Order of France.
Gaspard de Colligny Seignior de Chastillon, Knight also of the Order.
Guilliame Rochetell Seignior de Sassy, one also of the French Kings Council, chief Secretary, and Register of the Order.
At first, the Knights-Companions gave their Paternal Coats of Arms, singly and without any Quarterings, but towards the beginning of King Henry the Fifths Reign, they began to add their Quarterings, as may appear from the Scutcheons of Hugh Lord Burnell, who died Lib N. p. 67. an. 9 H. 5. Sir Lewis Robessart Lord Bourchier, Robert Lord Willoughby, and others.
Yet was not the same generally used, but left to the pleasure of the Knights-Companions: But of latter times, this very thing was thought of such concern|ment, and honour, that where a Knight hath been elected, who wanted Quar|terings, the Soveraign hath been pleased to grant him another Coat of Arms, to quarter with his Paternal Coat, lest otherwise his Banner (which ought to hang over his Stall) should seem too naked: as in the Case of Robert Viscount Ro|chester, and Thomas Earl of Kelley, in the Reign of King Iames.
Shortly after the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, the Knights compassed their Shields, with the Royal Garter; and thereon (if Noblemen) placed the Coronet belonging to their Dignity, continuing the use ever since. Thus adorned do we find the Scutcheon of Charles Duke of Burgundy, elected in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, and yet we do not observe it used in all the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. For though a Plate for Franke van Hall, (a Knight elected by the Founder) is hitherto standing in his Stall at Windesor, surrounded with a Garter, yet is not this Plate the workmanship of that Age, but engraved and set up of late times; as may easily be observed, from the work it self.
As touching Supporters; tis true, we observe two Plates to which Supporters

are added, the one of Iohn Beaufort the first Duke of Somerset of that name, elected an. 20 H. 6. the other of Anthony Woodvill Earl Rivers, elected an. 5. E. 4. and besides these, until the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, there is not one other example. But then it grew into a common usage; as also the ingraving their peculiar Mottoes or Devises upon the Plates.


SECT. III. The Offering of Atchievements.
A Third honour done to the defunct Knight, is a most solemn Offering up of his Atchievements at the High Altar, according to the magnificence of so great an Order; namely the Banner of his Arms, his Sword, his Helmet, and Crest, with its Mantlings: all which had been set up over his Stall, when he was Installed.
The Ceremony of Offering these Ensigns, does not appear to have been so Ordained at the Institution of the Order, but rather an additional honor, in|stituted by King Henry the Fifth, and the manner and order thereof, set down in the 14th Article of his body of Statutes.
This solemn Ceremony is local to the Chappel of St. George, within the Castle of Windesor, and not to be celebrated, until certain notice be given to the So|veraign of the Knights-Companions Death, or that he shall receive a Certificate thereof. This appears in the case of the Duke of Ferrara; where at the Feast of St. George, an. 20 H. 7. the vulgar report run for currant, that he was dead, nevertheless Lib. N. p. 178. See also Tho. Wriotheeys's old MS. penes W. le N. Cl. pag. 7. because the Soveraign had not then received any Certificate of the same, his Atchievements were not Offered up at that Feast.
There fell out a question, at the Feast of St. George held at Windesor, the 23 d. of May, an. 1 E. 6. which held some debate, viz. Collect prafat. W. le N. Cl. Vide etiam MS. 4. penes E. W. G. fol. . whether the Atchievements of King Henry the Eighth, which yet hung over the Soveraigns Stall, should be taken down and Offered at the Mass of Requiem ensuing, or not? in regard his Banner, Sword, Helm, and Crest, with Mantles, had been offered up th 16th of Febr. before, at his Interment within that Chappel: whereupon it was determi|ned, Collect prafat. W. le N. Cl. Vide etiam MS. 4. penes E. W. G. fol. . That the said Atchievements should not again be Offered, but remain over the Soveraigns Stall for his Son King Edward the Sixth.
The Relator for justifying the legality of this determination, saith, there was found a like Precedent, in the case of King Henry the Sixth, who lyeth buried in that Chappel; but we suppose him mistaken, and that instance (being in truth much different from that of King Henry the Eighth,) not well considered by him: For the case was this; When King Edward the Fourth came to the Crown, he thought it unfit, that the Atchievements of King Henry the Sixth (who could not be accounted Soveraign of this most Noble Order, because no longer King of England) should be continued over his Stall, They therefore by the express command of King Edward the Fourth, signified by Lib. N. pag. 126. Letters sent to his Deputy and the Knights-Companions, were by Garter taken down and carried out of the Choire into the Vestry, and, in their place were set up the new At|chievements of King Edward the Fourth, and this was done at the Feast of St. George held at Windesor Lib. N. pag. 126. an. 1. E. 4. and long before the Death of King Henry the Sixth, which when it hapned, he was first buried at Chertsey Abbey in Surrey, and by King Concilia Bri|tann. Vol. 2. p. 712.  713. Richard the Thirds Command Reinterred on the Southside of the High Altar, in St. Georges Chappel at Windesor, and therefore this cannot sute with King Henry the Eighths Case, whose Atchievements were not taken down at all.
But when the Soveraigns of this most Noble Order are not interred at Winde|sor, then are their Atchievements offered up at the next ensuing Feast, accord|ing to the usual manner, as were those of Queen Elizabeth, which the Blew

Book notes to be done at Lib. C. p. 152 vide etiam MS. fol. penes E. W. G fol. 155. Morning Prayer, the 11. of Iuly, an. 1. Iac. R. The Banner being offered by the Earl of Nottingham Lord Admiral (then the Sove|raign's Lieutenant) and the Lord Buckhurst, Lord Treasurer; the Sword by the Earls of Shrewsbury, and Cumberland; and the Helm and Crest, by the Earls of Northumberland, and Worcester; and also of King Iames her Successor, an. MS. pen. Ed. Fauconbridge gen. 1 Car. 1. both these Soveraigns being buried at Westminster.
As to the time for performing this Ceremony, it was ordained to be on the Lib. N. p. 66. vide H. 8. Stat. Art. 12. Morrow after the Feast, when the Lib. N. p. 66. vide H. 8. Stat. Art. 12. Mass was sung, for the soul of the Knights-Companions, and of all the Faithful deceased; and H 5 Stat. Art. 14. vide porro Collect. W. le N. Cl.  MS. in Offic. Armor. [H. 2. fol. 8. b.] before the Offering of Mo|ney. Thus was it ordered even, in the Lib. N. p. 67. first precedent we have of this solemn Ceremony, and so was it duly and constantly performed in succeeding times, till that of the Reformation, at which the Mass of Requiem being abolished, this Solemnity was nevertheless performed in the Morning Service on the Mor|row, immediately after the Offertory. But after Queen Elizabeth had removed the Feasts of St. George from Windesor, and left those of Installation only to be held there, that Solemnity was commonly dispatcht in one day, and the Atchievements of the defunct Knights offered, before they went out of the Choire, as in the 16. year of her Reign, at the Installation of the Ex Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. 29. Earls of Derby and Penbroke, Ex Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. 29. when assoon as the Morning Service was ended, in which the Ceremony of Installation was performed, the Commissioners, appointed for that Solemnity, came down from their Stalls, and offered the Atchievments of the Earl of Derby, Lord William Howard of Effingham, and Lord Chandos.
And this was the first time, we observe this Ceremony to have been translated from the Morrow after the Feast of St. George, to any other time, and the an|cient rule (as to the time) being thus broken, was never after restored, but Ib. pag. 33. vide etiam lib. C. p. 111.121.124.135.140.164. ge|nerally thence forward, the Offring of the defunct Knights Atchievments was per|formed the very same Morning, wherein the Elect-Knights were Installed. For Ib. pag. 33. vide etiam lib. C. p. 111.121.124.135.140.164. the Installation being fully compleated, towards the end of the second Ser|vice, viz. at the time of the Offertory, the Atchievments were offered, after which, succeeded the Offring of Money.
And yet once, when the Solemnity of Installation was celebrated at Even|ing Prayer, being that of Frederick the Second King of Denmark, and Iohn Casimire Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, the 13. of Ianuary an. 25. Eliz. Lib. C. p. 90. imme|diately after their Proctors had taken possession of their Stalls, and an Anthem been sung, the Atchievments of Lib. C. p. 90. Maximilian the Emperor, Emanuel Duke of Savoy, Francis Duke of Montmorency, Henry Earl of Arundel, and Walter Earl of Essex, were with wonted honor, as the Statutes of the Order required, severally Offered; but not without the sad and sorrowful view of all the stan|ders by.
Sometime before the day was thus changed, an intermixture of both the Of|ferings together, viz. of Money and Atchievments began to be introduced; when after the Offertory was read, the Soveraign's Lieutenant descended from his Stall, and proceeded to the Altar, and there Offered both Gold and Silver for the So|veraign, and so returned to his Seat; after which, the Offering of the defunct Knights Atchievements began, and that Ceremony being ended, the Soveraign's Lieutenant proceeded again to the Altar, and there offered Money for himself; and lastly, all the rest of the Knights-Companions present offered Money in order. Thus we find these Ceremonies managed MS. fol. penes praef. W. le N. Cl. fol. 13. an. 5. Eliz. at the Offering of the At|chievements of the Lord Grey, and an. MS. f. 18. b. 6. Eliz. when the Atchievements of the Earls of Westmerland and Rutland, and the Lord Paget, were offered; the Earl of Arundel being the Soveraign's Lieutenant at both these Feasts. But not long after, this course was altered in part, and the Ex Collect. praef. R. C. Cl. f. 25. sub. an. 14. Eliz. Lieutenant Offered not for the Soveraign, till after such time as the Atchievements of the defunct had been com|pleatly offered.
And albeit the day was thus changed, for performance of this Ceremony, yet was not the Ceremony it self begun till after the Installation was finished, that Solemnity having at all times the precedency; until an. MS. fol. pen. E. W. G. Et Lib. C. p. 173.178. 9. Iac. R. when he, ob|serving a kind of incongruity in the order of the Ceremony, namely to Install

a new Knight (and who, being thus installed, frequently became one of those Knights, that offered part of the defunct Knights Atchievments, as may be seen in divers and sundry Examples) before his Predecessor had been fully dis|charged of his Stall, gave order for Offering the Atchievments of Ibid. Sir Henry Lea, the Lord Scroop, Viscount Bindon, and the Earl of Dunbar, first, and be|fore the Instalment of the Elect Knights, Charles Duke of York, Tho. Earl of Arundel, and Robert Viscount Rochester, which was accordingly performed; as also at the Installation of Ibid. Frederick Count Palatine of the Rhyne, and Henry Prince of Orange, an. 10. Iac. R.
And two years after, at the Ibid. Installation of the Earl of Rutland, Sir George Villars (afterwards created Duke of uckingham) and Viscount Lisle, the Lord Admiral Ibid. going out of the Choire, to fetch in the said Earl of Rutland, to his Installation (according to the old manner, before the Offering of the Atchiev|ments, and as had been done the Lib. C. p. 184. year before) the Soveraign remanded him, and again MS. ordered, That the Atchievments of the Earl of Shrewsbury should be first Offered, before any of the Elect Knights should be Installed.
Not long after, it was thought convenient, to perform this Ceremony on the Eve of the Feast, presently after the first Vespers begun, and next to proceed on with the Installation of the Elect Knight, whereby as much as possible, the Stalls of the Knights-Companions might be supplyed, and consequently the places among them filled up, in all the rest of the Solemnities of the Feast: Thus was it ordered, at the Installation of Lib. 3. p. 6. Marquess Hamilton, an. 21. Iac. R. when the Atchievments of the Earl of Exceter were Offered. In like manner, the follow|ing year, were the Atchievments of the Ibid. pag. 18. Duke of Lenox first offered, and an. 4. Car. 1. those of the Ibid. pag. 40. Duke of Brunswick, and the Earls of Suffolk and Leice|ster, before the King of Sweden, Prince of Orange, and Earl of Suffolk were in|stalled; and at Ibid. pag. 61.84.127 vide etiam Palmers Iourn. pro an. 1639. pag. 19. all times afterwards during that pious Kings Reign, the Offer|ing of Atchievments was the first Ceremony performed on the Eve of the Feast, next after the decease of a Knight, though no Installation followed; as were those of the Earl of Carlisle, an. 13. Car. 1. and of the Earl of Kelly, in the 15. year of the same Soveraign.
But if at that time any of the Elect-Knights were introduced into the Choire, before the Offering of Atchievments began, they were appointed to Lib. R. p. 90. sub finem. stand there, under the Stalls designed for them, till that Ceremony was finished.
Thus the practice continued, of Offering the defunct Knights Atchievments, be|fore the Ceremony of Installation began; from the 9. year of King Iames until an. 15. of the present Soveraign, when it was performed, at the time anciently accustomed; for the Prince of Denmark (by his Proctor Sir George Carteret) and the Duke of Monmouth were both Installed, before the first Vespers began, and the Atchievments of Bernard de Foix Duke of Espernon, and Edward Count Palatine of the Rhyne, were not Offered till the Morrow after the Feast day, im|mediately before Divine Service began; so also was it observed at the Feast held an. 23. Car. 2.
As to the manner and order of this Ceremony, among other Institutions of King Henry the Fifth, it is thus appointed, H 5. Stat. Art. 14. vide porto Lib. N. pag. 66. That, as often as through the vacancy of any Stall, the Swords, Helms, with the rest of the Atchievements ought to be Offered, the Sword of the deceased Knight shall be first Offered, being carried up to the high Altar, by two of the Knights-Companions, whom the Soveraign or his Deputy shall assign to that purpose, and afterwards the Helm, with the Crest and Mantlings (for which we sometimes find one general word [Lib. N. pag. 101.  C pag. 111.140.  163. Insignia] used) by two other Knights-Companions, named also by the Soveraign or his Deputy; and this Offering is to be made for them, Lib. R. p. 84. in the order as they were Installed, not as they dyed.
But of the Offering of a defunct Knights Banner, we find no express mention, till the 18. year of King Henry the Seventh, at which time the Lib. N. p. 175. Banner of the Lord Brook was Offered, by Sir Edward Poynings, and Sir Richard Pool; his Sword by the Earl of Surrey and Lord Strange; and in the last place his Helm, with its Appendices, by the before named Sir Edward Poynings, and Sir Richard

Pool: But afterwards the direction for Offering this Ensign of the defunct Knights honor, was taken into King Henry the Eighth's Art. 12. body of Statutes.
And note, that since the Offering of the Banner was introduced, it was (in the order of Ceremony, and according to the before mentioned Precedent) to be offered Ibid. first, and so hath it been observed; only once we find this course inverted, viz. an. Lib. R. p. 18. 22. Iac. R. (but upon what account there is no mention) where, at the Offering of the Duke of Lenox his Atchievements, the Helm and Crest were offered in the first place, the Sword in the second, and the Lib. R. p. 18. Ban|ner in the third.
Immediately after the entrance of the before mentioned Constitution of King Henry the Fifth, in the Black Book, a Precedent for the order of this Cere|mony doth also follow, which extended it self to future times, and was thus, Lib. N. p. 67. On the Morrow after the Feast of St. George (an. 9. H. 5.) the Soveraign and Knights-Companions assembled according to custom, to celebrate the Mass pro de|functis, at which time the Sword of Thomas Duke of Clarence (who was slain at Trussels Hist. pag. 92. Bougy-bridge, in his return out of Anjou, on Ibid. p. 122. Easter Eve preceding) was born to the Altar and offered up, by John Duke of Bedford, and Humfrey Duke of Glou|cester (Brothers to the defunct Duke) but his Helm with its Appendices, were offered by the hands of the Soveraign, and the said Duke of Bedford.
Besides this honor, thus paid to the deceased Duke of Clarence, there past the like at that time, upon several other defunct Knights-Companions, namely on Lib. N. p. 67. Sir Iohn Grey, whose Sword was offered up by Sir Thomas Erpingham, and Sir Walter Hungerford, and his Helm and Crest by Richard Earl of Warwick, and the Lord Fitz Hugh; and next on the Lib. N. p. 67. Lord Burnell, whose Sword was offered by Sir Lewis Robessart, and Sir Simon Felbrig; and his Helm, c. by Sir Iohn Cornwall, and Sir Iohn Robessart. In the fourth place, the Sword of the Lib. N. p. 67. Lord Cameux, was offered up by Sir Lewis Robessart, and Lib. N. p. 67. S Here Tank Clux, and his Helm by Sir Iohn Cornwall, and Sir Iohn Robessart.
This solemn Ceremony being finished, in the order as is set down; the Sove|raign and Knights-Companions presently after decreed; Ibid. That the Rites to be ob|served at the Offring of Atchievements, should for the future be in the foresaid manner performed.
The appointment of the Statute is before noted to be, H. 5. Art. 14. Lib. N. pag. 66. that the Soveraign shall nominate and assign the Knights-Companions, who are severally to perform this Ceremony; and so is the direction set down in Art. 12. King Henry the Eighth's Statutes. But generally heretofore, so few of the Knights-Companions have used to attend the Feasts of Installation (at which time most commonly were the At|chievements of the defunct Knights offered) that there hath not been much choice, nay, for the most part not enough for the enterchange of all the Atchieve|ments, but that those who have offered the Banner, have been constrained to assist at the Offering, if not of the Sword, yet of the Helm and Crest.
Nay, yet less, for the Feast of St. George an. 1. E. 4. was solemnized at Winde|sor, by two Knights-Companions only, viz. Viscount Bourchier, the Soveraign's Deputy, and the Lord Berners, at which time there being the Atchievements of six deceased Knights to be offered; namely the Dukes of York and Buckingham, the Earls of Salisbury and Shrewsbury, of Viscount Beaumont and the Lord Scales, these Lib. N. pag. 126. two Knights-Companions performed the whole Ceremony, according to the ancient Custom.
Moreover, an. 32. H. 6. there were but Ibid. p. 111. three Knights-Companions that then held the Feast, namely the Duke of Buckingham Deputy to the Soveraign, the Lord Sudely, and Viscount Bourchier; the Ibid. p. 112. two latter of which offered both the Sword and Helm of the Earl of Salisbury, the Duke of Buckingham not enter|changing.
But notwithstanding these Examples, at another time, viz. an. 8. H. 7. Ibid. p. 171. be|cause the number of the Knights-Companions, present at the Feast, were fewer than the H. 8. Stat. Art. 14  Lib. N. pag. 171. Statute required; therefore the Offering of Atchievements was then pro|rogued; Iohn Lord Denham, then Lord Treasurer of England, being President, and only the Lord Scroop joined with him.
Again, when the number of Knights-Companions present, have been sufficient to perform all the Ceremony severally, yet do we not observe the same anci|ently executed by Knights-Companions, according to the series of their Stalls, which is an argument, that the Rule of the Statute took place, and that the So|veraign's choice and nomination, rather than the Knights seniority in the Order, was observed. But since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the Knights have generally proceeded to this Offering, according to their Lib. R. p. 18. vide Coll. W. le N Cl.  A. V. W. seniority, and where the course ended, then the Seniors began again: Besides, there is variety of Examples, where the Soveraign's Deputy or Lieutenant have joined in the Ceremony (though the instances where they have not, are more numerous) so that thence it appears to be no diminution to their Honor, to assist the other Knights, if it be also considered, that they are Companions and Fellows, in all the concerns of the Order; nor was it anciently thought otherwise, as is mani|fest from the Example which King Lib. N. p. 67. Henry the Fifth gave, at the performance of this Ceremony, to the memory of the Duke of Clarence, by himself and the Duke of Bedford, who then bore his Helm and Crest up to the high Altar, and there offered it.
There is a memorial entred in the Ibid. pag. 84. Red Book of the Order, an. 9. Car. 1. which chargeth it as an error, that the Earl of Holland was more than once joined with the Earl of Berkshire (who then wanted his opposite Companion) in Offer|ing the then defunct Knights Atchievements; and withal, implies, that it had been more rightly done, if the Earl of Berkshire had gone alone (in the last place) to offer the remaining Ensign. But, with submission, this direction was not only contrary to the H. 5. Stat. Art. 14.  Lib. N. pag. 66. Article of the Statute, which positively enjoins, That every part of the Atchievements should be offered by two Knights-Companions (not by any one singly or alone) but also to constant practice: For there is not one Example throughout all the Registers of the Order (excepting this now men|tioned) or any other authority we have ever met with, where a Knight pro|ceeded singly to the Offering of Atchievements. On the contrary, when a Knight-Companion happened to want his opposite Fellow, commonly the next junior Knight present (how much lower soever his Stall was placed) was joined with him, in assisting at this solemn Ceremony, and of this there are many Examples; though we acknowledge it to be otherwise, both in the direction and practice at the Offering of Gold and Silver.
By what hath been delivered, we see the principal persons concerned in this solemn action, are the Soveraign and Knights-Companions of the Order: Nor may a Proxie or Deputy be admitted, to perform any part of the Ceremony (though in the Offering of MS. in Offic. A. m. [H. 2 f. 8. b.] Money he ought) as is clear from the Examples Collect. A. V. W. of Iohn Tho|mas l' Angust, Proctor for Emanuel Duke of Savoy, an. 1.  2. Ph.  Mar. and of the Deputies to Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 31. Frederick the Second King of Denmark, and Iohn Count Palatine of the Rhyne, an. 25. Eliz. who descended not from the Stalls of their Principals, with the rest of the Knights-Companions into the Choire, at the time of Offering the Atchievements; but Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 31. remained therein during that Ceremony. Sr Ibid. fol. 33. Thomas Scroop, Deputy also for the Installation of his Father the Lord Scroop, an. 26. Eliz. intermedled not in this Offering, though he came down and Ibid. fol. 33. stood below in the Choire, before the Stall of his Principal, till the Ceremony was finished, and then returned up again into it, in his due order.
We shall now proceed to the duties of the Prelate of the Order, the Prebends of the Colledge, and the Officers of Arms; as their services severally or jointly relate to this Ceremony.
First then the Lib. R. p. 40.  84. vide eti|am MS. penes E. W. G.  Collect. A. V. W. Prelate, and two of the Prebends, ought to proceed up to the Altar, immediately before Garter summons down the Knights-Companions to the Offering, and there stand ready to receive the Atchievements, as they are seve|rally offered up.
It is next the duty of the Provincial Kings and Heralds, to conduct the Knights-Companions, when they proceed up to the Altar, bearing any part of the defunct Knights Atchievements, the whole of the Ceremony is briefly thus: (MS. fol. 18. b. the Sexton having beforehand taken down the Atchievements, and made them

clean, and (before service begin) placed them in readiness on a Form or Stool, set directly under each defunct Knights Stall)
Collect. W. le N. Cl. First, Garter riseth from his seat, and proceeds into the middle of the Choire, where after his usual obeysances, he summons the Knights-Companions to de|scend; who forthwith in their accustomed order, and with the usual Reveren|ces, come down, and place themselves before their Stalls; whereupon Claren|ceux and Norroy (or in the absence of either, the senior Herald, or of both, the two eldest Heralds) pass down from the Steps of the Altar, into the body of the Choire; in the interim, Garter takes the Banner of the eldest defunct Knight into his hands, (for its a general rule, that all the Knights Atchievements be offered, according to the seniority of their Instalment) and presents it Collect: R. C. Cl. fol. 29.  Collect. A. V. W. half rolled up to the two senior Knights-Companions; the two Provincial Kings, being by this time come neer to the wo senior Knights, there make their double obeysances, and afterwards another to the Knights-Companions, and then step a little aside: in the mean time, the Knights having took the Banner between them, make their double Reverence, and (preceded by the Kings) pass up to the Altar, bearing it with the lower end of the Staff foremost, and at the first Haut Pas make ano|ther double Reverence. The Provincial Kings being arrived at the uppermost Haut Pas before the Altar, after an humble obeysance, divide themselves to make way for the Knights-Companions to offer, and bowing to the said Knights as they pass by, the Knights forthwith raise the point of the Banner upwards, and (after a single Reverence towards the Altar) present it upon their knees, to the Prelate of the Order, who forthwith receives it from them, and delivers it to the two Canons (standing on each side him) and they deposite it upon Cushens laid before the Altar.
This done, the two Provincial Kings, conduct the foresaid Knights-Compa|nions back into the Choire, who with usual Reverences retire to their Stations, under (MS. fol. pen. E. W. G. not to) their Stalls, and the Provincial Kings to their places, on either side the Altar.
Next, the two senior Heralds pass down into the Choire, as did the Provin|cial Kings, while Garter, taking up the Sword, presents it also to the two next senior Knights, who proceed up to the Altar with the said two Heralds before them, in the same order as did the former Knights-Companions, and bearing the Sword between them, offer the same with the Pomel or Hilt upward, and then return to their Stations below in the Choire, conducted as before.
In the third place, the two next senior Heralds go down as before, Garter in the mean time presenting the Helm and Crest, to the two next senior Knights, who likewise proceed to the Altar, and there offer it in the same manner, and with like Ceremony, as had been the Banner and Sword. And if there be more At|chievements of defunct Knights to be offered than one, the Knights-Companions present, by course, two and two, perform the rest, in manner before described; but the Pursuivants at Arms do no part of this duty, only the Provincial Kings and Heralds, each in their turns and by couples. When there are the Atchieve|ments of several Knights to be offered, and that the junior Heralds have done their duty, the Provincial Kings begin again, and so continue the course, till all the Atchievements be offered; the Organs playing while the Offering lasteth.
In the before mentioned order, were the Atchievements of the Duke of Esper|non, and Prince Edward offered, at the Grand Feast of St. George, celebrated at Windesor an. 15. Car. 2. and the Provincial Kings and Heralds, as their turns came to officiate, took each of the Atchievements and presented them to the Knights-Companions.
The Duke of Espernon's Banner, was offered by the Duke of York and Prince Rupert, being conducted to the Altar by Clarenceux and Norroy.
His Sword, by the Dukes of Buckingham and Albemarle, attended by York and Lancaster.
And his Healm and Crest, by the Earl of Oxford and Duke of Richmond, brought up by Windesor and Richmond.
Prince Edwrd's Banner, Sword, and Helm were likewise severally offered,

by the very same Knights who offered the Duke of Espernons Atchievements, each pair being conducted to the Altar, by the foresaid Officers of Arms.
Heretofore we find, that Garter hath not only begun this Solemnity, and pre|sented the Banner to the first pair of Knights-Companions, but also conducted them up to the Offering; for so was the Banner of the MS. fol. pe|nes W. le N. Cl. fol. 13. Lord Grey, delivered by Garter to the Lord Loughborow, and Viscount Mountague an. 5. Eliz. and by him were they brought up to the Altar.
He also performed the like service to the Earl of Penbroke and Lord Clinton, when they offered the Banner of the MS. fol. 18. b. Earl of Westmerland, the following year; and to the Lord Admirl and Earl of Ormond, an. 34. Eliz. at the Offering of the Banner of MS. fol. pe|nes G. O. Y. p. 206. Iohn Count Palatine of the Rhyne. And at the Solemnity celebrated for the Earl of Derby, to the Lord Howard of Effingham, and Lord Chandos an. 16. Eliz. Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 29. Garter himself, and no other Officer of Arms, conducted the Knights-Companions to the Altar; the like did he an. 30. Eliz. at the Offering of the Hatchments of the Collect. W. le N. Cl. Duke of Holstien, Earl of Bedford, Sir Henry Sidney, and the Earl of Rutland.
It was also the usage heretofore, for the Prelate to deliver the offered At|chievements, to some of the Heralds, before appointed to receive them, which they immediately deposited upon (and sometimes near) the Altar.
In this manner MS. fol. pe|nes W le N Cl. fol. 13. Clarenceux and Norroy, an. 5 Eliz. (who stood on either side the Prebend) received the Lord Greys Atchievements, and placed them near the Altar.
Clarenceux, and Somerset, received likewise the Atchievements of the MS. fol. 18. b. Earls of Westmerland, Rutland, and the Lord Pagit, from the hands of the Prelate, and laid them on a Form, set beside the Altar for that purpose.
And an. 34 Eliz. Norroy, and Windesor, assisted to receive all the Atchieve|ments, of MS fol. pe|ne G. O. Y. 26. Iohn Count Palatine of the Rhine, the Earls of Shrewsbury, and Warwick, and Sir Christopher Hatton; which they deposited upon the Altar. But the present Soveraign, (Lib. Caol. p. 47. an. 15 Car. 2.) gave command, that the Atchievements should then and after be laid below before the Altar; judging it indecent to place them, where the sacred Mysteries of the Body and Blood of our Saviour are with great reverence Consecrated. He also commanded at the Feast held an. 23 Car. 2. that when the Ceremonies of Offring were ended, the Atchieve|ments should be disposed, part on the South, and other part on the North-side of the Altar, till Service was finished.
Besides these things already noted, there is nothing further observable, but what relates to the Atchievements themselves, as they are become by this Cere|mony of Offering them in so solemn a manner, parcel of the goods of the Chappel, and included within the words of the Art. 33. vi|de etiam Li N. pag. 126. Statutes of the Colledge, whereby the Soveraign granted to the Dean and Canons, all Oblations; concern|ing which, we have already spoken, when we Chap. 21. Sect. 5. treated of the Offering of Gold and Silver.
Hereupon, because they could not be alienated or sold, they were commonly deposited, by the Dean and Canons, in the Chapter-house: and there Ex Rt. Per|gam. an. 8 R. 2. upon the taking of an Inventory, of all the Vestments, Ornaments, c. of the Chappel; we find among them three Swords, one of the Founder's King Edward the Third, another of the Earl of Suffolke's, and the third of Sir Thomas Bani|ster's, as also six Helms. We also find more afterwards added, viz. the Swords of King Richard the Second, of King Henry the Fourth, when he was Earl of Derby, of Iohn a Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, and the Earl of Salisbury.
But the Helms and Swords, Autogr. in Aer. Coll. Windesor. because they were at first forged, (for this very purpose) of an extraordinary greatness and size, therefore have they been commonly redeemed, that they might serve again afterwards.
And because it belongs to Garter, to provide the Atchievements for the new installed Knights; he usually hath compounded with the Dean and Canons, for the defunct Knights-Atchievements: To which purpose, (among other compo|sitions) there was an Agreement drawn up in writing, dated the 20th of May, 1606. Ex alio An|togr. in codem Aeraer. between William Segar Garter, and Giles Thompson then Dean of Wind|sor,

William Wilson, Erasmus Webb and Henry Beaumont, three of the then Ca|nons, to this effect, Ibid. That Garter should pay to them or their Successors, when it should happen, for the Helmets, Crests, Swords, Mantles, and Banners, of the deceased Knights, the sums following; viz. for those of all Batchellor-Knights, Barons, Earls, and Dukes, the sum of twenty Shillings; but of Kings, and abso|lute Princes, being imbroidered, the sum of three pounds.
We shall conclude this Section, with another kind of Offering, ordained also to be made in honor of the deceased Knights-Companions, and Registered in King Henry the Eighth's Body of Statutes; which as it begun not many years before our Reformation in Religion, so was it of no long continuance, but then took end|ing, the words of the Statute are these. Hen. Stat. Art. 12. That if any Knight-Companion shall decease, the year before (the Celebration of St. George's Feast) then every Knight being in the Castle of Windesor, at the Mass of Requiem, shall offer a Taper, armed with a little Escutcheon of the Arms of the Knight deceased; and if there be more than one deceased, that there be made for every of them, an Escutcheon of Arms, and a Groat, set night to the light of the Taper; which Escutcheon and Taper, shall be made at the cost and charges of the Knights of the said Order.


SECT. IV. Of depositing the deceased Knights Mantles, in the Chapter-house.
THere past a Decree, an. 9 Eliz. Ex autogr. Sacramento D. Ch. Wren nuper Ord. Regist. at|testatur, 12. Mar. 1651. That the Knights-Companions should be bound by their Oath, to take care by their last Will, that after their decease, all their Ornaments, which they had received, should be restored, the Robes to the Colledge, the Jewells to the King that gave them. Hereupon Collect. praef. D. br. Wren. Sir Christopher Hatton sometime before his Death, commanded that his Mantle should be deli|vered to the Dean and Canons, and accordingly it was sent to Windesor after his decease. But the Collect. praef. D. br. Wren. Mantle of Sir Henry Lea, being left to the disposal of others, and not sent to the Colledge, hapned at length, to come into the hands of Bro|kers, and openly exposed to sale in Long-lane, to the great dishonor of the Order.
This Decree was in after-times but slackly observed; and therefore, (in a Chapter held at Windesor the 24. of September, an. 4. Car. 1.) the Knights were admonished, Lib. R. p. 43. That where the Soveraign should vouchsafe to bestow upon a Knight the Mantle of the Order, the said Knight should take care at his death to have it sent to the Chappel [at Windesor] according as the Statutes do provide.
But this taking little effect, the same Soveraign thought fit to restore to life and vigour the Law in this particular, by a Decree made in Chapter held also at Windesor the 18. of April in the 13. year of his Reign, which obliged all the Knights-Companions receiving the Ensigns of the Order from the Soveraign, Ibid. p. 120. to take care (according to the obligation of their Oath) that these (together with the Book of Statutes) should be restored into the hands of the Soveraign, after their Death. And a command was therewithal given, That certain Books, Mantles, and Surcoats then lying at Whitehall, should be delivered to the Register of the Order, to be laid up at Windesor, in honorable memory of them to whom they belonged.
In observation of these Decrees, where the Habit or Ensigns of the Order, were either wholly or in part bestowed by the Soveraign, order was taken (in either case) to send for them in, after such Knights decease. Accordingly at a Chapter held the 10. day of October, an. 15 Car. 1. the Palmer's Iourn. pro an. 1639. p. 36. Garter and George of the Lord Treasurer Weston, being sent back, was then presented to the Sove|raign

(by Lib. R. pag. 57.  58. whom it had been accustomed) and affirmed to be all that the So|veraign had given the said Earl, whereupon the same was accepted, and deli|vered to the Dean and Chapter of Windesor to be preserved. And at the same Chapter it was Ib. p. 62. ordered that the Earl of Kelley's Robes and Ornaments of the Order, should be sent for by the Chancellor: as having been given him by the Soveraign; to wit, the Garter and George immediately after his Election, and the Mantle and Surcoat, against the Installation of the present Soveraign.
These former Decrees were yet thought needfull to be confirmed by the pre|sent Soveraign, and therefore in a Chapter held in the Yellow-Chamber at Whitehall, the 4. of Febr. 1669. it was decreed, Lib. Carol. p. 79. That the Mantle of each Knight-Com|panion (so also the Book of Statutes) should be sent to Windesor immediately after their Death; and that the Chancellor of the Order, should be obliged by Let|ters to their Heirs and Executors, to put them in mind of sending them thither.
Nevertheless it is to be understood, that where the Mantle hath been provi|ded at the Knights own charge, there lyes no obligation for sending it to Winde|sor after his decease. And it appears upon the Death of Philip Earl of Pen|broke and Montgomery, that the Trustees for sail of the late Kings Goods, ha|ving sent and made demand of his Mantle, and Surcoat, his Executors making it appear, that they were bought with his own money, of Sir Peter Richat, by the then Soveraign's command, signified (not only to him but the rest of the Knights-Companions) an. 14 Car. 1. they desisted, from further prosecution.
There is a memorable Instance in the return of the Habit and Ensigns of Gu|stavus Adolphus King of Sweden, being sent back in a solemn Embassy from Lib. R. pag. 105. Christina Queen of Sweden, his Daughter and Successor to that Crown.
The Reception of which, having been ordered with considerable State and Ceremony, will most fitly be here remembred.
Saturday the 18. of April, an. 11 Car. 1. was the day appointed, for the resigning them up into the Soveraigns hands; on the Afternoon of which day, Iohn Baron Skiite, Ambassador from the said Queen, came to Whitehall, and was conducted to the Council Chamber, to retire himself, till he was sent for into the Chapter.
The Ex Autogr. penes E. W. G. Chapter was upon this occasion held in the Presence-Chamber, where as soon as they were set, the Soveraign assigned the Earls of Penbroke, and Arnu|del, (attended by Garter and Black Rod) to go for the said Ambassador, who was conducted to the Chapter, in the order following.

First, the Ambassadors Followers, two and two.
The Officers of Arms in their Coats, two and two.
Garter, carrying on a Velvet Cushion, the deceased Kings Mantle, Sur|coat, Hood, Garter, Collar, and great George, and the wearing George.

Earl of Arundel.
The Ambassador.
Earl of Penbroke.


The Ambassadors Followers, and the Officers of Arms, having proceeded in this order as far as the Presence-Chamber door, there divided themselves on each side, and made a stand, Garter going before, and the Ambassador between the said two Knights-Companions entred the Chapter, making the usual Congies in coming up to the Soveraign. Then Garter kneeling down, held the Orna|ments and Iewells of the Order on the Cushion, whilst the Ambassador made the following Oration in Latin.

Serenissime, Potentissime Rex, Domine clementissime.
NEmini potest esse obscurum, quod ab omni aevo, omnibus omnin Populis  Na|tionibus in more  usu positum fuerit, homines ob praeclara facta, variis pre|miis at honoribus afficere; tum ut fortitudinem acuerent,  virtutem cnserva|rent, tum ut robur  disciplinam tuerentur; Qu quidem re procuratum videmus, ut Equestris etiam dignitas inde,  ex hc occasione originem ceperit,  postmo|dum per omnes fer aetates validissimo roboris incremento aucta,  amplificata fue|rit,

rit, ac lict in tant ejusdem copi  varietate difficile videatur judicare, quae species alteri praevalere debeat,  quasi palmam praeripere. Siquis tamen paul al|tis hoc ipsum ponderaverit, deprehendet veterum illorum honores dignitates, ac privilegia cum Garterio Ordine non esse comparanda. Permitte mihi Serenissime Rex, ut in August  Nobili hc coron Ordinis Periscelidis decora accuratis contempler,  quid mihi insuper in mandatis sit datum humilim referam.
Edwardi tertii incredibilem virtutem at fortitudinem omnis posteritas in hunc us diem est admirata semper, qui cum  vetustissimis Angliae Regibus Originem traexerit, nulli veterum tum rerum gestarum gloria, tum invictissimi animi magni|tudine tum summae faelicitatis admiratione videtur esse postponendus; ab hoc inquam Hero laudatissimo  fortissimo cum Ordo hic Garterius excogitatus sit,  in|ventus, quid tanto Instituto potest esse Nobilius? quid praeclarius? Summa quo dgnitas huic Ordini ex eo aboritur, quod non mod praecipuae Nobilitatis viri, Po|tentissimi Duces, ac Principes, verm etiam Imperatores, Reges eorum liberi pulcherimo hc honore semper fuerint cumulati Magnificentiam dicti Ordinis com|mendavit tum quod candidatus egregiis  admirandis Ornamentis investiatur, in|stalletur,  amiciatur, tum quod ipso die Georgii honorificentissimo, Superiorum  inferiorum concursu mirific condecoretur, illustretur. Quemadmodum ver sa|cra vestra Regia Majestas, evidentibus rationibus commota, clementissimae meae Reginae parentem, Invictissimum Heroem hoc ipso Periscelidis splendore cumulan|dum judicrit ita exhibitio illa vel hc nomine long fuit clarissima, quod spectante universo pen exercitu, inter vehementissimam bellicorum tormentorum displosionem per vestros deputatos,  quidem in ipsius Dorussiae visceribus facta sit, ad omnem ita posteritatis memoriam commendatissimum erit quod licet exiguum tum tempo|ris extiterit intervallum, inter nostrum  hostilem exercitum adeo ut convenientis tanto Heroi fuisse nonnullis visum fuerit de corporis defensione, quam de honoris alicujus accessione cogitare, rejectis tamen omnibus periculis passus sit, sibi,  tribui honorem condignum  in Ordinis hujus Clarissimi Societatem se cooptari. Nec facile dixerim utrum huic accessioni plus dignitatis illatum, ex eundem Ordinem offerente, an ver recipiente. Ita enim utrarum vestrm Majestatum dignitas hic elucet, ita aequabili lanci innititur, ut discrimen non facil attendatur ac licet im|mensus mihi jam porrigatur Campus, in laudes utrius Serenissimae vestrae Regiae Majestatis expatiandi, cm tamen ita comparatum sit, ut qu quis laude dignior est, e minus patiatur laudes suas celebrari, non velificabor impraesentiarm tantis Majestatum vestrarum virtutibus, sed ea tantm referam, quae sine summ ingrati animi not non possunt praeteriri. Successit Sacra vestra Regia Majestas parenti suo gloriosissimae recordationis, in tot regnorum administrationem,  quidem ita successit, ut non solm paternis vestigiis laudabilitr inhaereat, verm etiam pater|narum virtutum dignissimum se ostendat haeredem; pacem, rem beatissimam, omni studio complectatur, subditis suis  quietem  omnium rerum affluentiam benig|nissim procuret,  quid sit quod Serenissimam vestram Regiam Majestatem infi|nitis hominibus amabilem magis reddere possit, quam omnium bonorum de edem singulare judicium? Etenim cum omnibus pateat, eandem naturali  prope divin qudam propensione in eas virtutes  ornamenta quibus vita haec humana fulcitur ferri:  ab omnibus iis vitiis quibus contaminetur, seri abhorrere; cum vita vestra omnis sit candoris, integritatis, castitatis  honestatis plenissima, nn potest mihi vitio verti, si oblat hc occasione illud ipsum jam commemorare aperte di|cam nullum praeter Serenissimam vestram Regiam Majestatem tum extitisse ex|cellentiorem Regem,  digniorem qui ista amplissimorum   proavis fortissimis acceptorum honorum ornamenta tanto Regi tribuere  conferre potuerit. Regis de|inde hujus incomparabilis qualitates siaccuratis contemplati fuerimus, nemo infi|ciabitur quin omni honorum genere fuerit dignissimus. Habuit is Patrem  Avum qui indefesso studio ea semper consilia tractrunt quae non solum ad pacis tranquilli|tatem, togae foelicitatem in antiquissimis Suecorum  Gothorum Regnis conser|vandam, verum etiam ad armorum ben gerendorum gloriam, bellicarum ratio|num  militaris disciplinae administrationem fovendam pertinent. His cum Pro|genitoribus ortus esset, industria  labore incredibili, at ade brevi temporis spatio e pervenit, ut nn solum illis pax verum etiam long clarior  celebrior

fuerit. Cum horrendae cujusdam virtutis amore, inter omnes mortales teneretur, talem se in vita su exhibuit, ut omnes virtutes numeros quoad ejus ab homine fieri potuit, explere conatus sit,  tanta quidem constantia iis sudoribus  vigiliis ut eum  tm laudabili proposito, nec rei magnitudo deterrere, nec ulla voluptas avo|care potuerit ab incunabulis, praeclarissimarum artium  linguarum studio, it ve|hementr invigilavit, ut postquam ad adultiorem aetatem pervenisset, ad miraculum us se iis oblectrit, nec honorum  optimorum authorum lectione, in ipsis Castris at ade in bostium suorum quasi conspectu abstinuerit. Tantus praetere in hc Here fuit amor,  sollicitudo conservandae Religionis  libertatis in German|ni; ut cum ejusdem Principes in tolerando quodam servitutis jugo praemerentur, eos non solum adversus hostium ferociam tutatus est, verum etiam in avitos duca|tus, unde expulsi fuerant, magn su glori, magn ipsorum laetiti, magno cum hostium dedecore, per vim fortissim reduxerit, pristinam dignitatem reddide|rit, quam si iidem jam voluerint deserere sibi suae socordiae inposterum imputa|bunt, ac licet praeter ipsam Dei benignitatem aliae etiam possint exhiberi rationes quibus Heros hic innixus tam arduum opus aggredi voluit, nulla tamen accommo|datior  certior costitueretur quam scientia rei Militaris  fortitudo quaedam invicta. Etenim cum post mortem laudatissimi Parentis triplici bello put Danico, Polonico Muscovitico distineretur, ita se bellicis artibus totum consecravit, ita mancipavit ut cum summis Imperatoribus non immerito suerit comparandus. Ad hanc rem promptius expediendum ita eum Deus  natura finierant, ut visis hosti|bus vel in summo vitae periculo constitutus, nunquam trepidarit, nunquam expal|luerit, nunquam aufugerit, quin potius exigua Militum manu saepe hostibus se obje|cerit, eos sustinuerit, iisdem maximas Clades intulerit,  Strages horrendas con|fecerit, at adeo nobilissimas provincias, incredibili robore extortus, Regno Sueco|rum (per se longe amplissimo) gloriosissime adjecerit. Eximi hc Militaris Dis|ciplinae administrtione, ita orbi terrarum innotuit, ut  Reges Principes com|plures, infiniti praetere homines ad eum amandum  colendum sint inflammati. Non inficiaberis, Serenissime Rex, quin cum ob alias rationes, tum potissimum ob rei bellicae gloriam Ordinis Garterii decora illi tribueris. Serenissimo Daniae Regi placuit filium suum Uldaricum Gustavo huic Magno de meliori not commendare, quo sub illius ductu in Dorussi tyrocinia militaria addisceret. Serenissimo item Regi Bohemiae commodum vald fuit in castra hujus Herois pervenisse, ut eo citis provincias sibi ereptas recuperaret. Uladislaus Rex Poloniae, licet hostis, eam de agnato suo fortitudinis Militaris conceperat opinionem, ut nisi humanis rebus erep|tus fuisset Magnus hic Gustavus, oper illius uti voluerit, in sopiendis dissidiis in|ter se,  Magnum Muschoviae Ducem. Idem ver Muschoviae Dux, cum patre Patriarch, quem Muschovitae Sanctissimum appellant, tanti aestimavit Regis nostri bellicas rationes, ut eos haud puduerit, eodem uti Ductore. Quorum quidem Prin|cipum benevolentia in Regem Gustavum tam vehementr apparuit, ut cum iidem accepto nuncio de Lipsensi pugn immensos triumphos in ejus honorem per Impe|rium Muschoviticum instituissent, ab omni aevo tale quid in ejusdem visceribus con|tigisse, vix, ac ne vix quidem, sit animadversum. Et quae res alia Christianissi|mum Galliae Regem Ludovicum XIII. commovit, ut huic Heroi arctissimo foederis,  amicitiae vinculo copulaeretur, quo Austriacae Domus, omnibus Regibus ac Prin|cipibus potentiam reformidandam comprimeret,  afflictae Germaniae succurreret, nisi quod eum fortissimum,  ad tantam Provinciam obeundam accommodatissimum esse, suo etiam suffragio comprobaret, toti terrarum Orbi declararet? Foedera quae Rex noster inierat cum praepotentibus Ordinibus Belgii, cum Principibus  Rebus publicis Germaniae, quid aliud testantur? quam summam in eo extitisse animi mag|nitudinem,  robur convictum ut interim silentio involvam Bethlemi Gaboris, Transylvahiae Helvetiorum,  quorundam Italiae Principum in eundem propensio|nem singularem; Magnus ille Praecopiensium Tartarorum Chamus, triginta homi|num millia in usum Regis nostri, se ex finibus suis educturum obtulerat, si iis uti vo|luisset. Fando deni exprimi non potest quomodo incomparabilis hujus Regis fa|ma, per Othomancum Imperium fuerit pervagata. Acquisivit Suecis ac Gothis, hc ips, ut eos   contemptu aliorum Populorum vindicaverit  effecerit simul, ut pro fortissimis militibus ab ipsis hostibus agniti,  celebrati fuerint. Tot ita

 tanta cum fuerint Magni Gustavi Regis ornamenta, cum nomen ejusdem per in|finita terrarum spatia inclaruerit, cum deni facta illius tot hostibus debellatis ac prostratis, Suethici nominis gloriam ubi circumtulerint, nonne dignissimus judi|cabitur, cui hic honos, hic splendor conferri debuerit? Verum enimvero cum Deo visum sit, invictissimum hunc Regem,  cujus parem septentrio nunquam vidit, bellatorem, Triumphatorem, perpetuum rebus humanis eripere, eum Ordinis Gar|terii Statuta jubeant, ut post excessum unius cujus signa  ornamenta remittan|tur, in mandatis idcirco mihi dedit Serenissima mea Regina, ut non solum Le|gibus praescriptis satisfacerem, verum etiam moram excusarem. Agnovit abund Serenissima sua Regia Majestas eum gente Suecorum univers Serenissimae vestrae Regiae Majestatis, in deferendis hisce honoribus, affectionem inusitatam,  bene|volentiam singularem nunquam intermittet,  procurare, quae ad vestrum  Bri|tannicae gentis splendorm amplificandum conducent. Inter alia sacra sua Regia Majestas exoptat  Deo immortali, ut quemadmodum hic Ordo, ab exiguis initiis, in maximum dignitatis culmen ascendit, ita etiam per longissima annorum spacia, foelicissimo  duraturo incremento ad omnem posteritatem, roboretur, conservetur, propagetur.

When the Ambassador had done speaking, Garter delivered each particular Ornament to him, which he forthwith presented to the Soveraign, who put them into the Chancellors hands, and he having received them, in answer to the Am|bassadors Oration, made this other in French.

Le Roy mon Maistre (Soverain de l' Ordre de la Jartiere) m'a command de vous dire, qu'il recoit de vostre main, avec fort grand regret, ces Enseignes de l' Ordre. Elles renouuellent  sa Majest,  luy font resouuenir la grand perte qu'il a faicte, en la personne du Roy de Suede, son bon frere. Il esto Prince dont l'ami|ti estoit fort chere  sa Majest comme celuy qui pour la rendre plus estroicte, avoit monstr un desir affection d'estre receu au nombre des confreres de cet Ordre. Du|rant la vie de ce grand Roy, vostre Majest, sa Majest a fait une grand,  digne estime de sa personne,  l'esgal de son merite,  de ces vertues, qui furent vraye|ment Royales,  depuis sa mort, sa Majest a fait le mesme de sa memoire. Et a fin que la posterit peult aussi prendre cognoissance de l'amiti  affection qui a est entre sa Maejest,  ce grand Prince, le Roy a donn un commandement expres, qu'aux Archives de l' Ordre sa memoire fust conserve au rang des plus grands,  des plus valereux Princes, qui l'ont devancez,  qui ont rendu par tant de Sie|cles cet Ordre si Auguste.
C'est (Monsieur) le Sommaire de ce que j'avois a vous dire de la parte du Roy mon Maistre le Soverain de l' Ordre pour ce qui est des aultres confreres,  prin|cipalement de Messeigneurs les Chevaliers icy presents, sa Majeste m'a donn per|mission de vous dire de leur part, qu'ils regrettent avec le Roy leur Maistre, la perte d'un si grand Prince comme a est le vostre,  tascheront pour le dernier debvoir qu'ilz doibvent  sa vertu, de rendre  sa memoire autant de respect,  d'honneur qu'ils eussent volontiers rendu  sa personne. Et pour mon particulier, la coustume qui est observe en telles occasions, me commandoit de dire quelque chose  la louange de ce grand Roy, qui estant confrere de l' Ordre est mort victorieux entre les armes. Mais quand je considere que vous l'avez desja si bien faicte, par vostre belle oraison (qui a est par tout remplie d'autant de verit que d'eloquence) qu'il me seroit im|possible d'en parler apres sans faire tort  moy mesme,  sans grand prejudice  une si haulte vertu j'ay pens doncques qu'il seroit convenable tant pour le Subject, que pour mon devoir, de laisser entierement  la renomme, ce qui m'est tellement im|possible d'exprimer en paroles.

This Speech being ended the Chapter broke up, and the Soveraign departed in the order he came thither, having first Lib. R. p. 106. Knighted Sir Iames Skijtte the Am|bassadors Son, Sir Iohn Krue, Sir Gustavus Banir, and Sir Gabriel Oxensterne, who were of his followers. But the Ambassador and the two Earls Conductors returned in the same order as they came to the Council-Chamber, and there took

leave. And in May following, the said Sir Iohn Skytte junior (whom I find stiled Baron of Buderof, and Colonel of a Regiment of Scots in Sweden) was sworn a Lord Cham|berl. Book of Warrants ab an. 1634. ad annum 1641. pag. 58. Gentleman of the Soveraign's Privy-Chamber extraordinary.
After the Chapter was ended, the Soveraign Lib. R. pag. 106. commanded the Iewels to be delivered to the Master of his Iewel-house, and the Robes to be sent to the Dean of Windesor, to be deposited there.
Notwithstanding which Command, yet was not the Collect. Chr. Wren nuper Ord. Regist. Mantle brought thi|ther, till the Instalment of the present Soveraign, at which time, by order in Chapter, and the Soveraign's liberal donation, not only the Mantle, but the Gar|ter, Collar, and Great George of the foresaid King, (the value whereof we have Chap. 7. Sect. 1.  7. before noted) were Palm. large Iourn. pag. 21.  22. ordered to be committed to the custody of the Dean and Chapter of Windesor, and accordingly then brought down from the Court (in the Castle) by Ex Collect. praed. Mr. Iosee, Mr. Maxwell, and some others belonging to the Soveraign's Bed-Chamber, and delivered to them to be laid up in their Treasury, for a per|petual memory of that renowned King, who died in the field, wearing some of those Iewels; to the great renown of the Order, and as a true martial Prince and Companion thereof.
The Diamonds, set in the Garter and George, at the humble request of Doctor Christopher Wren, the then Register, were Ex od. Iourn. loco cit. Ordered to be viewed and numbred, by Sir Iames Palmer Deputy Chancellor; which being done, an Ex Collect. praesat. D. Chr. Wren. Inventory was made, the 24. of May following, and a Duplicate thereof being drawn, the one part was signed by the Dean and Prebends, which remained with the Deputy Chancellor; the other by the Deputy Chancellor, and left in the Treasury with the Jewels; the number upon the great Garter and George, amounting to 498 Dia|monds.
And in the Ex Collect. praesat. D. Chr. Wren. Floor of the said Treasury did these Iewels remain (hid there by the said Register) till about the beginning of March, an. 1645. that Colonel Ex Collect. praesat. D. Chr. Wren. Ven, the then Governor of that Castle, took them thence; and it should seem, they were afterwards delivered unto Colonel Whitchcott, who succeeded him in that Go|vernment; for I find, that Mr. Iohn Hunt Treasurer to the Trustees (appointed by the Long Parliament, for Sale of the late Kings Goods) did receive them from the hands of the said Colonel Whitchcott.




CHAP. XXVI. OF THE Founder, THE FIRST Knights-Companions, AND THEIR Successors.

SECT. I. Of what Number the Institution consisted.
THE main part of our design, relating to the Institution, Laws, and Ceremonies of the most Noble Order of the Garter, is now brought to a period; what else we intend, with the end of our journey, lies now within our prospect, and concerns the Founder the first Knights-Companions and their Successors. For King Edward the Third having Instituted the said Order, and set down Rules and Statutes for the government and regulation thereof, he Lib. N. p. 38. next resolved to Elect from among the flower of his own Chevalry, 25 noble and valiant Knights, who, together with himself should make up the number of 26. (for of so E. 3. Stat. Art. 3. many doth the Order, by his appointment, consist) and indeed that Age furnished him with large choice of gallant men, made famous by martial Exploits, performed in the Battels of Sluce, Crescy, and Durham.
The first that he Elected into this Noble Order, was Edward, his eldest Son, who had already in part deserved, and afterwards obtained the title of a va|liant and renowned Prince; and the rest of those accomplished Collegues were these that follow, and thus placed in their Stalls.



On the Soveraign's side.
On the Prince's side.


2. Lib. N. p. 38. Henry, Duke of Lancaster.
2. Thomas, Earl of Warwick.


3. Piers, Capitow de la Bouch.
3. Ralph, Earl of Stafford.


4. William, Earl of Salisbury.
4. Roger, Earl of March.


5. Sir Iohn Lisle.
5. Sir Bartholomew Burghersh.


6. Sir Iohn Beauchamp.
6. Sir Iohn Mohun.


7. Sir Hugh Courtney.
7. Sir Thomas Holland.


8. Sir Iohn Grey.
8. Sir Richard Fitz-Simon.


9. Sir Miles Stapleton.
9. Sir Thomas Wale.


10. Sir Hugh Wrottesley.
10. Sir Nele Loring.


11. Sir Iohn Chandos.
11. Sir Iames Audeley.


12. Sir Otes Holland.
12. Sir Henry Eam.


13. Sir Sanchet Dabrichcourt.
13. Sir Walter Paveley.


We once intended a full and entire History of the Lives of these Noble Foun|ders, and to that purpose made a large and chargeable Collection out of the Records in the Tower of London, and elsewhere, of all that we could find wor|thy to be remembred of them: in which we spent most part of the years 1657.1658. and 1659. But this our design being 20. Febr. an. 14. Car. 2. afterwards represented to the pre|sent Soveraign and Knights-Companions, by the late Chancellor of the Order, through the wrong end of the Perspective, we thereby received so great dis|couragemement, as caused us to wave it, and indeed resolved wholly to lay it aside. Nevertheless, upon other thoughts (here being a proper occasion) we are content to let in a glimpse, of what may be improved to a far greater light; and, from that stock of Collections, drawn out some few things relating to the Founder and first 25 Knights-Companions, particularly their Honors, Martial Em|ployments, famous Exploits, Matches, Issues, and Death; therein laying down only matter of Fact, and Materials for History, without deductions or observa|tions. All which we shall deliver with the plainness there found, being unwil|ling to add other Rhetorical flourishes, lest we might withal cast some blemish upon the native beauty of Truth.
And in this undertaking, the Reader may see what Furniture (though it lye disperst) our Publick Records will afford for History; and how plentifully our own may be supplied and improved, if pains were taken therein: for what is hitherto made publick, hath been collected, chiefly out of old Annals, and they filled with few things but such as were very obvious, nay the Annalists them|selves (for the most part residing in Monasteries) too often by ass'd with Interest, and Affection, to Times and Persons: But on the contrary, in our publick Re|cords lye matter of Fact, in full truth, and therewith the Chronological part, car|ried on, even to days of the Month. So that an industrious Searcher may thence collect considerable matter for new History, rectifie many mistakes in our old, and in both gratifie the world with unshadowed verity.


SECT. II. A short view of the Founder's Wars.
TO begin then with the Founder, the most Noble King Edward the Third; He was eldest Son of King Edward the Second, and Isabel Daughter to Philip the Fourth, King of France, whose Sons Lewis, Philip, and Charles, (all Kings of France one after another) dying without Issue Male, this Prince chal|lenged the Crown of France, as the next Heir male to it.
He was born in Windesor Castle, the 13. day of November, being Claus. 6. E. 2. m. 22. Dorso. Monday next after the Feast of St. Martin, the Bishop in Winter, (and the day of St. Brice, Bishop, and Disciple of St. Martin) in the year of our Lord God 1312. an Astrological Scheme of whose Nativity, hath been long since painted in Glass, in one of the Windows of the Prebends Lodgings at Windesor, belonging to the Reverend and Worthy Divine, Doctor Hever, late one of the Canons of that Colledge. Whence it appears, that he was born at 40 minutes after five in the morning of the said day, the 6. Degree of the Sign Scorpio Ascending, and the 18. Degree of Leo Culminating. The places of the Planets, as there posited, followeth.

gr.
 in 5 
 in 27 
 in 21 
 in 28 
 18 
 in 8 
 in 8 
 in 26 

The Thursday after his birth, he was Christned in the Chappel, then of St. Edward, in Windesor Castle, by A. Priest Cardinal, by the Title of Sancta Prisca, and his Godfathers were Ibid. Richard Bishop of Poictiers, Iohn Bishop of Bath and Wells, William Bishop of Worcester, Lewis Earl of Eureux, the Tho. Wal|singh. sub an. 1312. Queens Brother, Iohn de Britannia Earl of Richmond, Aymer de Valence Earl of Penbroke, and Hugh le Despenser.
Within a few days after, the King his Father granted him the 24. Nov. Chart. 6. E. 2. n. 21.  n. 44. County of Chester, except the Mannors of Mekklesfield, and Shotwyke, to hold to him and his Heirs Kings of England for ever. And likewise the County of Flint, and Cantred of Englefield, with the Castles of Flint and Rothelan, to hold as before, except the Mannor of Overton, the Lands of Mailor, Seysnoke, and the Castle and Mannor of Holt; after which he was thus stiled by the King, Claus. 7. E. 2. m. 1. Chart. 8. E. 3. m. 2. Edwardus Comes Cestriae filius noster Charissimus.
So pleasing to his Father  the birth of this Prince, that the 16. of Decem|ber following, he gave to Pat 6. E. . par. 2. m. 5. Iohn Launge Valet to the Queen, and to Isabel his Wife, and the longer liver of them, for bringing to him so desirable News, 24 l. per annum, to be paid out of the Farm of London. But leaving his Infancy, we will now proceed to his youth, and the occurrences that attended his riper years.
King Edward his Father, having been often summoned to the Court of France, to do homage for the Dukedom of Aquitaine, and other his Lands held in that Kingdom, and still delaying, till the French King had seized there|on, it was at length concluded, that he should give to this Prince that Duke|dom, who then should do the Homage, and enjoy the Lands. Hereupon pre|paration was made for his passing into France, and a little before at Langedon Abbey, near Dover, the King on the 2. of September in the 19. year of his Reign, first gave to him, his Heirs, and Successors Kings of England, jure haereditario imperpetuum, the Pat. 19. E. 2 p. 1. m. 25. Counties of Ponthieu, and Monstroile; and on the 10. of the same month (at Dover) granted to him the Pat. 19. E. 2 p. 1. m. 25. Dukedom of Aquitaine, and all the Lands he had, or ought to hold, in the Kingdom of France, Habendum as be|fore; Claus. de eod. an. m. 28. Dorso. two days after, this new Duke took shipping at Dover, thence passed into France, and made his Homage: in which Journey it was likewise thought fit, that the Queen should accompany him, in regard her Lands in that Kingdom had also been seized on.
Shortly after his return into England, he was unanimously chosen Claus. 20. E. 2. m. 3. Dors. 20. Oct. Custos of the Kingdom in his Fathers absence (then fled into Wales, with Hugh le Despencer the Son, Robert-Baldock and others) by divers of the Bishops, Nobility, Barons, and Knights, de assensu totius Comitats dicti Regni ibidem existentis, and at Mart|ley, the Ib. 26. Nov. Great Seal (sent from the King) was delivered to him.
Not long after, his Father ressigned his Crown, upon which, great prepara|tions were made for this young Prince's Coronation, which was solemnly perform|ed at Westminster, by William Archbishop of Canterbury, on Claus. 1. E. 3. pars prima membr. 25. die Kalendas Febr. Hen. Knighton in Hist. Anglic. Script. Col. 2550. Sunday after the Conversion of St. Paul, being the 1. of Feb. an. 1327.
His first Martial Attempt, but unsuccessful, (for more then what appertains to his Wars we shall not here discourse off) was the Chroni. Io. Froisard mil. L. 1. c. 15. raising an Army to march against the Scots: For Robert Bruce King of Scotland, having sent him a defi|ance about Easter next following his Coronation, shortly after invaded England, Claus. 1. E. 3. p. 1. m. 2. dorso. notwithstanding the Truce between the said King Robert, and King Edward the Second, was yet on foot, and an agreement for further Treaty of Peace (to be held in the Marches) on Sunday next before Ascension day then next comming.
The Kings Army was appointed to Rendevouz at Rot. Scotiae 1. E. 3. m. 9. Newcastle upon Tyne, on Munday next before the Ascension of our Lord, though Loco supra cit. Sir Iohn Froissard saith it was at York, upon Ascension day, whence about three weeks after Trinity Sun|day, he marched towards the Enemy: but the Claus. 1 E. 3. par. 2. m. 16 dorso. Scots (having exceedingly wasted the Northern parts, and declined to fight) slipt from him at Stanhop Park in the Bishoprick of Durham, and withdrew towards their own Country: nor could the King engage them, though he endeavoured it for 24. days together.
I confess the first Actions of Princes are looked upon by all Eyes, and not seldom, with many Observators, taken as the Radix, whence to calculate their future, either Successes or Miscarriages. If, at these undertakings, a full Age entitle them to the sole management of Affairs, we are inclined to think a ju|dicious Eye may partly discern the strength of their Fortune: But while they reside within Tutorage, and their designs are carried on under the conduct of others, the Event of things will manifest a dependency upon the strength or weakness of the Genius of those persons, who are the chief managers of their Concerns. And this was fully made good in this Prince, whose Martial under|takings were very unsuccessful, specially while the Government of the King|dom was committed to others (and sometimes afterwards, when he was tyed up and hampered by his Allies in Flanders) but he no sooner arrived at full Age, but his Affairs shewed themselves as if disposed by his own Genius; and the first remarkable experiment was verified even upon the Scots themselves, from whom before, he had received some affronts and indignities.
For having sent Ambassadors to the Froiss. Chro|nic. L. 1. C. 26. Custos, and chief Nobility of Scotland, He demanded the Homage of David Brus their King (and these were probably Ralph Lord Basset of Drayton, and William de Denum, for it appears Rot. Pat. 6 E. 3. p. 3. m. 3. they were employed thither the 14. of Decemb. an. 6 E. 3. Rot. Pat. 6 E. 3. p. 3. m. 3. touching the Affairs of the King and Kingdom) and the doing of Homage denyed. He forthwith rai|sed an Army, in assistance of Iohn Balioll, Son of Iohn Balioll, sometime King of Scotland, against David Brus the then King: which being appointed to meet at Claus. 7 E. 3. m. 19. dorso. Newcastle upon Tine, on Trinity Sunday, an. 7 E. 3. King Edward entred Scotland, and wasted the Country as far as Scone, for six months together: Insomuch that the Scots were forced to fly to their Fastnesses in the Forest of Gedworth, where they abode for many years, and as the King returned, he en|countred an Army of theirs at Hallidown Hill, which he defeated, and killed about Hollinsh. Chron. pag. 350. a. 32000. common Souldiers, 7. Earls, 90. Knights and Bannerets, and 400. Esquires.
In memory of this great Victory (hapning on the Rot. Scot. 7. E. 3. m. 2. Eve of St. Margaret the Virgin, being the 13. of Iuly) he repaired the Church and Convent of Nuns, near the place where the Battel was fought, (upon that occasion destroy|ed and burnt) and caused an Altar to be therein erected, and dedicated to that Virgin. He further granted to those Nuns, and their Successors, 20l. per annum, out of the Issues of the Town and County of Berwick, until Lands to that va|lue should be conferred upon them; to the end, that annually on the Eve and day of St. Margaret for ever, they should commemorate the goodness of God for his so prosperous success.
On the Holinsh. Chron. pag. 350. a. Morrow after this great Victory, the King had the Town and Castle of Berwick surrendred to him, and on the Ib. a. 8. L. 3. 19. of Iune, in the following year, did Edward Baliol, King of Scots, make Homage and Fealty to him at Newcastle, as to his Superior and Chief Lord of the Realm of Scotland, who then gran|ted to the King, and annexed to the Crown of England, for ever, the Coun|ties next adjoining to England, namely, Berwick, Roxbourgh, Peples, and Dunfres,

the Towns of Hadington and Gedworth, with the Castle and Fortress of Silkirke, Etherick, and Gedworth.
By the assistance, which King Edward afforded to Edward Baliol, Ib. p. 351. he gained the most part of Scotland: nevertheless divers Castles refused to surrender, which occasioned the King to make another expedition thither, and about All|ballontide, he arrived at Newcastle upon Tyne, and thence marched into Scot|land, towards the end of November, and at Christmass entred Ethrick Fo|rest: but the Scots were fled, whereupon having prosecuted his design as far as he thought good, he returned into England.
The next year, Ib. an. 9 E. 3. he raised new Forces, and himself from Carlisle, and Edward King of Scots from Berwick, both entred Scotland on the 12. of Iuly, burning and wasting the Country on both sides, beyond the Scottish Sea. This Expedition brought the Earl of Atholl, and divers of the Scotch Nobility, to a Submission; upon which the King came back into the Northern parts, where he wintered, and kept his Christmass at Newcastle.
About Ib. an. 10 E. 3. Twelfth-tide, he was provided to pass again into Scotland, when Ambassadors from the Pope and King of France, found him at Berwick, ready to enter that Kingdom, and by their earnest sollicitation (about Candlemas) obtained of both Kings a Truce till Midlent following: but no Peace ensuing, Edward King of Scotland, and divers of the English Nobility (at Whitsontide) entred Scotland again: and finding St. Iohns Town slighted by the Scots, they fortified it. Shortly after this, King Edward followed them thither, and thence passed with his Army unto Elgen in Murrey, and Innerness. In his return, he took Aberdeen, and burnt divers Towns, and destroyed the Country. About which time the Earl of Cornwal entred Scotland also, and destroyed the West|ern parts, and met the King his Brother at St. Iohns Town, where the King stayed not long, but marched to Striveling, built the Fortress called the Pile, and re|turned home. About the Feast of St. Luke, he marcht again with a fresh Army into Scotland, and repaired Bothuill-Castle, and returned into England before Christmas, leaving Edward King of Scots, at St. Iohns Town, setled in the Go|vernment of that Kingdom.
The Affairs of Scotland being thus quieted for some years, gave King Edward the leisure to look towards France; which Kingdom afterwards became the Scene of all his Martial Glory. For Robert d' Artois, Earl of Beaumont in France, being discontented at the Sentence wherein Philip King of France had given the Earldom of Artois from him, to Maud Countess of Burgundy, let fall some dangerous words, and they being laid hold on, forced him to fly into England, where he was kindly received by King Edward; who after he had been here sometime, 23 April. Pat. 11 E. 3. p. 2. m. 5. afforded him the use of the Castles of Guilford, Wallingford, and Somerton, whensoever he pleased to retire thither for his recreation, and afterwards assigned him 26 Mar. Pat. 12 E. 3. p. 1. m. 18. 800l. per annum for his support; the one moiety to be received out of the Revenues of certain Priories Alien, seised into the Kings hands, and the other moiety, out of his Exchequer.
Soon after his coming over, he advised the King to Froiss. Chron. l. 1. c. 28. set on foot his claim to the Crown of France  whereto the King was willing enough to hearken, and to be perswaded by him; but the Affair being of so great concern, his Coun|cil advised him, to take the opinion of his Father-in-Law, the Earl of Henault, before he attempted any thing therein: Hereupon (a Holinsh. Chron. p. 353. Comet with long and terrible streams, ushering in this grand Affair) he employed thither, with all privacy, Froiss. ut supra. Henry Burghersh, Bishop of Lincolne, with two Banerets, and two Do|ctors, to gain him to his party (with all other persons of note, as they should find inclinable to assist the King) who laying before the Earl, King Edward's pretensions to the Crown of France; he not only approved of his design, but advised the King to contract other Alliances, and gain to his party some of his neighbouring Princes thereabouts.
Encouraged by this advice, and the assurance of his assistance, he by a Com|mission 16 Dec. Pat. 10 E. 3. p. 2. m. 6. constituted the said Earl (therein stiled, Guilielmus Comes Hanoniae, Ho|landiae  Selandiae, ac Dominus Frisiae socer noster) his Proctor, to treat and



The PORTRAICTVRES of King EDWARD the 3. with the first 2 KNIGHTS COMPANIOS in the HABIT of the ORDER, and SVRCOATS of their ARMES,




agree with such Noblemen, persons of note, and others, as he should think best, touching both Alliances and Retainers. With this, Commissions with like power, and under the same date, were likewise sent to Ibid. William Earl of Iuliers, the Kings Brother-in-Law, to Sir Iohn de Montgomery, Knight, and to Mr. Iohn Waweyn, Canon of Derlington.
In April following, a like Commission was issued to 19. April Pat. 11. E. 3. p. 1. m. 11. Henry Bishop of Lin|colne, William Earl of Salisbury, and William Earl of Huntingdon, and they im|mediately dispatcht into Flanders, where they found business so well prepared by the Commissioners before named, that by the 24. of May ensuing, Rot. Alman. 11. E. 3. m. 9.10.11. they had fully engaged divers of the Nobility and others in Henault, Geldres, and the Marquisate of Iuliers, to appear in the Kings assistance against the French, and withall setled the proportion of Men and Arms, each of them were to furnish the King with in that Service, together with the stipends and wages to be paid them in lieu thereof. This done, the said Froiss. Chron. Lib. 1. cap. 29. Bishop went to Gaunt, and there won so much upon the humour of Iaques Dartuell, that he gained him also to the Kings party.
Within a few days after Ret. Alman. 11. E. 3. m. 10. Renaut the Second Earl of Guildres, and Zuitphen (who had married Leonora, the Kings Sister) and William Marquess of Iuliers (Rittersbusius in Tab. Com. Hollandiae  Seland. Husband to Ioane Sister to Queen Philippa) entred into the Association, and next Vlt. Iunii Rot. Alman. 11. E. 3. m. 9. Rupert, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, Duke of Bavaria, signed an Agree|ment at Frankeford, whereby he obliged himself to assist the King, for the re|covery and maintenance of his Inheritance, against all persons whatsoever, ex|cept Lewis the Emperor, his Uncle (which several Contracts, made by the fore|said Ambassadors with these Princes, were Ibid. confirmed by the King under the Great Seal of England, the 26. of August following.)
Between this Ibid. m. 11. Emperor and the King, and their Heirs, past also an Union and Confederacy, which obliged them to use all their power particularly against Philip de Valois (who carried himself as King of France) and his Successors in that Kingdom, for the recovery and defence of their Honors, Inheritances, and Possessions.
The 13. of Iuly was Ibid. m. . Iohn Duke of Loraine, Brabant, and Lemburgh retained for the King, and with the assent of the Emperor, was the Confederation made with 2. Sept. Ib. m. 6. Lewis his eldest Son, there stiled Marquess of Brandenburgh Count Pala|tine of the Rhyne, Duke of Bavaria, and Arch-Chamberlain to the Emperor.
With these, the King retained, for his intended Expedition into France, seve|ral other Noblemen of those Countries, as namely Ibid. m. 9. Adolph Earl of Monte (who having made Fealty and Homage to the King, he in reward thereof, setled on him a Pension for life, of 1200 Florens of Gold per annum, out of his Exche|quer) Ibid. m. 6. Everhard, eldest Son to Thideric Earl of Lymborg; Ibid. m. 6. Adolph, Earl of Mar|lia; Ibid. m. 6. Robert de Touburgh, Lord of Warnich; Ibid. m. 5. Theodorick, Earl of Lossen and Heuseberg, and Lord of Blatikenburgh; and Theodorick de Montjoy, Lord of Val|kenborgh: besides divers valiant Knights, and Commanders of eminent note.
But Philip de Valois was so alarm'd at the report of these Alliances, that he used all endeavours to interrupt the foresaid Ambassadors, in their passage home, both by Froiss. Chron. lib. 1. cap. 30. placing a Garrison in the Isle of Cogaunt, and setting out se|veral men of War to Sea: Of which the King having intelligene, directed his Writ to 20. Iunii Rot. Vasc. 11. E. 3. m. 30.  22. vide Rot. Franc. 11. E. 3. m. 30. Iohn de Ros, Admiral of the Fleet, from the River of Thames North|ward, to fit up a Convoy of 40 stout Ships well mann'd, to be at Dort in Hol|land, on Monday after Midsommer-day, to secure their return, where they lay ready for their coming.
And whereas these Ambassadors, in making these Alliances and Retainers, upon the Kings account, had obliged themselves to pay sundry great sums of money; the King Rot. Alman. 11. E. 3. m. 4. indempulfied them, their Heirs, and Executors, of all those sums, and other things whereto they were so engaged.
This great Affair, of strengthening the King with Alliances and Friends in Germany and Flanders, was again set on foot, and to that purpose, another 3. Oct. Rot. Alman. 11. E. 3. n. 10. Commission was issued to the said Bishop of Lincoln, and Earl of Salisbury, to whom was added Robert de Vfford Earl of Suffolk, and Iohn Darcy Steward of

the Kings Houshould, with power to any three of them, to treat thereupon with Lewis the Emperor. Another Ibid. n. 11. Commission of the same date, was made out to them, and to Richard de Winkele, Iohn de Offord, Paul de Monteflorum, Iohn de Montgomery, and Iohn Wauwyn, impowering them to treat with, and re|tain all persons, aswell Nobles as others, for the Kings Service.
And as the King did endeavour by these means to gain assistance, for the re|covery of his right to the Crown of France, so did he not neglect all methods of Peace: among which he thought fit to 7. Oct. Ib. n. 13. constitute the foresaid Bishop of Lincolne, the Earls of Salisbury and Suffolk, and Iohn Darcy, his Agents, to treat cum magnifico Principe Domino Philippo Rege Franciae illustri, or his Depu|ties, touching his right to the said Crown; to wit, whether it ought to remain to him, or King Edward: And by another Commission, they were impowered to treat upon all Controversies and Demands whatsoever, relating to the Duke|dom of Aquitaine, or other parts beyond Sea, and also of a happy and perpe|tual peace.
The same day, he Ibid. m. 1. constituted Iohn Duke of Brabant and Loraine, his Lieu|tenant, Captain, and Vicar General in the Kingdom of France: where it is wor|thy note, that the King in this Commission (challenging the Crown of France, as devolved to him by right of succession, and consequently become his lawful Inheritance) did assume the Title of that Kingdom, and stiled himself, Edwar|dus Dei grati Rex Angliae  Franciae, Dominus Hiberniae,  Dux Aquitaniae: And by another Commission bearing even date, made of these Officiary Digni|ties to the said Duke, he put France in the first place, thus, Edwardus Dei gra|ti Rex Franciae  Angliae, c. but it was not long e're he voluntarily laid this Title of France aside, nor did he solemnly assume it again, till the 14. year of his Reign over England.
By several other Ibid. Commissions of the same date (wherein the Titles of En|gland and France were so transposed) did the King constitute into the same Dig|nities, William Marquess of Iuliers, William Earl of Henault, his Father-in-Law, and William Bohun Earl of Northampton; and by another then dated and direct|ed to the Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, and all other persons in the Kingdom of France (having therein the Titles of England and France transposed as before) they are commanded to receive the said Duke, as if it were the King in his own person, as also the Marquesses and Earls. And further, the said Marquesses and the Earls were by other Commissions severally constituted the Kings special Ambassadors, to make known his said Title to all whom it should concern, to challenge and prosecute his right, to require every unjust detainor, to render to the King whatsoever he so withheld from him, to displace and punish such as they should think meet; and lastly to do and exe|cute all other things, which should be most necessary for the recovery and pre|servation of his right.
The King of France had in the beginning of this year sent Forces into Claus. 11. E. 3. p. 2. m. 29. Dorso, vide Hist. Anglic. Script. Coll. 2569. Gas|coigne, and seised upon many of the Kings, Castles and Fortresses; upon notice hereof the King gave Rot. Vasc. 11. E. 3. m. 40. command to arrest 20 Ships in the Port of Southampton, and thereabouts, and to press men to be ready at Portsmouth, to set forward for Gascoigne on Whitson-Eve following; for he had raised a great Army to send thi|ther. (It may not here be forgotten, what is recorded of Rot. Vasc. 11. E. 3. m. 4. Reymond Cornely Lord of Abertha a Gascoigner, who made an offer to the King of France, to fight in defence of King Edward's right to those Countries; for which 6. Ian. ibid. he sent him very great and particular thanks.) But withall made several applications, by his Am|bassadors, to the Court of France, for restitution of what had been seized on, and prevention of a War. His Offers were these.

1. Claus. 11. E. 3. p. 2. m. 28. Dorso. To marry his eldest Son the Duke of Cornwall to the King of France's Daughter, without Dowry.
2. The marriage of his Sister, the Countess of Geldres to his Son, with a great sum of money.
3. The marriage of his Brother the Earl of Cornwall, with any of the Blood Royal.
4. To make restitution for any dammage, he tendered him as much money as he could in reason demand.
5. He also proferr'd to take a Voyage to the Holy Land with the King of France, if he would restore his Lands to him.
6. "To go the Voyage, if he would restore but half, or some of those Lands.
7. To take the Voyage with him, if he would make restitution after his re|turn; or lastly,
8. To take the Voyage singly himself, so that at his return, he would re|store him his right.

These Overtures with many others, which the King or his Council could think off, were offered to the King of France, in order to a Peace, with this general proposal beside; That if any one could think of any other way tend|ing thereunto, he would be ready to accept thereof. But all in vain; for, on the contrary, King Philip excited and maintained the Scots against him, and his Navy also did great mischiefs at Sea.
Whereupon the Pope perceiving that the War was likely to proceed, sent into England P. Priest Cardinal of St. Praxid, and B. Deacon Cardinal of St. Mary in Aquiro, to use their best endeavours, to compose the differences now growing high between the two Kings. Upon whose mediation with King Ed|ward, though Peace could not be obtained, yet that things relating to Peace might the better be effected, a Rot. Franc. 11. E. 3. m. 2. Dorso. Truce was agreed on, to the Morrow after Candlemas day, an. 12. E. 3. and thence prorogued to the Rot. Al|man. 12. E. 3. p. 1. m. 36. vide Pat. de eod. an. p. 1. m. 24. first of March, and lastly, a further enlargement of it to Rot. Al|man. 12. E. 3. p. 1. m. 36. vide Pat. de eod. an. p. 1. m. 24. Midsummer following, in case the King of France should consent to it, and give Security that it should be observed; but he it seems refusing, the King was advised to revoke this later cessation (which he did the Ibib. m. 16. 6. of May) and to take a Journey into Flanders, personally to con|fer with his Allies, in pursuance of his design against France, and thereupon he took shipping at the Port of Orewell the 16. of Iuly, and went to Antwerp: But before he went, upon the Cardinals further importunity, a 21. Iune Rot. Alman. 12. E. 3. p. 1. m. 5. Commission issued to I. Archbishop of Canterbury, R. Bishop of Durham, R. de Vfford Earl of Suf|folk, Sir Geoffry le Scrop Knight, and Mr. Iohn Vfford Archdeacon of Ely, with power to treat and agree, touching all things in difference between them, in reference to a full and final Peace. And by another Ibid. Commission, bearing the same date, the Duke of Brabant, Earl of Hanow and Gueldres, the Marquess of Iuliers, and Sir William Dunort Lord of Oustrehout, Knight, are added to them. These Commissions were double, and of two several Stiles; in the one, the King calls Philip de Valoys Consanguineus noster Franciae, only; and in the other, Excellentissimus Princeps, Dominus Philippus, Rex Franciae, illustris Consangui|neus noster charissimus.
At Antwerp the confederate Princes gave the King a meeting, and here he 22. Iuly Rot. fact. apud Ant|uerp. 12. E. 3. m. 7.  3. expresly revoked all the powers he had given the forementioned Commissio|ners, to treat with Philip de Valois, as King of France. At length it was resolved, that the Froiss. Chron. lib. 1. cap. 32. Duke of Iuliers should be sent Ambassador, from the King to the Em|peror; which Embassy obtained a promise to the King, of the Vicar-general|ship of the Empire; whereupon, about the beginning of September he took a Journey to Walsingh. sub an. 12. E. 2. Colen, where the Emperor publickly defied the King of France, and constituted King Edward his Vicar-General, who at his return into Flanders, Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 34. entred upon the execution of that Office.
In the 13. year of this Kings Reign, at the instance of the foresaid Cardi|nals, Primo Iulii Pat. concess. ho|minib. Augl.  Vasc. 13. E. 3. m. 17. Iohn Archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Bishop of Durham, Henry Bishop of Lincolne, the Earls of Derby, Salisbury, and Suffolk, and some others, were impowered to treat with Philip de Valois, or his Deputies, upon the Dignities, Honors, Lands, and Rights, belonging to King Edward, and all other contro|versies whatsoever. The Deputies on the other part, were the Hollish. Chron. p. 355. Archbishop of Rouen, the Bishops of Langres and Beauvais, and the place for treaty, Arras; but nothing of Peace being thereby effected, the King prepared effectually for War; having 16. Febr. Pa|tentes inter Re|gem Angl.  diversos Mag|nates German. de an. 13. E. 3. m. 2. some time before, made an alliance with Albert and Otho, Dukes of Austria, Stiria, and Karinthia; and received Homage as King of France,

from Reiginald, Duke of Gueldres and Earl of Zutphen, for which he afterwards granted him Ib. m. 4. 1000l. sterling per Annum, for his life. He likewise made allian|ces with other Princes, who were to furnish him with men, to be imployed in his intended expedition into France: as also with Ib. m. 4. Lewis the Emperour: after which, he sent a Letter from Antwerp to the Pope, asserting his claim to the Crown of France, which is to be seen in Sub an. 13. E. 3. Thomas Walsingham's History of England.
All things for War being now in readiness, the King (with the assistance of his Allies) first besieged Cambray (an Imperial City, and then in the hands of the French) but it being too well fortified and provided, to be suddenly taken, he raised his Siege, and passed into France, first Froiss. Chron. l. 1. c. 34. sending his defiance to Philip de Valois (then at Paris) by the Bishop of Lincoln. Sir Walter Many was the first, who, after the defiance made, Ibid. c. 36. entred France with 40. Horse, burnt Mortaigne, took the Castle of Thyne, garrisoned it, and returned to the King at Mechlin.
The King having passed the River Skell, entred France upon Knighton in. Hist. Angl. Script. Coll. 2574. St. Matthews Day, and burnt the Country before him. And not long after, at the request of the Duke of Brabant, to admit of a Treaty of Peace, the King, at Mar|koyne, 4. Oct. Pat. concess. homi|nib. Angl.  Vas. 13 E. 3. m. 2. grants the said Duke power, in his name, to give safe conduct to such persons as he should think fit, to meet at any place within two or three Leagues from his Camp, to treat of Peace, the same to continue till Friday following, and all that day; but nothing was effected.
The Knighton loco cit. Saturday before St. Lukes Day, the King with his Army passed the Ri|ver Oyze, and marching forward till he came between Vyronfoss, and Flamen|gery, the two Armies drew near each other, where the Day of Battel was agreed on to be the Friday after. But in the interim a Froiss. Chron. l. 1. c. 42. Letter of advice was brought to the French King, from Robert King of Sicily a famous Astrologer, to disswade him from fighting, since he had by his Science found, that if he fought with the King of England, he should be vanquished, and loose the day. This Letter so prevailed with the King of France, that though he had the greater power, and that both Armies stood ranged for Battel, yet was there not a blow struck on the appointed Day. The Munday following, intelligence was brought to the King, Knighton Hist. Angl. Coli. 2575. that the French were dispersed, and returning homewards, where|upon he withdrew his Army, and marched back into Brabant.
At his return to Antwerp, he 15. Nov. Pat. inter Regem  diversos Magnat. Ger|man. 13. E. 3 m. 3. issued out another Commission, to Iohn Arch|bishop of Canterbury, R. Bishop of Durham, H. Bishop of Lincoln, W. Earl of Salisbury, Sir Bartholomew Burghersh, and Sir Geoffry le Scrop, Knights, and Iohn de Offord Archdeacon of Ely, to treat of Peace with Philip de Valois, or with Commissioners from him, and a 16. Dec. Ib. m. 2. month after this Commission was re|nued, upon adding Robert de Vfford, Earl of Suffolk, to the before-named Com|missioners.
Here also, the King was advised to ingage the Froiss. l. 1. c. 43. Flemmings to his further Assistance, who were willing enough (for, by the means of Iaques D'artuell, he had gained a great influence upon them) but considering they stood in|gaged in the Pope's Chamber in two Millions of Florens, not to make War against the King of France, they proposed, that the King would quarter the Arms of France with those of England, and call himself King of France, as he ought of right to do, and then they would take him to be the rightful King of France, and receive from him a discharge of that Obligation, and afford him their assistance. To this proposal the King agreed, and solemnly assumed both the Arms of the Kingdom, and Title of King of France. He also caused his Great Seal to be changed, and brought it with him at his return to England (landing at Claus. 14. E. 3. p. 1. m. 42. dorso. Orewell the 21. of Febr. at 9. a Clock in the Morning) and the first of March delivered it to Sir Iohn de St. Paul, in a Chamber called the Cage Chamber at Westminster. The old Great Seal, was then delivered up to him by the said Sir Iohn, which he gave to William de Kildesby to be kept in his War|drobe: But, that the New Seal might be made more publick, he caused 21. Febr. Ib. m. 33. dorso. Im|pressions thereof, and of his Privy Seal, to be made and sent to all the Sheriffs

in England, to be published in the several Counties, in regard he intended at the meeting of the Parliament on the Wednesday next after Midlent Sunday; to Vide Rot. Parl. 14. E. 3. n. 10. acquaint them with the cause, wherefore he had added to his Stile, the title of King of France.
That day being come, he under his New Great Seal, as King of France, Pat. 14. E. 3. p. 2. m. 36. va|cated all Papal Processes made at the instance of the French King, against the Inhabitants of Flanders; and granted to the Earl of Flanders, his Heirs and Successors for ever, the Towns of Lysle, Doway, Bethune, and Orchies, with the County of Artois, and City of Tournay, and to their Inhabitants, divers Pri|viledges. And by another Instrument of the same date under the said Seal, with the consent of the Parliament, he granted, Ib. m. 35.  37. that the staple of Wools should be setled at Bruges.
A little before his return into England, he wrote a Rot. Franc: 14. E. 3. m. 1. Letter from Gaunt (which bore Teste the 8. of Febr. in the first year of his Reign over France, and 14. over England) to the Prelates, Peers, and Commons of France, thereby signi|fying, that Charles, late King of France, his Mothers Brother, being dead, that Kingdom was fallen to him by manifest Law; and that Philip de Valois, Son to the Uncle of the said King, had by force intruded into it in his Minority, and yet detained it. Lest therefore he should seem to neglect his own right, he thought good to own the Title of France, and take on him the defence and Government thereof, and having offered the said Philip divers friendly conditions of Peace, to which he refused all condiscention, he was therefore necessitated to defend himself, and recover his right by force of Arms; and therefore all such Subjects as would submit to him as true King of France, by Easter then next ensuing, should be received into his grace and protection.
Having dispatcht his Affairs with the Parliament, which had given him a Rot. Parl. 14. E. 3. n. 7. great Supply, to go on with this War, and wherein an Act passed Ib. n. 34. that he might, with the assent of his Allies, condescend to any reasonable terms of Peace: And having created the Marquess of Iuliers, n. 35. Earl of Cambridge, and given him 1000l. per annum until he were provided for of so much Land of In|heritance, He got in readiness an Army to go beyond Sea, and prepared his Navy to transport it, and on the 22. of Iune (hor diei quasi prim) set sail from Orewell.
The French King had laid Froiss. l. 1. c. 50. 120. great Ships, beside Genoeses, Normans, and Picards, Manned with 40000. Men, to intercept his passage; But after a fierce and bloody fight on Midsummer Eve, the Claus. 14. E. 3. p. 3. m. 6. dorso. King got the Victory, before Sluce, destroying most of the Enemy, and taking the greatest part of their Fleet: and on Midsummer day landed at Sluce, and went forthwith to Gaunt. Of this Signal Victory an account, by Rot. Parl. 14. E. 3. n. 6. Letter was sent from the King to the Bishops and Pre|lates, by the Earl of Arundel, and Sir William Trussell.
Not long after the Froiss. l. 1. c. 2. King held a Council with his Allies at Villenort, where it was resolved, that the King should besiege Tournay, before which he brought 120000. Men. 27. Iuly. Thence, he sent a Letter sealed with his Great Seal, to Philip de Valois, signifying, that he had fairly requested him to render him his lawful right to the Crown of France, but perceiving he meant to persist in detaining it, without returning him any answer, He was therefore entred Flanders, as Soveraign Lord thereof, to pass through that Country, for recovery of his Inheritance so detained; yet to avoid the effusion of Christian blood, and de|termine the right, he challenged him to fight body to body, or else 100. cho|sen Souldiers on each side, or if both were refused, then to pitch upon a day for both Armies to fight neer Tournay; But the French King returned no answer to this Letter.
The Siege continued eleven weeks, wanting three days, in which time, by the mediation and effectual endeavour of Iane de Valois, the French Kings Sister, a Treaty was set on foot, Claus. 14. E. 3. p. 2. m. 32. dorso. Iohn, King of Bohemia, Adolph, Bishop of Leige, Reynel Duke of Loraine, Am Earl of Savoy, and Iohn Earl of Arminiack, being Commissioners for the French King, the Dukes of Brabant, and Gueldres, the Marquess of Iuliers, and Iohn of Henault Lord Beaumont for King Edward;

who on the Walsingl. pag. 136. 25. of September agreed upon a Truce, between both Kings, to en|dure till Midsummer following (of which publication was made in England the 6. of October) and thus both Armies retired. But this was much against the Kings Will, though not against those of his Allies, who were very desirous to return home. The Siege being raised, the King went to Gaunt, and thence re|turned into England, where he arrived (at the Tower Wharf) on the Claus. 14. E. 3. pag. 2. m. 12. dorso. Feast of St. Andrew about Midnight.
At this Treaty before Tournay, it was among other things agreed, that ano|ther Treaty should be held at Arras, within that year, whither both Kings and the Pope should send Commissioners; but that meeting produced only another year to be added to the Truce. The Kings Commissioners were the Frois. lib. 1. cap. 63. Bishops of Lincolne and Durham, the Earl of Warwick, Sir Robert d' Artois, Sir Iohn Henault, and Sir Henry of Flanders. This year produced some other Over|tures for the amicable composure of all Controversies, and concluding a Peace between the two Kings; to which purpose a 9. April Rt. Alman. 1 E. 3. m. 27. Commission issued to R. Bishop of Durham, Hugh Earl of Gloucester, William Fitz, Warren, Nicholas de Flisco, and William Trussell. Another 24. May Ib. m. 20. Commission issued to Iohn Duke of Brabant, Reignold Duke of Gueldres and Zuthphen, William Marquess of Iuliers, and Earl of Cambridge, and William Earl of Hanaw, and Iohn de Hanaw Lord Beaumont, to treat and agree with Philip de Valois, upon a Truce, to the Feast of the de|collation of St. Iohn Baptist then coming on, which it seems became so far hope|ful, as to 21. Aug. Ib. m. 19. vide Claus. 15. E. 3. p. 2. m. 38. dor|so. produce a prorogation till the Feast of the 14. Sept. Ib. m. 12. Exaltation of the Holy Cross, and thence till Ibid. m. 7. Midsummer in the following year. Another Commission was made forth to Rot. Alman. 15. E. 3. m. 13. William Earl of Huntingdon, Bernard Dominus de le Brett, Bartolomew de Burglersh, Iohn de Offord, Archdeacon of Ely, and Michael de Flisco, to treat with the  Philip de Valois, aswell touching the Kingdom and Crown of France, as divers other questions and controversies between them, and to compose the differences by a full Peace, or otherwise a Truce; and one of these Commissions was to treat, by the advice of Iohn Duke of Brabant, and other the Kings Allies in landers.
While the King lay at the Siege of Tournay, the Frois. lib. 1. cap. 55. Knigh|ton Hist. Angl. Script. Coll. 258. Scots (excited by the French King) invaded England, and passing by Berwick marched into Northumberland, and thence to Dm, foraging the Country still as they went, and after re|turned home.  this incursion they recovered all the Castles formerly lost, ex|cept those of Edeurgh, Strivling, and Roxborough, the first of which, within a short time after, was taken by stratagem. But in the Truce made at Tournay, the Scotch were by a particular Article included, and so all hostility ceased du|ring that Truce; yet after the expiration thereof, and some new provocations given the King, he raied an Army to enter Scotland, but being engaged in the War with France, could not go with it himself, and therefore Primo Aug. Rot. Scot. 15. E. 3. m. 9. constituted Edward, King of Scotland his Captain and Lieutenant of his Army: and in ano|ther Ibid. Commission of the same date, gave him power nevertheless to treat with the Scots, and to admit them to Peace, and pardon their offences. In these Com|missions the King stiles him, Magnisicus Princeps, Edwardus Rex Scotiae, fidelis  consanguineus noster charsimus.
The Rot. Scot. 16. E. 3. m. 12. following year he was again constituted the King's Captain and Com|mander in chief, of the Army designed against Scotland, for defence of the Kingdom of England, and destruction of his Scotch Enemies; and further com|missionated to Ibid. m. 9. raise men in all the Counties beyond Trent, aswell within Liber|ties as without, for that Expedition. Upon which preparation, a Knighton Hist. Ang. Scrip. Coll. 2581. Truce was made for one year; before the ending of which, the Truce concluded at Vannes in Britagne, between the King and his Adversary of France, took commence|ment, being to hold from Michaelms 17. E. 3. for three years: And in the mean time the Bishop of Durham, and others, were appointed by the King to Rot. Scot. 17. E. 3. m. 4. treat and conclude with the Scots, touching the manner, form, and conditions appointed by the said Truce, and the mutual commerce of the Subjects of both Kingdoms, as also to reform and punish the breakers of the Truce.
The Truce made with the French at Tournay, and enlarged at Arras, gave the

King time to see his Allies in Flanders, aimed chiefly at the accomplishment of their own designs by his hands, rather than the advancement of his interest in France by their assistance; and the two fruitless Expeditions, in attempting to enter that Kingdom through Flanders, shewed they would do little for him; be|sides, he now judged it a more easie and advantagious passage thither through Britagne, which he hoped to gain, by laying hold of the occasion offered him, to protect and assist Iohn Earl of Montsort, Duke of Britagne; whose Title to that Dukedom, and the occasion of the War between him and Charles de Bloys, are set down at large by Lib. 1. t. 64. Sir Iohn Froissard.
This Froiss Chron. lib. 1. cap. 72. Iohn Montfort being taken Prisoner at Nants, by Charles de Bloys (whom the French King had assisted with an Army to enter Britagne) was sent to Paris, and there died in Prison, his Widow (Pa. 16. E. 3. p. 1. m. 25. Ioane of Flanders being of a manlike courage) nevertheless maintained the War, and, to gain further ai and supplies from King Edward, proposed (by Hllish. Chron. p. 62. Sir Emere de Clisson, a Nobleman of Britagne) to marry her Son to one of his Daughters, which taking effect, the King snt Ro. Alman. 15. E. 3. m. 4.  7. vide Frissard. li. 1. cap. 79. Sir Walter Many (in November) with 3000 Archers into Britagne, who though they wandred 40 days at Sea, by distress of weather, Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 81. yet came timely to her assistance.
The King in the 16. year of his Reign raised a great Army, and, by May 20. Claus. 16. E. 3. m. 20. dorso. Pro|clamation made, appointed his Souldiers in all Counties of England, except Yorkshire, Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmerland, to be in readiness by Midsummer following, to go along with him, and Ibid. p. 3. m. 28. dorso. after directed his Letters to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishops, for publick Prayers to be made, and the divine goodness sought to, for a blessing upon his Armies, which now he designed both against France and Scotland.
The P. 2. m. 23. dorso. 4. of October following he took shipping at Sandwich, in a Ship called the George, and sailing towards France met with the French Fleet, where after a fierce Encounter, they were separated by Tempest; at length he 29. Nv. Hol|lensh. Chron. pag. 364. landed neer Vannes in Britagne, and laid Siege thereto; and here, leaving the Lord Stafford, he marched to Remes and Nantes, laying Siege to both Towns, as also to Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 96. Dynan and took it; after which he returned to Vannes, and then Ibid. cap. 97. drew off his Forces from Nantes thither: and there the Rot. Pal. 17. E. 3. n. 8. vide etiam Claus. de ed. an p. 1. m. 25. dorso. Bishop Cardinals of Penestrina and Tusculan, sent from Pope Clement the Sixth, obtained of him (19. Ian. 1343.) a Truce for Kinghton Col. 2583. 3 years, which the King gave way to, in hope of an honorable Peace. This done, the King returned into England, and Claus. 16. E. 3. p. 1. m. 31. set forth a Proclama|tion, to give publick notice of this Truce.
But the Truce expiring, the Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 142. War was again renewed, between Charles de Bloys and the Countess of Montfort, to whose assistance the King snt Sir Tho|mas Dagworth, from the Siege of Calais, with a supply of men; and the English having Rochedaren surrendred to them, Charles de Bloys laid Siege to it, to re|lief of which, the Countess sent Sir Ibid. c. 143. Thomas Dangorne, and Sir Iohn Artwell who (Hollirsh. Chron. p 376. 20. Iune 1347.) took Charles de Bloys with the Britagne and Norman Lords, that were on his part, Prisoners, and raised the Siege; which Froiss. c. 147. Charles was sent into England, where he remained in custody a long time.
The Claus. 17. E. 3 p. 1. m. 25 dorso. 24. of February, an. 17. E. 3. the King summoned a Parliament to be held die Lunae proxim post Quindena Paschae, wherein Sir Bartholomew Burghersh, present at the making of the Truce neer Vannes, declared that the King con|sented thereto, Rot. Parl. de eod. an. n. 8. provided it might be honorable and advantageous for his Al|lies, and was content to have the Peace made before the Pope, as before a Friend, but not as a Judge; otherwise he would pursue his Quarrel. And that as the King did not undertake this War without the assent of Parliament, so without it he would conclude no Peace, and therefore it rested, whether it were best for the King to take this Offer, and send Ambassadors to the Pope instructed for this Affair, before Midsummer, or not? Hereupon both Lords and Commons answered, That it was good to pursue the Peace, and to send Ambassadors, as was proposed.
Those who were first sent to the Popes Court upon this Affair, were 20. May Ro. Franc. 17. R. 3. m. 1. Hugh le Despenser Lord of Glamorgan, Ralph Lord Stafford, William de Norwich,

Dean of Lincoln, Sir William Trussel, and Andrew de Offord, a Civilian. The Authority given them was to Treat in presence of the Pope, not as a Judge, but private Person and Friend to both parties, with the Agents of his Cosin the Lord Philip de Valois, upon the Kings Right to the Crown of France, as also upon whatsoever Dominions, Dignities, Honors, Lands, Possessions, Pla|ces, and Rights appertained to him, concerning which any controversy had ri|sen between them, or was like to arise. After this another 19. Aug. Ib. Commission issu|ed containing the same powers, to Henry of Lancaster Earl of Derby, Thomas de Beauchampe Earl of Warwick, Robert de Vfford Earl of Suffolke, Hugh le Despenser Lord of Glamorgon, Ralph de Nevill, Bartholomew de Burghersh, Iohn le Grey de Ruffyn, Reginald de Cobham, and Thomas de Brodiston, Barons, Willi|am de Norwich Dean of Lincoln, Iohn de Offord Archdeacon of Ely, Robert Herward Archdeacon of Taunton, and Andrew de Offord Professor of the Civil Law, or to any 12, 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, or 3. of them. But this Treaty had only the effect of continuing the Truce, yet that so ill kept on the French side, that the following year it occasioned a 4. Aug. Rot. Franc. 18. E. 3. m. 3. solemn complaint, sent from the King to the Pope, by Iohn Offord, Dean of Lincoln, Hugh de Nevill, and Nicho|las de Flisco, to require reformation, and security for the observance of the said Truce, until the time it was to end, and in case that were not done, then they to surrender it into the Popes hands, and defy Philip de Valois, as the Kings Enemy.
It seems, the desires of the King met with a dilatory answer, for the Ib. m. 2. 20 of October following, William Bishop of Norwich, Iohn de Offord Dean, and Iohn Thoresby Canon of Lincoln, Sir Hugh Nevil, and Sir Ralph Spigurnell Knights, and Nicholas de Flisco were commissionated to declare before the Pope, in what par|ticulars the Truce had been broken, and to demand reparations: but after all this, no satisfaction being given to the King, and the Truce manifestly and notoriously violated, the King gave 4. April Rot. Franc. 19. E. 4. p. 1. m. 24. Commission to William de Bohun, Earl of Northampton to defy Philip de Valois, as a Violator of the Truce, an unjust Usur|per of his inheritance in France, and his Capital Enemy. And 14. Iune. Ib. m. 10. shortly after, he set forth a Manifesto touching the dissolution of the Truce, wherein the cau|ses were declared at large: being the same with the Rot. Ron. 19. E. 3. m. 2. n. 4. Letters sent from him to the Pope and four Cardinals, the 26. of May preceeding.
This being done, the King with all diligence Froissard Chron. l. 1. c. 121. provides an Army to enter France the following year, and the Stows Chron. p. 241. b. 5. of Iuly in the 20. year of his Reign, took Shipping at Southampton; but instead of sailing towards Goscoigne, whe|ther he at first intended, (upon the advice of Sir Geoffry de Harecourt) he di|verted his course, and made towards Normandy, and landed at Hoges Saynt Wast, in the Isle of Constantine not far from St. Saviours le Vycount, the Cart.  Pat. factae in Franc. 20. E. 3. m. 1. 12. of Iuly after.
Upon his arrival he ordered his Army in Froissard Chron. l. 1. c. 122. three Battels, the one marched on his right hand along the Sea-side, the second on his left; both which exceed|ingly inriched themselves with the spoils of the Country: and himself with the third in the middle. This Battel consisted of 3000. men at Arms, 6000. Archers, and 10000. Common Souldiers.
The first Town he took was Ib. c. 123. St. Lo, in Constantine, rich in Drapery, and next Ib. c. 124. Caen; the plunder of it, and other places, consisting Ib. c. 125. of Cloth, Vessels of Silver and Gold, Jewels, and more than 60. Knights and 300. Burgesses, made Prisoners, were sent to the Ships, and transported into England. After this the King marched on, wasting and burning the Country and entred Lisieux, the Chief City of Normandy, for Wealth and Merchandize, and plundered it. And hence, he gave Rot: Nor|man. 20. E. 3. m. 21. Letters of Protection and safe conduct to the Cardinals of Tusculan, and St. Iohn, and St. Paul, sent from the Pope to mediate a Peace. From thence he marched into the Country of Eureux, and spoiled it, and leaving Roan, he passed to Gaillon, and burnt it, with Vernon, Pont de Lache, and all the Country thereabouts, and went over the River Seyne to Poissy. Hence (having thus overrun and wasted Britagne and Normandy) the English Marshalls rode towards Paris, and burnt St. Germain en Laye, Mountjoy, St. Clou, Pety Bolayne

neer Paris and the Bourg la Reyne, which caused the French King to retire to St. Denys. Sir Godfrey de Harecourt encountred a considerable party of the Bur|gesses of Amiens, going to the assistance of the French King, of whom he kill'd 1200, and defeated the rest, and took their Carriages and Baggage.
About this time the Rot. Norman. 20. E. 3. m. 21. Dus. French King had sent notice to King Edward, that he would give him Battel, the Thursday, Saturday, Sunday, or Monday after, be|twixt St. Germains de Preez, and Valgirart de l Paris, or between Franconville and Ponthoise; in answer to which, (from Antes 15. Aug.) the King sent him word, that he was come thither, to put an end to the War by Battel, but that the said French King had broken down all the Bridges, so that they could not come at each other. That he had come to Poissy, and repaired that Bridge, and there stayed three days expecting him, and that the French Forces might have come on, either on the one side or the other, at his pleasure. But foras|much as they did not, he could not then give him Battel, and therefore now re|solved to pass further into the Kingdom, and there stay till he had ended the War, or advantaged himself, and disabled his Adversaries: Nevertheless if he would combat him, to save those which he challenged for his Subjects, upon notice of the Hour, he should find him ready for the Encounter, and this he principally desired for the benefit of Christianity, since he had refused to accept of, or propose any reasonable way for effecting Peace.
This answer was not liked by the French King; therefore the King having stayed at Froiss. Chron. loco cit. Poissy, and there kept the Feast of our Lady in August, marched thence into the Country of Beauvosyn, burning and destroying all before him. One night having lodged in an Abbey, and next morning after his departure, looking behind him, he saw it on fire, but he hanged 20 of his Souldiers, that had done the mischief; because at his first entrance into France, he had caused Proclamation to be made throughout his Army, that no man, upon pain of death, should violate a Church, or burn a Religious House.
As he passed by Beauvois, he fired the Suburbs, and went thence to Gra|nvillers. He also took and fired the Castle of Angers, and the Town of Pork, and the two Castles; and drawing neer to Froiss. lib. 1 cap. 126. Abbeville, he endeavoured to pass the River of Somme, but sounding several places found no Ford; at length one Gobyn a Grace (a Prisoner) brought him to Blanch-taque. This Ford was guard|ed on the other side by 12000 men, commanded by Sir Godmar du Foy; Ibid. cap. 127. here the King forced his passage, and defeated Sir Godmar, and after he had passed his whole Army over, he marched to Crescy in Ponthieu, where he formed his Army into three Battels, the Ibid. c. 128. first of which was led by the Prince of Wales, ac|companied with divers of the English Nobility, the second by the Earl of Nor|thampton, and the third by the King himself.
And here, before the Battels joined, he created 50 Knights, among whom were Cart. Pat. Rege existente in Fra. 20. E. 3. m. 21. Robert de Maule, Guy de Brian, Iohn de Ravensholm, Peter de Brewes, Tho|mas de Lancastre, Henry Dengayne, and Iohn the Son of Guy de Beauchamp; to whom the King gave annual Pensions for their lives, to support these Honors.
The Battel was fought Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 130. between Bray and Cressy, on Saturday the Ex Lib. Mo|nast. de Lacck in Com. Wilts. 7. of the Calends of September, viz. the 26. of August an. Dom. 1346. and the Victory fell to King Edward. There were kill'd on the French part, the King of Bohemia, the Duke of Lorraine, the Earls of Alanson, Flanders, Harcourt, Almor, Bloys, Auser, and St. Paul; but the French King fled to Bray Castle with 5 Barons only, and thence to Amiens. On the day after the Battel, there were Froiss. c. 131. four times as many slain (coming to the assistance of the French King, but knew nothing of his defeat) as on the day on which the Battel was fought.
After this Battel, the Ibid. c. 132. King forthwith carried his Army towards Calais, and sat down before it the Knighton Hist. Angl. Script. Coll. 2595. 7. day of September, continuing his Siege all the Winter ensuing. The next Summer the French King came down with an Army of 200000 men to raise the Siege, and on Stwe Chron. pag. 244. Monday after St. Iame's day, drawing neer to the Castle of Guisnes, and finding the King so strongly intrenched, that he could not attempt him, he, on the 2. of August, returned; whereupon the

Town was surrendred to the King's mercy, the Knighton loco cit. 4. of August following; and the King having setled his Affairs there, returned into England the Stowe loco cit. 14. of October.
The Ibid. p. 242. 7. of October an. 20. E. 3. which was within a Month after King Edward had laid Siege to Calais, David King of Scots invaded England, with Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 137. 50000 men. The Ibid. c. 138. Queen being then at York raised an Army to oppose him, and marched towards Newcastle, neer which, on Knighton Hist. Angl. Script. Coll. 2590. St. Luke's Eve she encountred the Scots, flew 15000 of them, and vanquished the rest. Their King was taken Prisoner at Ib. Coll. 2591 Meryngton, by Iohn Copland, an Esquire of Northumberland, and (according to the Kings command signified to 20 Dec. Rot. Scot. 20. E. 3. m. 2. Thomas Rokely, high Sheriff of Yorkshire, who had received him by Indenture from Monsieur Ralph Nevill) was delivered by Indenture, dated the Claus. 20. E. 3. p. 2. m. 1. Dorso. 2. of Ianuary after, unto Iohn Darcy Constable of the Tower of London, there to be kept in safe custody. After this Victory, the English entred Scotland, and took the Castles of Hollenish. pag. 376. Roxburgh and Hermitage, and subdued the Counties of Anandale, Galloway, Mers, Tividale and Ethrick Forest, extending their March as far as Cockburns Peth, and Sowtray hedge, Tralnilips, and Cross Cave.
Shortly after the defeating of the King of Scots, upon the mediation of the Cardinal of Naples and Clermont, a 22. Oct. Rot. Norman. 20. E. 3. m. 18. Commission was made out to William Mar|quess of Iuliers, William de Bohun Earl of Northampton, Constable of England, Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, Marshal of England, Bartholomew de Burg|hersh, Richard Talbot Steward of the King's House, Thomas Bradewardyn Chan|cellor of London, Iohn de Thoresby, Canon of Lincolne, and Andrew Offord Ca|non of York, or any 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, or 3 of them, to treat of, and conclude with the said Cardinals, upon all Quarrels and Controversies depending between the King and Sir Philip de Valois, and their Allies; but this meeting came to nothing.
Nevertheless, after Calais, was taken, the Earls of Lancaster and Huntingdon were 25 Sept. Rot. Calesis. 21. E. 3. m. 4. commissionated to treat of a Peace, with the said Sir Philip de Valois, which upon the interposition and mediation of the foresaid Cardinals, produced a Truce, to endure from Michaelmas Eve an. 21. E. 3. to the Qninzeme of St. Iohn Baptist next ensuing.
Lewis of Bavaria the Emperor being dead, about this time Henry Archbishop of Mentz, Arch-Chancellor of the Empire in Germany, Rudolph and Rupert Counts Palatine of the Rhyne, and Dukes of Bavaria, Lewis Marquess of Brandenburgh and Lusatia, and the Dukes of Saxony assembled at Collen, whence they sent Ambassadors to King Edward, with the offer of Electing him Emperor of Ger|many; in return of which he 10. May Claus. 22. E. 3. m. 20. Dorso. sent to them Sir Hugh Nevil, and Ivo de Glynton Canon of St. Pauls London, with full information of the Kings intention, which contained a refusal of that Imperial Dignity, but with Hollinsh. pag. 412. great thanks for the ho|nor they designed him.
The Truce made at Calais as aforesaid, now growing towards an end; the King was prevailed with, upon the Popes Letters, to 15. May Rot. Franc. 22. E. 3. m. 13. depute Thomas Fastolf, Arch Deacon of Wells, Iohn Carleton Canon of Wells, both Doctors of Law, and Fryer Iohn de Reppes of the Order of Mount Carmell, who had Commission to prorogue the Truce, and to treat of a final Peace, the former of which was concluded on for Ibid. m. 19. 6 weeks in Picardy, Normandy, Artois, Boloigne, and Flanders, and to commence the 13. of September an. 22. E. 3. But the King well seeing the delay, and unwillingness of the French to close with him, either for Truce or Peace, drew down his Forces in October to Claus. 22. E. 3 p. 2. m. 8. Dorso. Sandwich, intending to pass the Sea; which quickned the French to 18. Nov. Rot. Franc. 23. E. 3. m. 10. Dorso. agree to the prorogation of the Truce, from the 18. of November till the first of September, an. 23. E. 3. upon which he returned to London.
No sooner was this Truce concluded, but the Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 150. Lord Geoffry Charney attempt|ed to corrupt Sir Amery de Pavy, an Italian, then Governor of Calais, to betray the Town to him for 20000 Crowns, of which the King having notice, came privately the night before the delivery was agreed on. The Lord Geoffry had paid his money, and expected the surrender of the Town, 31. Dec. 1348 when the King issu|ed out, disguised under the Banner of Sir Walter Many, and fought on foot

among the Common Souldiers; and within a while he encountred the Lord Eustace of Rybemont, a Valiant Knight, who having struck him twice on his Knees, was at last Mastered by the King, and made his Prisoner.
The encounter being over, and the Froissard c. 1.52. King desirous to view the Prisoners, caused a great Supper to be prepared for them, at which time he came in, wear|ing a Chaplet of Pearls, and passing to Sir Eustace of Rybemont, took the Chap|let off his own head and placed it upon the head of Sir Eustace, with the com|mendation of a valiant Knight, and one that had performed best in the late Action, and with all forgave him his ransom.
Thomas of Walsingham placeth this famous exploit to the year 1349. and con|sequently to be done in the 23d year of King Edward the Third. But we ra|ther judge Sir Iohn Froissard to be in the right, since we find Sir Iohn Beauchamp made Captain of Calais, the Rot Franc. 22. E. 3. m. 1. first of Ianuary an. 22. E. 3. which according to Froissard's Account, was the next day after this defeat of Sir Geoffry Charney: And though the French Writers affirm, that Sir Aymery de Pavy, discovered the design to the King, yet Froissard saith not, tell the King had otherwise first heard of it, and therefore not unlike, but there might rest so much suspicion upon Sir Aymery, as induced the King to appoint a new Governor of the Town, be|fore he went thence.
It having been agreed on at the last Truce, that Commissioners on both sides should meet at Boloigne on Sunday, in medio Quadragesimae following, the King 10 Mar. Rot. Franc. 23 E. 3. m. 7. appointed William Bishop of Norwich, William Bohun Earl of Northampton, William Clynton Earl of Huntingdon, Regnold de Cobham, Robert de Bourghcher, and Iohn de Carleton, Doctor of Laws, his Commissioners to Treat of and con|clude a Peace (or prorogation of the Truce) and League of perpetual friend|ship, between him and his Adversary of France. But no final Peace could be agreed on, while Philip de Valois lived, nor after, till King Iohn, his Son and Successor, was taken Prisoner at the Battel of Poictiers, only several Froissard Chron. l. 1. c. 154. Truces were made from time to time, and the last consented to in February an. 28. E. 3. to hold till Midsummer following.
While these Truces were on foot, endeavours were made for the Release of David King of Scots, the Kings Prisoner, and at length it was agreed, that upon the coming into England of Rot. Scoti 25 E. 3. m. . Iohn, the Son and Heir of the Steward of Scotland, and several other young Noblemen Hostages for the said King (who when they came, were disposed into the Castles of York and Notingham) King David should be permitted to go into Scotland, and upon his return back, the Hosta|ges should be delivered. The Kings Ibid. Letters as well of safe conduct to the Hostages, as of power to receive them, and to take King Davids Oath for his return, and the Command for his safe Custody at Newcastle till the Hostages were come, bear Teste the 5. of September, an. 25. E. 3. to continue unto the Quindena of the Purification next following, and the 3. of November after, were they renued to the Feast of St. Philip and Iacob ensuing.
It seems King David returned back into England about half a year after; for the 28. of March, an. 26. E. 3. a Rot. Scotiae, 26 E. 3. m. 3. Command was sent to the Sheriff of York|shire to conduct the Hostages to Berwick, to be there in Quindena Paschae, it be|ing the day set for King David's return to that Town.
On the same 5. of October, Rot. Scot. 25. E. 3. m. 3. command was sent to Iohn Coupeland, Sheriff of Northumberland, who had then the Custody of the said King, to deliver him to the Bishops of Duresm and Carlisle, William Earl of Northampton, Henry de Percy, and Ralph Nevil, or to any 4, 3, or 2. of them: and likewise another com|mand issued to them, to deliver him upon the conditions, and under the form agreed on.
Whilst the foresaid Truce, agreed on in February an. 28 E. 3. was on foot, the Pope undertook to do what he could, to further the effecting of a Peace, and to that purpose he sent again to both Kings, to obtain their Authority to bring it about; but it doth not appear, that any thing was done before Midsummer while it was in being. Nevertheless, we find, that 28 Aug. Rot. Franc. 28 E. 3. m. 3. whereas in the Treaty between them held at Guynes, among other things, it was agreed, that Ambas|sadors

from King Edward should be sent to Pope Innocent in Kal. Octob. follow|ing; the King did accordingly impower William, Bishop of Norwich, Henry Duke of Lancaster, and some others, his special Ambassadors, to treat with his Ad|versary of France, or his Deputies, touching a final Peace between them; but they returned without effecting any thing, all, but the Stow, p. 254. Bishop of Norwich, who died at Avignion, and was there buried.
Towards the latter end of the following Summer, the King having intelli|gence, that Iohn the French King was drawing down with an Army towards St. Omars, Walsing. sub an. 29. E. 3. in the beginning of November passed over to Calais with Lyonel of Vlster, and Iohn of Gaunt his two Sons, and a considerable Army, where he ar|rived the 2. day of November, and immediately marched against him; but upon notice of his approach, King Iohn retired, (Knighton Hist. Angl. Script. Coll. 2610. breaking down all the Bridges be|hind him) whom King Edward followed as far as Heyden, and the Country be|ing wasted by the French, he, for want of Provision for his Army, returned to Calais, and thence into England.
And whilst in his absence, the Scots had broke out and taken the Ibid. Town (but not the Castle) of Berwick he immediately marched thither, and (13. Ianuary) recovered the Town, passing further into Scotland, and on the 25. of the same Month, being then at Roxbrough, King Edward Baliol there made a solemn re|signation of his Crown and Kingdom to him by his Letters Patent; after which, he marched with his Army to Hadington, burning and wasting the Country on each side as he went; and having laid it waste, returned into England, and took Ed|ward Baliol along with him.
The King having notice in the precedent year, that Iohn the French King had given to Charles Dauphin of Vienvois the Dukedom of Aquitaine, 10. Iuly. Rot. Vasc. 29. E. 3. m. 16. con|stituted the Prince of Wales his Lieutenant in that Dukedom, and sent him with an Army thither, where he 19. Sep.. Claus. 30. E. 3. m 3. Dorso: fought that memorable Battel at Poictiers, and took Iohn the French King Prisoner, whom he brought into England in May following.
King Iohn was lodged at the Savoy, and there continued all the Winter, and in the Spring after was removed, from thence to Hollinsh. p. 390. Windesor Castle, where he and his youngest Son spent their time in Hawking and Hunting, and to|wards Winter returned to the Savoy. And it appears, that the 12. of De|cember, Rot. Liberarae 32. E. 3. m. 1. an. 32. E. 3. He was (again setled at this House) under the Cu|stody of Roger Beauchamp, and several Knights, Esquires, and other Attendants, appointed for his Guard.
The French King had not been long in England, ere the Pope sent hither Pat. 31. E. 3. p. 2. m. 25. Talairand, Bishop of Alba (commonly called the Cardinal of Pyergort) and Ni|cholas Priest Cardinal, by the Title of St. Vital, to assist at the Treaty of Peace to be held about Midsummer, an. 31. E. 3. the Kings Letters of safe conduct for them, and their Train, consisting of 200 Horse, were dated the 3. of Iune that year. The Bishop of St. Gean de Maurienne in Savoy came also hither to the Trea|ty, having like Letters for himself, and a Train of 30 Horse, dated the 26. of May preceding; and though a final Peace was not concluded, yet several Truces were made one upon another, in hopes of it, till Midsummer an. 33. E. 3.
Before this, there had been Rot. Scot. 25. E. 3. m. 3.  Rot. Sooc. 26. E. 3. m. 3. great endeavours used for the Release of David King of Scots, the Kings Prisoner, and several addresses made to the King from King Rot. Scot. 28. E. 3. m. 6. David himself, as also the Prelates, Peers, and Commons of Scotland, second|ed by the zealous sollicitations of Hollinsh. pag: 391. Ioan his Queen, Sister to King Edward. But this affair (though often treated of) came not to an issue, till the Rot. Scot. 31. E. 3. m. 2. dorso. 3. of Octob. an. 31. E. 3. when, at a meeting of Commissioners on both sides at Berwick, namely Rot. Scot. 31. E. 3. m. 2. dorso. Iohn Arch|bishop of York, Thomas Bishop of Duresme, Gilbert Bishop of Carlisle, Henry de Percy, Rauf de Nevile, Henry le Scrope, and Thomas Musgrave deputed by King Edward on the one part, and William Bishop of St. Andrews, Thomas Bishop of Catness, Patrick Bishop of Brethin, Chancellor of Scotland, Patrick Earl of March, Robert de Irskin, and William de Levington Knights, Deputies of Robert Steward Guardian of Scot|land, the Prelates, Lords, and Commons of Scotland on the other party, it was agreed, Ibi that King David should be delivered out of Prison, and ransomed for

the sum of 100000 Marks Sterling, to be paid by 10000 Marks annually at Midsummer, the first payment to begin at Midsummer following. It was also agreed, that the Truce should be kept and observed in England, Scotland, and the Isle of Man, until the money was paid, and that Edward de Baliol, and all the Kings Allies should be comprised in the said Truce. That for payment of the said sum, King David should leave 20 Hostages (who are named in the con|ditions set down for their delivery) that King David, the Peers, Bishops, and Pre|lates of Scotland, should be obliged by writing and oath, for payment of the said Ransom, and observing the Truces: That if there were a failer of payment, they should be also obliged after the foresaid manner, to render the Body of King David within three Months after failer, of any term, and he to remain Prisoner till the sum due at the said term were paid; and for the true payment thereof 20 Hostages were to be left in England; besides which there were several other conditions agreed upon, that made up the consideration of his Release.
The Truces between England and France being expired, as aforesaid, with|out obtaining Peace, and all endeavours of others becoming ineffectual, the Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 201. two Kings themselves began to confer, and fell at length upon such terms, as it was hoped would produce a Peace; of which an account was sent into France, but the French determined rather to let their King lye in Prison, than to agree to them: upon notice of which refusal, the King resolved upon a War, and the following Winter to enter France, and either make an end of the War, or ob|tain Peace and honor at his pleasure. And having designed his Expedition, he next provided for the security of the Kingdom in his absence, and 10.  12. Febr. Rot. Claus. 34. E. 3. m. 40. dorso. issued out Writs to the Sheriffs of the several Counties, to summon both Knights and Bur|gesses to treat with his Council at London, as also with certain Bishops and Earls in other parts of the Kingdom, how that might best be done.
He next caused all the Froiss. c. 06. French Prisoners to be disposed into several safe pla|ces: and the French King having been secured in the Castle of Hereford, under the custody of Claus. 33. E. 3. m. 2; dorso. Roger de Beauchamp, was afterwards by the advice of his Council, sent to the Castle of Somerton in Lincolnshire, on Claus. 33. E. 3. m. 2; dorso. Monday the 29. of Iuly, and conducted thither by William Deyncourt, William Colvill, Iohn Kirketon, Iohn Deyn|court, and Saier de Rocheford, with a strong Guard of Horse and Foot. Neverthe|less upon the at. 34. E. 3. p. 1. m. 28.  38. first of March following, upon a spreading rumor that the French were at Sea, with a design to deliver their King from Imprisonment, command was given that King Iohn and all the French Prisoners should be removed thence to Berkhampsted, and Iohn de Buckingham Keeper of the Privy-Seal to Thomas the King's Son, Custos of England, and Ralph Spigurnell were appointed to conduct them thither. But it seems Iohn de Buckingham went not as was designed, for it appears by a 8. Mar. Ib. m 22. dorso. Writ of assistance, directed to all Mayors, c. That Thomas de Baddely was put in his room; nor afterwards was either of them employed in this Service, nor Berkhampsted, but London, the place whither King Iohn was brought, for we have met with a 14. Mar. Claus. 34. E. 3. m. 38. dorso. later Writ, whereby William de Ayremynne, Iohn de Buscy, and Thomas de Meaux were commanded to be at Somerton, on Friday the 20. of March, to bring the said King to Grantham, and the like Writs were sent to others, to conduct him from place to place, till he was brought to London, to wit, the 21. of March to Stanford, the 22. to Higham Ferrars, the 23. to Wooburn Abby, the 24. to St. Albans, and the 25. to London.
The King, having raised his Army, Froiss. lib. . cap. 205. first sent over to Calais Henry Duke of Lancaster, and himself presently followed, taking Shipping at Sandwich, in the Claus. 33. E. 3. m. 9. dorso. Dertmouth the 28. day of October, inter auroram diei  ortum solis; with him went the Prince of Wales, and his other Sons Lyonel and Edmund, and many of the Nobility, and landed that Evening at Calais, circa horam Vesperarum. This Army (then which never before departed from England, one greater or more gallant) marched through the very heart of France, and laid all wast be|fore it: for the French, not daring to encounter the King in all his March, kept themselves within their fortified Towns, and relinquished the Country to the spoil of this Army: and to the end, the Reader may observe the course of this Expedition, we will here set down from Froissard the most notable places it passed through.
From Calais (on the Hollinsh. p. 392. Froiss. l. 1. c. 209. 4. of November) he marched through the Country of Artois, by Arras, and so to Beauvois thence into Thierach, and so to Reims, to which he laid Seige for 7. weeks, but provision growing scarce thereabouts, he departed towards Chaalons in Champaigne, and thence towards Troyes, Ton|nerre, Noirs, Mont-royal and so to Avallon, Ib. c. 210: where he stayed from Ash-Wednes|day to Midlent. During this time the young Duke of Burgoigne sent some No|blemen to the King, who made a Composition with him to preserve his Country from plundering, for 3. years: after which the King dislodged his Army, and marched towards Paris, and sat down within two Leagues of it at Bourg la Reyne.
The King of Sicily was not the only Astrologer that prognosticated of King Edward's success; but one Ib. c. 211. Fryer Iohn de Rochtaylade (as Froissard calls him) whom Pope Innocent the Sixth kept Prisoner, had foretold many notable things, which about that time came to pass, among others (being demanded an account of the War) he affirmed, that all the misery that had been seen, was not like that to come, and for the wasting of France, assigned the years 1356, 1357, 1358, and 1359. which hapned right enough: for so great deso|lation and devastation was made by the Sword and Famine in those years, that when King Edward entred France an. 1359. he met with exceeding great scarcity of provision of all kinds, and in all places where he passed.
While the King lay at Bourg la Reyne, he sent his Heralds to Paris, to de|mand Battel of the Duke of Normandy (eldest Son to King Iohn, and then Regent of France) to which he would not consent; whereupon the King dis|lodged, and went to Manto le herry (where he arrived on Holinsh. pag. 393. Tuesday before Easter, being the last of March) intending to enter the Country of Beausse, and stay part of that Summer in Britagne, and about August to return, and besiege Paris: but the Pope sending into France, the Abbot of Cluygny, and Simon de Lengres, Provincial of the Friars Preachers, with Hugh de Geneve Knight, Seigneur d'Au|ton, the Duke of Normandy dispatcht them to King Edward, to propose a Treaty of Peace, who required things so great, they could not be yielded to. Howbeit they still followed the King to Chartres, where a meeting for Com|missioners, on both sides, was consented to, and they brought demands to such moderation, that, (with the Duke of Lancasters effectual perswasion) the King was content to accept of Peace. But what inclined the King to hearken there|to (as Ib. l. c. 211. Froissard tells the story) was this; That while the Commissioners on both sides were upon Treaty, and the King wholly untractable, there fell in the Kings Army so great a Tempest of Thunder, Lightning, Rain, Hail, and Stones of such bigness, that kill'd both Men and Horses; at which time the King, be|holding the Church of our Lady of Chartres, vowed devoutly to condescend to Peace. This prodigious storm hapned on Easter Munday, which falling that year on the Stow pag. 264. 14. of April, neer a Month before the conclusion of the Treaty, was from its dismal effects, called Stow pag. 264. Black Munday, which name it retains to this day.
The Treaty was managed between Rot. Cales de Negotiis communibus an. 34 E. 3. m. 6. Edward Prince of Wales, and Charles Regent of France, their Proctors and Agents, in the Rot. Cales de Negotiis communibus an. 34 E. 3. m. 6. name of both Kings, these two Rot. Franc. 34 E. 3. par unica m. 11. dors. Princes, and all the Subjects of France. Those deputed on the English part, were Sir Reginald de Cobham, Sir Bartholomew Burghersh, Sir Francis Hale, Bannerets, Sir Miles Stapleton, Sir Richard la Vache, and Sir Neel Loring, Knights, and others of the Council of the King of England. Those other on the French side were the Ellect of Beauues, his Chancellor Charles Lord Momorency, Mon|sieur Iohn le Meingre Marshal of France, Monsieur Aynart de la Tour Lord of Vivoy, Monsieur Ralph de Ravenal, Monsieur Simon de Bucy, Knights, Monsieur Stephen de Paris, and Peter de la Charite, his Councillors, with many others of his Council deputed by King Iohn and Himself.
At first a Truce was agreed on (the Rot. Cales de Nego. com. an. praed. m. 6. 7. of May, An. Dom. 1360. in the 34. year of King Edward over England) to continue till Michaelmas following, and thence till Michaelmas an. 35 E. 3. which upon the return of the King into Eng|land, was, by Writs bearing Teste the 24. of the same Month, commanded to

be published throughout all the Sea-Ports in England; and by a like Writ, no|tice was given to the Duke of Lancaster, to proclaim it in Gascoigne. And the next day (viz. 8. of May) were the Articles referring to a final Peace, agreed to on the behalf of both Kings.
This was that Famous Treaty of Renunciation, of both Kings, so much spo|ken of by Writers (to which their eldest Sons were parties) in regard the King of France renounced the Soveraignty of several Territories to King Edward; and he in like manner renounced his Title to France, and some other Places, all which we shall here briefly mention.
First it was agreed, Rot. de Tractatu Pac Francia, an. 34 E. 3. m. 10. that King Edward with what he held in Aquitaine, and Gascoigne, should hold perpetually to him and his Heirs, in the same manner as the King of France or his Son, or any of his Ancestors held the same, (to wit, that in Soveraignty, in Soveraignty, and that in Demain, in De|main) the City, Castle, and County of The Names of Towns and Countries are here written as in the Re|cord. Poytiers, with the Fees of Thoars, and Land of Belleville, the Cities and Castles of Xaintes, Agen, Pierregort, Ly|moges, Caours, Tarbe, Angolesme, and Rodeis, and the Land and Countries of Poytou, Xaintonge, on this and the furthest side of the River of Charente, with the Town and Fortress of Rochell, Agenoys, Pierreguis, Lymosyn, Caorsyn, Tarbe, Bigorre, Gaure, Angolesmoys, Rovergue, the Counties of Pierregort, Bigorre, Gaure, and Angolesmoys. And that such Earls or Lords, as had Lands within the fore|mentioned places, should do their Homages and Services to him.
That King Edward should have in Demain, all that any of his Predecessors an|ciently held in the Town of Monstrereul, on the Sea; As also all the County of Ponthieu (with some few exceptions) the Town and Castles of Calais, the Towns, Castles, and Lordships of Merk, Sangate, Coloigne, Hames, Wale, and Oye, with their appurtenances, as likewise all the places lying within the Jurisdictions and bounds following; that is to say, from Calais to the border of the River before Gravelinges, and so by the same River round about Langle, and by the River that runneth beyond the Poil, and by the same River that falleth into the great Lake of Guynes to Freton, and thence by the valley about Calculy Hill, inclo|sing that Hill, and so to the Sea, with Sangate, and all the appurtenances, that the King should have the County of Guynes, with all the Lands, Towns, For|tresses, Places, Men, Homages, Lordships, Woods, Forests, and Rights there|unto belonging, in as ample manner as the then late Earl of Guynes, or his Pre|decessors held the same; and likewise all the Isles adjoining to the Lands afore|said, and all other Isles he then held.
That the King of France, and his eldest Son the Regent, should before Mi|chaelmas 1361. give and deliver to the King of England his Heirs and Succes|sors, all the Honors, Obediences, Homages, Liegeances, Subjections, Fees, Ser|vices, Recognizances, Rights, and all manner of Jurisdictions high and low, Resorts and Saveguards, Advowsons and Patronages of Churches, and all Lordships and Soveraignties, with all the right they had and belonging to them, by any Cause, Right, Title, or Colour, or to the Crown of France, in the said Cities, Counties, Castles, Towns, Lands, Countries, Isles and Places, and of their appurtenances and appendencies, without holding any thing to them, their Heirs or Successors, or Crown of France. And also to give notice to all Arch|bishops, Bishops, and Prelates, and all Earls and other Noblemen, and Citizens, by Letters-Patent in all the said places, to yield obedience to the King of En|gland, his Heirs and Successors, in the same manner as they had obeyed the Kings and Crown of France, and thereby also to quit and absolve them of all their Homages, Fealties, Oaths, Obligations, Subjections, and Promises made to the Kings and Crown of France. And that the King of England, his Heirs, and Successors, should have and hold all the forementioned Cities, Counties, Ca|stles, Lands, Places, and Persons, perpetually and freely in their Lordship, So|veraignty, Obedience, and Subjection, as the Kings of France had or did hold them in times past, and all the Countries with their appurtenances in all Free|doms and Liberties perpetually, as Lords and Soveraigns, and as Neighbors to the King and Kingdom of France, without any acknowledgment of Soveraign,

or making any Obedience, Homage, Resort, or Subjection, Service, or Recog|nisance in time to come, to the Kings or Crowns of France, of the Places or Persons aforenamed, or any of them.
The Renunciation on the King of England's part, was as to the Name and Right to the Crown and Kingdom of France, to the Homage, Soveraignty, and Demain of the Dutchies of Normandy and Thouraine, of the Earldoms of Anjou and Maine, to the Soveraignty and Homage of the Dutchy of Britagne, and Earldom and Country of Flanders, and all other demands that King Edward made, or might make to the King of France, for what cause soever, except such things as by the said Treaty ought to be delivered to him and his Heirs.
It was also agreed, that the King of France should be brought to Calais, with|in three weeks after Midsummer following, and should pay for his Ransom three Millions of Escuts of Gold; two of which should be worth one Noble English. And that there should be paid to King Edward 600000 Escuts of Gold, within four Months, accounting from the time of the King of France's arrival at Calais, and within one year ensuing 400000 Escuts more; and from that year, every year following, 400000 Escuts, till the said three Millions were paid. And it after appears in the same Roll, that King Edward had received 400000 Escuts (part of the first 600000) the 24. of October 1360. and for payment of the other 200000, he gave time till Christmas and Lady-day following.
Furthermore, that certain of the Nobility of France (aswel of those who were made Prisoners at Poictiers as others) should remain Hostages in England for the King of France, namely, Lewis Earl of Anjou, Iohn Earl of Poictiers, both Sons to King Iohn, the Duke of Orliens his Brother, the Duke of Burbon, the Earl of Bloys, or his Brother the Earl of Alanson, or the Lord Peter of Alanson his Brother, the Earls of St. Pol, Harecourt, Pontieu, Valentynois, Brene, Vandemont and Forest, the Viscount Beaumont, the Lords of Cousy, Fienles, Preaux, St. Ve|naunt, and Garenciers, the Dauphin of Auvergne, the Lords of Hangest and Montmorency, Sir William of Craon, Sir Lewis of Harecourt, and Sir Iohn Ligny. And the Names of the Prisoners were these, Lord Philip of France, the Earls of Eu, Longuevil, Pontieu, Tankarvile, Ieigny, Sanceurre, Dampmartin, Ventadour, Salebruche, D'auceurre, and Vendosme, the Lords of Craon and Deruale, the Mar|shal Dodenham, and the Lord Daubyny.
Besides these, the King of France was obliged to deliver at Calais, within three Months after he departed thence, in further pledge for the accomplish|ment of this Treaty, four Persons of Paris, two of each of the Towns here named, to wit, St. Omer, Aras, Amyens, Beauves, Lisle, Douay, Tournay, Reyms, Chaalons, Troies, Chartres, Thoulouse, Lyons, Orliens, Compeigne, Rouen, Caen, Tours, and Bourges, and these to be of the most sufficient and best Burgesses of these Towns.
It was moreover agreed, Rot. de Tract. Pacis Fr. 34. E. 3. m. 9. That the King of France, and his Heirs Kings of France, should quit the Alliances they had with the Scots, and never give to that King, Kingdom, or Subjects, present or to come, any aid or assistance against the King of England, his Heirs or Successors, his Realm or Subjects, nor make any alliance with the Scots, in time to come, against the King and Realm of England. And the like Article was agreed to by the King of England, in refe|rence to his Alliance with the Flemmings.
There were divers other particulars agreed to, on the behalf of both Kings, and set down in this Treaty of Peace, which we (designing brevity) do omit; but these are the main and principal to our present purpose.
All things thus finished, King Edward immediately left France, and Rot. Claus. 34. E. 3. m. 30. dorso. landed at Rye the 18. of May following in the Evening, and thence the next day came to Westminster. And shortly a Writ 17. IutiRot. Franc. 34. E. 3. m. 6. issued to Sir Iohn Beauchamp then Con|stable of Dover, forthwith to arrest and fit up a sufficient number of Ships, to carry over King Iohn and his Family to Calais within the time agreed on, and whither he was conducted the Hollinshed, pag. 394. 8. of Iuly after.
The Hollinshed, pag. 394. 9. of October King Edward followed, where the foresaid Treaty, with some few alterations, was there ratified and confirmed by Oath of both Kings,

and several Instruments relating to the full accomplishment of the several Arti|cles thereof, were drawn up and sealed, with the Great Seals of both Kings; all bearing date at Calais the 24. day of October, an. Dom. 1360.
Here also were the Renunciations, on either side both Rot. de Tract. Pacis Fran. 34. E. 3 m. 8. absolute and Ibid. m. 7. condi|tional, to all the Towns, Castles, Countries, c. to the Resort and Soveraign|ty, c. comprehended in the Articles of Peace, drawn up, sworn to, and seal|ed, at the same time, but not exchanged; because the King of France was as yet in Calais, and Prisoner to King Edward, and the Towns, c. not as yet de|livered. But it was then nevertheless agreed and promised, that they should be surrendred to the special Deputies on both sides, by Midsummer following, if it might be; and the Renunciations sent at the Assumption of our Lady next en|suing, to the Church of the Augustine Fryars at Bruges, to be delivered to those Deputed to receive them. Or if they were not surrendred till Alhollantide after, then the Renunciations were to be delivered in the said Church, on St. Andrews day following, at which time and place, both Kings engaged to send thither, and cause to be delivered to the Deputies on both sides, theirs, and their eldest Sons Renunciations likewise; but if they were not accordingly mutually delivered, then not any thing agreed on was to take effect.
But it seems, things were not made ready against Midsummer, the first of the appointed times for compleating these matters, for the 15. of November following, King Edward Rot: Franc. 35. E. 3. m. 3. constituted Sir Thomas Vnedale Knight, and Thomas de Dunclent, Licenciate in the Laws, his Agents (whom he sent to Bruges) with power to make request to the King of France, for the effectual accomplishment of all things concluded on as aforesaid, and to require that He and his Son should make the Renunciations and Transports, according to all the foresaid Agreements made at Calais, and upon reception of which, he was thereby enabled to give Acquittance in King Edwards name. But there was another Instrument dated at Calais the said 24. of Oct. 1360. whereby
Rot. praed. de Tract. Pacis Franc. m. 5. King Edward was obliged to deliver up to the French King on this side Candlemas, an. 35. E. 3. the Castles and Fortresses, which he held in other parts of France, than in those, surrendred to him by the French King, viz. (as they are written in the Record.)
In Champaigne, and in Brie.
Bursant and Ioinville upon the Marn, Bourt in Champaigne, Ochie, Sye upon the Seine, the Mote de Triesreine, Brugelemens, and all other Fortresses taken in these Countries.
In Nivernois. Cornallour, Gueillons, Anlesy, Villers, and Mont Epny.
In Anceurrois, and Burgoigne. Regennes, Legny, Malecorne, and the Mote de Chauloye.
In Aurelenoys and Gastinoys. The New Castle upon Loire and Mereau au Boys, and all other Fortresses in Orlenois, in Gastinois, in Messien, in Beause, and in Wenguesin le Francois.
Within a month following, the County of Ponthieu was to be surrendred to King Edward, or else Hostages.
King Edward was also to deliver up the New Castle in Tynerois, Beaumont, le Choistif, Nogent, le Rotron, and the Ferte de Ville Nevill, and all other Fortresses in France, and in the Country of Perche, and of Chartain, and of Drouais.
And then all the County of Montsort to be surrendred to King Edward, with|in a Month after. Or otherwise Hostages.
In Berry and Bourbonoys. The Fortresses of Brisansoys, of St. Torete le Priague, also Chabries, Espunell,

Beamein, Briance Masbres, the Abbey of Diverlaks, Thos, Bruyll, Ameron, Vierson, Mausey, Bourseront, the Roche Tnay, Blotueres, Villers, Montempny, Beauuoirs, Beau, Ien, Voderon.
In Tourrayne. Lisle, Bouchart, the Roche of Fowsey, Piry, Milieres, Roulet, Piergu. Veres de Desrubay the Pleyssers Dinone, Langere, Osem, Palnau, and all other For|tresses in the party of Auvergne, of Bourbonoys, d' Amascon, of Lyon, of Berry, and of Touraine.
And within a Month after, the French King was to deliver up the Country of Angoulesmois; or Hostages.
In Normandy, Anjou, and Mayne. The Fortresses de Donefront in Passais, Neuim, Mirebel upon the Loyre, the Toures de Villers, Saintwast, the Brois Demaine, Conde upon Noire, and another Fortress thereby called Messe, Tynchebray Annillers, the new Boure, the Ferte freswel, the Roche Doryvall, the Morle Racul, the Tower of St. Christopher, Villerais Husron, Honnesfleth, Trisenay, the Vicount of Plessoys, Buret la Rouche, dire le Port, Ioulein, la Flesche, Willie, Viez, Pas|savant, Roussailes.
And within one Month, the French King was to surrender Santes, and the County of Santoigne; or Hostages.
And all the Fortresses in Pierregort, Coursin, and Agenoys.
For the surrender of all which, the King made forth Commissions to several persons, bearing date as aforesaid at Calais.
The two Kings then also made a Ibid. m. 6. League for them, their Heirs, and Succes|sors, of perpetual friendship, and alliance, to become faithful friends, to assist each other, against all persons whatsoever, except the Pope and the Emperor; and moreover made a solemn Renunciation to all Wars against each other, their Heirs, and Successors, Realms, and Subjects; to both which League and Re|nunciation, their eldest, and other Sons signed, and divers of the Nobility on both sides were sworn.
A Proclamation then also issued from King Edward, directed to Thomas Hol|land, Earl of Kent, and all other Captains of Towns, c. held for the King in France, to give notice (to all places within their Command) of this Peace and final accord made as aforesaid.
All things relating to this Peace being thus concluded, and the French Hosta|ges arrived at Calais, King Edward entertained King Iohn at a great Supper in the Castle, where the Kings Sons, the Duke of Lancaster, and other of the chief Nobility of England, served the Kings bare-headed; and when Supper was ended, both Kings took leave of each other. The Ibid. m. 3. next morning King Iohn, and his Attendants, went a foot on pilgrimage to our Lady of Bouloigne, the Prince of Wales and his Brothers accompanied him thither, where, in the Church of our Lady, they all made their Offerings, and thence went to the Abby, and having taken leave of King Iohn, they returned to Calais the next day: Soon after, King Edward, the Prince, and French Hostages took shipping for England, where they arrived on the Eve of the Feast of All-Saints.
The Peace thus setled, endured all the life of King Iohn, who took all possible care to have it entirely preserved, and himself ever after kept good correspondence with King Edward, to whom he gave all evidence of affection and love; inso|much, that about the end of the year 1363. he came into England Bakers Chro. only upon a visit to King Edward. After his landing, he rode first to Eltham, and there di|ned with the King (Hollinshed. pag. 396. 24. Ian. 37. E. 3.) and thence that afternoon to the Savoy in the Strand, where he lodged, and was entertained with all possible kindness; but about the Hollinshed. pag. 396. beginning of March following he fell sick, and dyed the 8. of

April, an. 38. E. 3. for whose death the King Ex verasto Cod. de Episc.  Priorib. Du|nelm. Ecclesiae. appointed solemn obsequies in di|vers places, and conducted his Body out of England with a Royal magnificence.
About these times, the Reputation of the King grew so great that several foreign Kings and Princes came hither to his Court, either to visit him, or con|gratulate his Victories, or to obtain his assistance and relief: and these were the foresaid King Iohn, Peter King of Cyprus, and David King of Scots, Hollinsh. loco cit. an. 37. E. 3. as also Pat 38. E. 3. p. 2. m. 37. Wuldemer King of Denmark, and Albert Duke of Bavaria, his Letters of safe Conduct being dated the Pat. 39. E. 3. p. 2. m. 7. 6. of Dec. and to continue in force till Mid-summer after.
But Charles King Iohns Son, and Successor (who had sworn to, and sealed the Treaty at Chartres) was soon perswaded to violate the Peace, though with great artifice he dissembled his intentions for some time. For though he rea|dily gave ear to the Complaints of some of the discontented Earls of Ar|maignaco and Comminges and Visc. Cor|main. Baker. Nobility of Gas|coigne, who, quitting their Homage to the Prince, fled to Paris, and complain|ed to him as their Supreme Lord of the Fouage imposed on that Country by the Prince, pretending that King Iohn had not power to release them of their Ho|mage to the Crown of France, or deliver over their Country to the King of England: Yet he forbore laying hold on this occasion, at least for one year after their complaint. But then, all of a sudden, King Edward, not suspecting any fraud, but thinking himself sufficiently secured by the Treaty of Peace made at Britagne, the French King sent him a defiance, and by the time it was thought to be delivered, Froiss. Lib. 1. cap. 247. Guy Earl of St. Paul, one of the French Hostages (who Hollinshed, pag. 401. had slipt out of the Kingdom, without taking leave, as had also the Duke of Anjou, and some others of them) and Sir Hugh de Castilion, entred Ponthieu with an Army, and were received into Abeville, afterwards took St. Valery and Crotoy, and imme|diately all Ponthieu revolted.
Hereupon the King assembled a Claus. 43. E. 3. m. 18. dorso. Parliament at Westminster, and about the Walsingham. end of May, the Lords and Commons declared, Rot. Parl. de eod. an. n. 2. That whereas the French King had broke the foresaid Peace (in not delivering the Countries, nor paying the monies agreed on there) and had usurped the Resort and Superio|rity, which ought to appertain to the King of England and his Heirs, in the Lands surrendred to him by the foresaid agreement, by summoning the Prince and some of the Nobility of the Kings Allies, to answer certain Appeals at Paris, and surprised and taken divers Castles, c. in Ponthieu and Gascoigne, and was setting forth a Fleet to invade England, contrary to his Oath and the form of the Peace; therefore with their whole consent it was agreed, That the King should resume the name of King of England and France, as he had done before the Peace, and for the future so call himself in his Letters, and under his Seals. Hereupon on Monday (being St. Barnaby's day) there were several new Seals provided, in one of which was inscribed Edwardus Rex Angliae  Franciae, c. and in another Edwardus Rex Franciae  Angliae, c.
Shortly after, he An. 43. . 3. Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 249. sent an Army under the Command of the Earls of Cam|bridge and Penbroke into Aquitain, who landing in Bretagne, past through that Country to Angoulesme, where the Prince lay with 3000 men, and entred the Country of Piergort, and over-ran it. He sent also a Letter to the Rot. Vasc. 43. E. 3. m. 2. Nobility of Gascoigne, wherein he acquainted them with the reasons why he re-assumed the Name and Title to the Kingdom of France, as he used it before the Treaty of Peace to which he condescended, not without a manifest diminution of his right.
Walsingh. sub an. 43. E. 3. Iohn, Duke of Lancaster, and several others of the English Nobility, were sent with another Army into France about Midsummer, who landed at Calais, of which the French King receiving advertisement, called back his Forces de|signed for the Sea to invade England (to meet with whom, as also to secure Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 247. Southampton, the Isle of Wight, and Garnsey, King Edward had set forth a con|siderable Fleet) and sent them under the Command of the Duke of Burgoigne, to oppose the Duke of Lancaster: but upon report of the Hollinsh. pag. 404. Earl of Warwick's coming by Sea, to the Duke of Lancaster's assistance, the French withdrew.
The following year, the Ib. cap. 275. French King raised two Armies, and sent them into Aquitaine, one under the Command of the Duke of Anjou, to enter Guyen, by

Reol and Bergerac, and the other under the Duke of Berry, to enter that Coun|try by Lymoges and Quercy, and both Armies to meet at Angoulisme, to besiege the Prince, then in those parts.
Ib. c. 277. King Edward, considering the unsetledness of these Countries, raised like|wise two Armies; That for Aquitaine was Commanded by the Duke of Lan|caster, of which we shall make further mention, when we speak of the Prince and the other designed for Picardie, by Sir Robert Knowles. In relation to which latter expedition, 6. May. Claus. 44 E. 3. m. 1. dovso. Proclamation was sent forth, That all Souldiers designed for Normandy and other parts of France, under Sir Robert's Command (being Rot. Franc. 44 E. 3. m. 14. constituted the Kings Lieutenant in those parts of France) should be at South|ampton, in the Octaves of St. Iohn Baptist following, ready fitted to take Ship|ing there with him.
Nor was the King slack in strengthning himself by Allies from abroad, and therefore 18. May. Pat. 44 E. 3. p. 1. m. 8. Sir Iohn atte Wode, and Mr. Robert de Wykford Archdeacon of Win|chester, and Doctor of Laws, were sent beyond Sea, having power to treat with Wenceslaus Duke Brabant and Lorraine, Marquess of the Empire, about fur|nishing the King with Men and Arms, to serve him in these Wars. He also secured the back Door, to wit, Scotland, by a Froiss. l. 1. c. 278. Treaty of Peace for 9. years, in which nevertheless the Scots were at liberty to serve either English or French, without breaking the Peace, and lastly 4. Aug. Pat. 44 E. 3. p. 3. m. 1. confirmed the Treaty with the Earl of Flanders and the Towns of Gaunt, Bruges, and Ipres.
Sir Robert Knowles with Holinshed p. 405. 12000. Men being landed at Calais, and resting there 7. days, forthwith took the Field, and, marching through the Country of Froiss. l. 1. c. 278. Guynes, and Fauconbridge, came to Turwin, and thence into Artois, draw|ing near Arras, and so to Vermandois, wasting the Country all the way he went. He thence marched to the City of Ib. c. 281. Noyen, and into Champaigne, and turned to Bry and so on the Holinshed. p. 405. 24. of September, to Paris; before which he stayed a day and two Nights. After this, Froiss. c. 285. (Sir Bertrand de Guesclin, having defeated a stragling party of his) he marched to Dorvel Castle in Bretagne: This Army, Walsingham sub an. 44 E. 3. so long as it submitted to their General prospered, but towards Winter, some of them growing disobedient, and slighting his Commands, became a prey to the French, whilst his policy and prudence preserved those safe who stuck to him, in his march into Bretagne.
This year the Froiss. l. 1. c. 292. but Wal|singham pla|ceth this Acti|on to an. 46. E. 3. Flemmings set upon part of the Kings Navy, under the Com|mand of Sir Guy de Bryen at la Bay in Bretagne, but he got the Victory, and took 25. of their Ships with their Captain Sir Iohn Peterson, and many other Prison|ers, whom he brought with him into England; which caused the King Ib. c. 293. to set forth a Navy against the Flemmings, but the Towns of Bruges, Ipres, and Gaunt, hearing of his preparations made such applications to the King, that they ob|tained Peace.
The Fortune of the War in Aquitaine at this time standing fair on the Eng|lish side, the following Winter the King designed Ib. c. 296. two fresh Armies to enter France, yet indeavoured before (upon the Popes request, both by Letters and Messages) to lay hold of an honourable Peace, to which end 19 Febr. Rot. Franc. 46 E. 3. m. 47. power was gi|ven, to treat thereon, to Simon Bishop of London, Guy de Bryene, Roger de Beauchamp, Bannerets, Sir Arnold Savage Knight, Iohn Appleby Dean of London, and Iohn de Branketre Treasurer of York; and the Ib. m. 48. next day he granted Let|ters of safe conduct for the Ambassadors of France to come and treat about that Affair. One of the foresaid Armies were designed for the defence of Froiss. loco cit. Aquitaine, and the other to land at Calais, whence the Duke of Lancaster and Earl of Cambridge were appointed to enter France by the Plains of Picardy. But Iohn Earl of Penbroke (Rot. Vasc. 46 E. 3. m. 4. constituted the Kings Lieutenant in Aquitaine) was ordered to go into Poictou, and, in pursuance of that design, took Sea and ar|rived at Rochell, the 22. of Iune, 1372. where he found the Froissc. 297. Spanish Fleet, who fought him two days, and at last took him Prisoner, the Ib. c. 298. Rochellers having re|fused to assist him: and in that ingagement the Ship, which carried a Ib. c. 299. great Treasure to pay the English Army, was unfortunately sunk.
The King designing also the relief of Thoars, raised an Army of 3000. Men

of Arms, and 1000. Archers, and with the Prince took Shipping at Sandwich, on Claus. 46 E. 3. m. 12. dorso. Monday the 30. of August, about nine a Clock, in a Ship called the Grace de Dieu, directions having been given for making publick Prayers in all Churches for good success in this Voyage; and so sailing towards Rochell, the Froiss. c. 305. Walsing. p. 183. Winds and Tempests kept him at Sea 9. Weeks, and when he saw he could not arrive in France by Michaelmas, being the time limitted for relief, or otherwise surren|der of the Town (he returned to England, and had the Wind at will. The consequence of this improsperous Voyage (with the miscarriage of the Earl of Penbroke) was the loss of all the Country of Poictou, Xantoigne, and Rochell.
After these misfortunes, a Treaty of Peace was again set on foot, and 8. of Ian. Rot. Franc. 46 E. 3. m. 2. Simon Bishop of London, Edmond Earl of March, Richard de Stafford, Roger de Beau|champ, Rauf de Ferrieres Bannerets, Simon de Molton Doctor of Law, and Ion de Branketre Treasurer of York, were constituted the Kings Commissioners for the management of this Affair; and Ibid. m. 5. Letters of safe conduct granted (the same day) to the Cardinal of Beauvez (and other Agents from France) who with the Cardinal of Canterbury were by the Pope commissionated to be the chief managers of this Treaty.
The Duke of Lancaster (16. Iune Class. 47  3. m  publick Prayers having been made also for his good success) arrived at Calais (in Hoirh.  408. Iuly an. 47. E. 3.) with 3000 men of Arms, and 10000 Archers, which he divided into three Battels, and marched by Land through France to Bourdeux, and there he arrived about Christmas; in which Voyage, though the French durst not fight him, and all the way avoided the hazard of a Battel, yet through the scarcity of Victuals many dyed, not to men|tion the loss of Walsingh: p. 183 30000 Horse. About the beginning of the following Summer, at the Holinsh. loco cit. Pope's instance, a Truce was made by this Duke and the Duke of Anjou, to continue till the last of August; wherein it was agreed, that in the beginning of Ibid. p. 409. September there should meet in Picardy, on the English part, the Duke of Lancaster and other Commissioners, to treat of Peace with the Duke of Anjou, and others on the French part, where also the Popes Legate should appear as Mediatour; and in pursuance thereof the Duke of Lancaster took Shipping the 8. of Iuly, an. 48 E. 3. after whose departure Walsingh. sub an. 48 E. 3. all Poictou and Aquitaine fell from their Allegiance, except Bourdeux and Bajon.
In this year the Earl of Cambridge, and the Duke of Bretagne were Rot. Franc. 48 E. 2. m. 6. consti|tuted the Kings Lieutenants in France, after which, 18 Nov. m. 7. Commands were sent forth to arrest Ships for their passage thither, to be at Dertmouth and Plimouth with all speed. But notwithstanding these preparations, yet they went not till the following Claus. 49 E. 3. m. 46. Spring, having then in their retinue many of the English Nobi|lity, and for whose good success 8. May Ibid. m. 36. dorso. publick Prayers were appointed to be made. In this Expedition the Froiss. l. 1. c. 313. Duke recovered many of his Towns; but being Walsingham sub cod. an. in|cluded in the Truce made by the Duke of Lancaster, he was thereby obliged to lay down his Arms.
For upon the mediation of the Bishops of Roan and Carpentras, the Pope's Nuncios, there had been a Rot. Franc. 49 E. 3. m. 2.  16. Treaty set on Foot at Bruges in Flanders this Year, managed chiefly by Iohn Duke of Lancaster, who, with Ibid. m. 24. Simon Bishop of Lon|don, William Earl of Salisbury, Sir Iohn Cobham, Sir Franke de Hale, Sir Arnold Savage, Mr. Iohn de Shepeye, and Mr. Simon de Molton, were 20 Feb. Ib. commissionated to carry on that Affair on King Edwards part; and by Philip Duke of Burgundy, on the behalf of his Brother Charles the French King: which though it brought not forth a compleat Peace, yet in effect it put an end to the present War, for 27. Iune Ib. m. 16. it produced a Truce, to hold for a year, viz. to the last of Iune, an. 50 E. 3. to give notice of which to the English Subjects, a Proclamation was 15. Iuly. Claus. 49. E. 3. m. 80. dorso. set forth. And 12. March Rot. Franc. 50 E. 3. m. 16.  21. a quarter of a year before its expiration, at another meeting at the same place, this Truce was inlarged to the first of April, an. 51 E. 3. and thereupon another 7. Aug. Claus. 50 E. 3. p. 1. m. 3. dorso. Vide Rot. Vasc. de eod. an. m. 8.  Rot. Franc. m. 10. Proclamation issued to make it known. But it appears that the French were gotten to Sea, Claus. 51 E. 3. m. 16. sometime before the expiration of this latter Truce, and had done much hurt upon the Sea-Coasts.
Of this design of theirs the King had timely intelligence, and therefore he

endeavoured to enlarge the Truce, to which end he 20. Febr. Rot. Franc. 51 E. 3. m. 7. empowred Iohn Bishop of Hereford, Sir Iohn de Cobham of Kent, Iohn Monteacute Bannerets, and Iohn Shepeye Doctor of the Laws, to Treat with the Earl of Salebruch, Monsieur Chatillon, and Philebert le Spoit, where the Pope's Legats were also present as Me|diators. But nothing was done thereupon; only the Holinsh. pag. 411. Legate proposed a Marriage between Richard Prince of Wales, and the Lady Mary Daughter to the French King; which begot a private meeting shortly after at Montrevile by the Sea, and there Sir Richard Dangle, Sir Richard Stan, and Sir Geoffry Chau|cer, Commissioners for King Edward, with the Lord Coucy, and other Commis|sioners for the French King, spent the time chiefly to found one anothers inten|tions, and so departed without any other effect, saving that of Proroguing the Truce to May day following.
The Rot. Franc. 51 E. 3. m. 3. 26, of April, another Commission was made for the same purpose, to Adam Bishop of St. Davids, Iohn Bishop of Hereford, William Earl of Salisbury, Robert de Ashton the Kings Chamberlain, Guichard Dangle Banneret, Aubrey de Vere, Hugh de Segrave Knights, Walter Skirlow Dean of St. Martins le Grand, and the foresaid Iohn Shepeye, which gave them power to treat and compose all differences, Wars, and contentions. They thereupon came to Calais, and the Holinshed lo|co cit. Lord Coucy, and Sir William Dormer Chancellor of France came to Montre|vile; but by reason of the suspicion the Commissioners had of each other, they could not agree of an indifferent place to meet at, and so the time limitted by the Truce spinning on, absolutely expired. And in this posture the Affairs relating to France stood (to wit in open hostility) till the Death of King Edward.
Thus we see, that from the breach of the Treaty, and Entry upon King Ed|wards Territories, to the time of his Death, he all along steered against the Tide of adverse Fortune, and what with Invasions, Revolts, and disastrous accidents (though no pitch'd Battel was fought) nothing of his great Con|quests remained to him, but only Calais, and the small Territory adjoining.
But of the strange unsuccessfulness of these subsequent years, there might be three main causes: First, the loss of so many stout and well disciplin'd Soul|diers, as, upon their disbanding after the Peace made near Chartres, joyned them|selves to the Le grand Compaignie. Companions, and marcht into Spain, Italy, and Germany (to which number may be added those who perished in the Princes expedition into Spain, of whom scarce the Knighton Hist. Angl. Script. Coll. 2629. fifth man returned) a sort of people so inur'd to War, and such as had gained so great experience therein, that the very Com|mon Souldiers among them were men of good conduct. The French King knew well enough, how much King Edwards power was weakned, through the want of those men, and that, as to such as might be raised a-new (few of them ha|ving been trained up in the former Wars) he thought he might the better deal with them, in regard that many of his own disbanded Souldiers, were still within his Kingdom, and lay ready at his service.
A second cause might be, that the King declining in years, and the Prince of Wales growing daily worse and worse of a lingering sickness, without hope of Recovery, the French King took the more heart, and began now not to fear, either them or their Fortunes, which before had proved so terrible to France. And therefore he supposed if he could make a shift but to keep his Forces on Foot, against their declining power, he might deal well enough with those who should succeed them: none of King Edwards other Sons, having given such proof of their success in martial affairs as to be feared by him, and much less was any such thing to be expected, when an Infant King was likely to succeed.
Lastly, His supplies of Money from his Subjects, who before had freely enough opened their Purses to carry on the War, began to fail him: For being tyred out, with the prosecution of it, they complained of Poverty; and thence it came, that the Forces raised to recover what was lost, were inconsiderable, in comparison of the former Royal Armies levied for his own and the Princes expeditions.
During the Minority of this King, His Wife. there were several Matches proposed for him, though none took, but the last: and first, his Father designed to marry him to the Lady Rot. Rom 12.13.  14. E. 2. m. 10. Margaret, Daughter of William Earl of Hanow, Holland, Ze|land, and Lord of Frisia; who, being in the third degree of Consanguinity, a Letter was dispatched to the Pope, dated the 10. of December, in the 12. year of his Fathers Reign, for obtaining his Dispensation, because of their nearness of blood.
Secondly, with the Lady Ibid. m. 7. Sibilla, Daughter to Robert Earl of Hanow and Zeland, Lord of Frisia, as appears from a like Letter to the Pope, dated the 2. of November in the following year.
Thirdly, with the Rot. Vasc. 17. E. 2. m. 5. n. 9. Daughter of Iames, King of Arragon, for which affair were commissionated Alexander Archbishop of Dublin, Edmund Earl of Kent, King Edward the Second's Brother, and William de Weston Canon of Lincoln, Doctor of Laws: the Commission bore Teste the 30. of March, an. 17. E. 2. It appears by the Kings Pat. 18. E. 2. p. 1. m. 19. Letters of the 16. of February following, that her name was Iolant, and King Iames her Father stiled, Claus. 18. E. 2. m. 12. dorso. Rex Aragoniae, Valenciae, Corsae, Comes Barch,  Sanctae Rom. Ecclesiae Vexillarius, Admirallus  Capitaneus Ge|neralis, to whom the King then also sent Sir Edmund Bacon, Sir Robert Thorpe, Mr. Iohn Heldesley Canon of Chester, to proceed further in this matter.
Fourthly, with the Lady Alonar, Sister to Alphonsus King of Spain, to which purpose, Pat. 18. E. 2. p. 2. m. 22. Iohn Stoner, William de Berne, Lord of Lescune, William de Weston, Canon of Lincolne, and Peter de Galicano, Canon of Roan, were impowered by a Commission dated the 6. of April an. 18. E. 2. as also to treat and conclude a marriage between the said King Alphonsus, and Elianor King Edward's Sister.
Besides these, the King of Portugal sent Ambassadors over hither, to propose a marriage between this Prince and his Daughter, to whom the King by Let|ter, dated the Claus. 19. E.  m. 9. dorso. 15. of April an. 19. E. 2. directed thus, Magnifico Principi, Domino Alfonso Dei grati Portugaliae  Algarbiae Regi illustri, amico suo charissimo, ac|quainting him with the Treaty of marriage begun, between his Son and the King of Spain's Sister, and that because of neerness of blood, he had dispatcht a Let|ter to the Pope for his Dispensation; that he had received no account as then, of the issue of that Affair; that his Son was gone into France, to do Homage for the Dukedom of Aquitaine, during all which, it was not fit for him to be|gin any new Treaty: but if that succeeded not, he would then confer with his Ambassador in this particular.
But last of all, in the following year, the Queen and Duke having left France, went to the Earl of Henault's Court, where a Contract past between him, and one of the Earls Daughters, and, not long after his Coronation, the marriage was consummate; in reference to which, R. Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, was 8. Oct. Pat. 1. E. 3. p. 3. m. 15. constituted the King's Ambassador, to contract either espou|sals or marriage in the King's Name, with Philippa that Earls Daughter, who forthwith took his Journey to Valenciens, and (the Popes Dispensation being gained) she was there married to King Edward by Proxie.
By this Lady he was Father to 7 Sons, Children: all (except two that dyed young) men of great renown in that Age; namely, Edward Prince of Wales and Guy|enne, signally famous all over Europe, and commonly called the Black Prince; William of Hatfield, Lyonell of Antwerp, Duke of Clarence and Earl of Vlster, Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster and Aquitaine, King of Castile and Leon, Ed|mund of Langley, Earl of Cambridge, and Duke of York, William of Windesor, and Thomas of Woodstock, Earl of Buckingham and Duke of Gloucester. His Daughters were five, Isabell Wife to Ingelram de Coucy, Earl of Bedford; Ioan married by Proxie to Peter, eldest Son to Alphonsus King of Castile and Leon, but died in her journey thither; Blanch died young, Mary Wife to Iohn Montford, Duke of Britagne, and Margaret Wife to Iohn de Hastings, Earl of Penbroke. Besides these, he had a natural Son named Cod. M9. Miscel. R. Glo|ver. Somerset. fol 135. Nicholas, who was Abbot of West|minster, and lies buried in Westminster, before the Altar of St. Blase.
His Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 267. Queen fell sick at Windesor Castle, and there dyed before him, viz. Walsingham, pag. 179. on the day of the Assumption of our blessed Lady, an. 43. E. 3. whose Exequies and

Interment he caused to be solemnized with great magnificence.
and Death.He himself dyed the Ib. pag. 189. 21. of June, at his Mannor of Shene in Surrey, after he had reigned 50 years 4 Months and 28 days, and lies interred on the South side of St. Edward's Chappel in Westminster Abbey, under a stately Monument, ha|ving thereon his Portraicture at full length.


SECT. III. Some account of the first 25 Knights-Companions.

(1.) Edward Prince of Wales.
THis Noble and Valiant Prince, was born at Ex Chron. Tho. de la Mare. Woodstock, the 15. of Iune, An. Dom. 1330. at ten a Clock in the Morning, in the Scheme of whose Nativity (found among the Collections of that famous Mathematician Mr. Thomas Allen of Gloucester-Hall in Oxford) the 9. degree of Virgo ascends, the 3. of Ge|mini culminates, and the Planets are thus posited.

gr.
 in 16

 in 12

 in 11

 in 1

 in 19

 in 18
 
 in 10

 in 22

 in 22

 in 19


So welcome to his Father was the News of his Birth, that he 4. Febr. Pat. 5. E. 3. p. 1. m. 33. granted to Tho. Priour who brought it 40 Marks per annum, out of his Exchequer for life, until he should setle on him Lands to that annual value. Afterwards, he 16. Apr. Pat. 10. E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. gave to Ioane de Oxenford, this Prince's Nurse, 10 l. per annum out of his Exchequer during her life, until he or his Heirs should setle that yearly value in Lands or Rents upon her. And the Ibid. next day a yearly Pension of 10 Marks out of his Exchequer also for life, on Matilda Plumpton Bersatrix, or Rocker, to this young Prince, till Lands of that value were in like manner provided for her.
Before he was three years old, the King intended to make some considerable provision for him (though he had Pat. 4. E. 3. p. 2. m. 42. Rot. Liberat. 5. E. 3. m. 8. Claus. 10. E. 3. m. 26.  12. before made him an annual allowance for the expences of his House, and several Gifts, did by his Charter dated 18. May, in the 7. year of his Reign, Cart. 7. E. 3. m. 4. grant to him by the Title of Edward his most dear and eldest Son, the County of Chester, the Castles of Chester, Beston, Rothe|lan, and Flynt, and all his Lands there, as also the Cantred and Land of Engle|field with their appurtenances, to him and his Heirs Kings of England, together with all Knights Fees, Advowsons, Liberties, Royalties, and all other things belonging to the said Country, Castles, Lands, and Cantreds, aswell in Eng|land as in Wales, and the Marches thereof, as fully and under the same condi|tions, as himself received them before he was King: And thence forward he had the Title of Earl of Chester added to his Stile.
But intending to provide yet better for him, the next day he Pat. 7. E. 3. p. 1. m. 13. gave him all the Corn, as well in Granges, as growing on the Ground, as also the Arms, Vi|ctuals, Cattel, Goods and Chattels in all the said Castles, Lands, and other places to him before granted, together with the Debts, Arrerages of Accounts, and other Services due to himself.
In the Parliament held at Westminster, an. 11 E. 3. he was created Duke of Cornwall, as appears by his Chart. 11. E. 3. n. 55. Charter of Creation, bearing date the 17. of

March the same year, and invested by the Sword only; and this is the first Pre|cedent for the Creation of the Title of Duke with us in England. Herewith also, the King setled on him divers Manors and Franchises, expresly set down in the said Charter, for the better support of the State and Honor of Duke; all which, though some lay in other Counties, were thereby made part of the Dutchy of Cornwall. And further, by Letters Patent dated the same day, he granted to him the Pat. 11. E. 3. p. 1. m. 19. Stannaries in Cornwall, together with the Coinage of Tin, and all the issues and profits thence arising; as also the profits and perquisites of the Courts of the Stannaries, except only 1000 Marks formerly granted to William Mountague Earl of Salisbury, and his Heirs, out of the Issues thereof, till Lands were provided for the said Earl, of that yearly value; and afterwards 29. Se. Pat. 17. E. 3 p. 2. m. 24. grant|ed, That all the Castles, Honors, Mannors, Lands, and Tenements, belonging to the Dukedom or Earldom of Cornwall, which were held in Dower or for term of life or years, whose Reversions belonged to the King, should remain to this Prince as Duke, still as they fell, and to the eldest Sons of him and his Heirs, as Dukes of the foresaid Dukedom.
In the Parliament held an. 17. E. 3. the King 12. May Chart. 17. E. 3. m. 24. n. 27. created him Prince of Wales, and invested him with a Coronet, a Gold Ring, and a Silver Rod: and the better to support his State as Prince of Wales, gave him several Lands, which are all particularly enumerated, in a Pat. 17. E. 3. p. 1. m. 8. Writ directed to William de Emeldon, to de|liver them unto this Prince or his Attorney, with this Dignity: The King also 20. Sept. Ex|tract. donat. 17. E. 3. m. 4. gave him all Debts and Arrears of Foreign Rents due to himself, for what cause soever, in North Wales and South Wales, to the time of his being created Prince of Wales, as also all Victuals, Arms, Horses, Oxen, Cows and other things in all the Castles and Lands which he held by the King's Grant.
He was constituted Pat. 12. E. 3. p. 2. m. 12.14. E. 3. p. 2. m. 28.16. E. 3. p. 2. m. 6.  46. E. 3. p. 2. m. 25. Custos Angliae divers times, when the King had occasion to be absent out of the Kingdom, to which the Title of Locum tenens Regis was sometimes added; and in his younger years, the King appointed the Pat. concess. hominib. Angl.  Vasc. 13. E. 3. m. 13. Arch|bishop of Canterbury to be the chief of his Council, to direct him in all Affairs; the powers belonging to this Great Officer being recorded in Rot. Pat. de an. 14. E. 3. pars 2. m. 28.
The first time this Prince entred upon the Stage of War, was at the begin|ning of his 16. year of age, at which time he accompanied his Father into France; where at his landing at Rot. Parl. 20. E. 3. n. 45. m. 4. Hoges in Normandy, he received the honor of Stows Chron. pag. 241. b. Knighthood, from that martial Kings hands. Thence he marched in the body of the Army with the King toward Cressy, at which Battel (fought an. 20. E. 3.) he led the Froiss. cap. 130. Van, and after a fierce encounter with the French, was somewhat distrest from the Enemies breaking in among his Archers, but the rest of his men timely advanced to their Assistance; nevertheless notice of his condition being sent to the King (who commanded the Reer) he asked if the Prince were dead or wounded, the Messenger said no, but stood in need of his Assistance; well said the King, Froiss. cap. 130. return, and bid them send no more to me, so long as my Son lives, for I will have him this day win his Spurs, since I design him the honor of this Expedition: and it cannot be denyed, but the compleatness of the Victory then gained, fully conferred it on him, so also did his Fathers acknowledgment; for after the Battel was ended, he embraced the Prince and kist him, and said Ibid. cap. 11. fair Son, God give you resolution to pursue Honor, you are my dear Son, and have ac|quitted your self nobly, you are worthy to govern a Kingdom.
The following year, a Truce being agreed on at Calais, was spun on by several Prorogations, but without effecting any thing of Peace, till an. 29. E. 3. in which year both Kings provided for War. Hereupon the King 10. Iuly Rot. Vasc. 29. E. 3. m. 6. constituted this Prince his Lieutenant in the Dukedom of Aquitaine and other places in France, whither he should happen to march, both for Reformation of the State of that Dukedom, and other places in France, and the recovery of his Lands and Right possest by the Rebels. And by another Commission of the same date, he Ibid. gave him power to make Alliances with all persons, of what Nation, Dignity or Condition soever, to retain men, and pay them Wages and Rewards. A third Commission Ibid. m. 4. gave him Power (in the King's stead and name) to receive

Homage and Fidelity, from the Nobility and others within this Dukedom, and the Kingdom of France.
Armed with their Powers and accompanied by the Earls of Ex Lib. Mis|cellan. R. Glo|ver, Somerset. fol. 29. Warwick, Ox|ford, Salisbury, and Suffolk, and a good Army attending him, he took Ship|ing and safely arrived in Gascoigne: for whose passage thither the King had be|fore assigned Rot. Franc. 29. E. 3. m. 12. Richard de Cortehale, and Robert de Baildon Serjeants at Arms, to arrest, array, and equip all the Ships of 20. Tun and Upwards, in all Ports and Places from the River of Thames unto Lynn, as well within Liberties as without, to furnish them with men and other necessaries, and to bring them to Southampton by St. Barniby's Day at the furthes; as also to Press Mariners for the Voyage at the Kings Wages; and had given Commission to 27 May. Ib. Thomas de Hoggeshaw Lieutenant, to Iohn de Beauchamp Admiral of the Sea Westward, to carry him over: with power to hear and determine all Crimes and Transgres|sions committed on Shipboard, and to punish them according to Maritine Law, and to do all other things appertaining to the Office of Admiral.
Having entred the River Froissard c. 155. See the Names of all the places they marched through in Stows Chron. 256. c. Garronne, he marcht into the South-part of Lan|guedock, and burnt the Great Town of Carcassone, scituate near the Mediterra|nean Sea, thence passed to Narbon, burning and wasting the Country; after which, he returned to encounter the French Forces which marcht out of Tolouse, under the Command of the Marshall Cleremont, and Earl of Armaignac; but upon his approach they retyred, and so in November after 8. Weeks he returned to Bourdeaux with great store of Pillage and Prisoners.
A more particular account of which Voyage, with the Towns and Castles taken and destroyed, and several other actions done after the Prince's Return to Bourdeaux, to the 21. of Ianuary following, are reported in Sir Iohn Wing|field's Letters, Printed in Ib. p. 384.385. Hollinshead's Chronicle.
Intelligence of the Prince's taking the Field the An. 30. E. 3. Froiss. c. 157. following Summer, being brought to King Iohn, he resolved to fight him, for now the Prince (with about Hollinsh. p. 387. 8000. Men) had entred the Country of Berry, as far as Issoudun, Bourges, Vi|erzon, and Froissard c. 158. Remorentin, which two last Towns and their Castles the Prince took by Assault: and passing into Ib. c. 159. Anjou, and Touraine, (having wasted all the Country where he past) intended to return for Bourdeaux.
But after this long and wearisom Voyage, drawing near to Poicters, he was informed, that the Ibid. c. 62. French Army was not far from him, (and here the Cardinal of Poicters used means to have brought both sides to some com|position, but the French being high in their demands, his endeavours took no effect.) The Prince thereupon fitted himself for fight, and the Battels joining (in the Fields of Ib. c. 64. Beau|uoir and Mal|pertuse two Leagues from Poictiers. Ho|linsh. Beaumont and Malperteus) after some space, they broke the Van of the French Army, when the main Body, led by the Duke of Normandy coming on, and finding the other routed, fell into disorder also. This incoura|ged the Prince to fall in upon the Rear led by the King, at whose approach, the main Body of the French Army left the Field, as their Leader himself did, with Charles, Lewis, and Iohn, the Kings Sons, the Earls of Poicters and Tourayne. King Iohn behaved himself very valiantly, and maintained the fight for some time, but was at length taken Prisoner by Froiss. c. 64. Sir Denys Morbeck a Knight of Arthois (to whom the Prince gave afterwards Ibid. c. 169. 2000. Nobles to support his Estate) whilst the chace continued to the Gates of Poictiers, and a compleat Victory obtained, the particulars whereof are related by Froissard.
The French Kings Army consisted of Hollinshed Chron. p. 389. 60000. fighting men, whereof there were above 3000. Knights. The Prince had but Hollinshed Chron. p. 389. 8000. whereof 3000. were Archers, though Froissard in one place saith 6000. in another 4000.
The names of some of the Prisoners of Note, and those that were slain, are mentioned by In Hist. Angl. Script. Coll. 2613.  2614. Vide Stow p. 263.  Ho|linsh, loc cit. Knighton: in a word, the Flower of France fell here, and so ma|ny Noblemen were there slain, or made Prisoners, that there were but few left to manage the Affairs of France; the Souldiers had Froiss c. 166. twice as many Prisoners as themselves were in number, nay divers of them 4. or 5. Prisoners a piece, all which they put to ransom in the Field, upon promise to return before Christ|mas with their Ransoms to Bourdeaux. The spoil was exceeding rich, so were

also the Arms they took, and whatsoever the Booty was, it remained to him that took it. The Ibid. c. 169. Prince bought of the Gascoigners for ready money those of the French Nobility, whom they had taken: And of these, namely Philip Son to King Iohn, the Earl of Sanceir, and the Lord Craon, he sold to the King 22. Oct. Pat. 33. E. 3. p. 3. m. 14. after|wards for 20000 l.
This Battel was sought the Rot. de Tract. Pacis Franc. 34. E. 3. m. 9. vide Claus. 36. E. 3. m. 3. dorso. 19. day of September, an. Dom. 1356. it beginning in the Morning and ending at Noon; but it was night e're they returned from the Chase.
When it was ended, the Prince (who saith Froissard, was therein couragious and cruel as a Lyon, and took great delight in the Fight and Chase) command|ed his Standard to be pitched on a high Bush, as a signal to the dispersed Forces to retire to him thither; and then sent out the Earl of Warwick, and Sir Rey|nold Cobham, to make enquiry after the French King, who in a short time brought him Prisoner to the Prince. The Froiss. c. 168. Prince entertained this Noble Pri|soner at a Supper, at which himself, with all respect, served him; nor could be prevailed upon to sit down at the Table.
The next day the Prince dislodged his Army, and marched through Poicton, Santonge, and at Blaye passed the River Garronne, and so to Bordeaux, where in one part of the Abby of St. Andrew he lodged his Royal Prisoner, and in the other himself; and upon the News of this great Victory and Success, the King appointed 10. Octob. Claus. 30. E. 3. m. 3. dors. publick thanks to be given to God throughout England.
In Hollish pag. 39. April following, the Prince took shipping for England, and brought along with him the French King (and divers other Prisoners of quality) the Walsingh. pag. 164. 5. of May he arrived at Plymouth, for whose reception there, Iohn Dabernoun Sheriff of Devonshire, was 20. March Pat. 31. E. 3. m. 3. dorso. commanded to make provision of Victuals, and Carriages. and Horses, and attend him in all parts through that County. The Walsingh. lco cit. 24. of May, the Prince, in a stately Cavalcade, rode through London, his Royal Priso|ner by his side, on a White Courser, and himself on a Black Hobby, and so proceeded to Hollinsh. loco cit. Westminster Hall, where he presented King Iohn to his Father, and from whence King Iohn was conducted to his Lodging; but within a short time, the Savoy was furnished for his entertainment.
After some few years, the King (an. 33. E. 3.) preparing for another Expe|dition into France, this Froiss. c. 207. Prince went along with him (so also his three Bre|thren) and commanded the Rear of that Army, which making its way through the Bowels of France, at Bretigny, neer Chartres, a Peace was concluded, in which this Prince (and some other of the Kings Council) on the Kings part, having treated with the French Lords, on the part of the Dauphin of Viennois Governor of France, brought all controversies, touching that Realm. to a happy composure. The King (desirous to proceed to the effect and accomplish|ment of that Treaty) gave him another Rot. Cales de Negorii com|munibus 34. E. 3. m. 6. Commission, with authority to treat further upon any thing that concerned or was comprised therein, either in ge|neral or special; to demand and receive the Hostages, Money, Castles, Cities, and Fortresses, and what ever else was to be delivered to the King, by virtue thereof; with a general Clause, to add and supply the power granted, if any solemn or substantial thing should be omitted, through much business or other|wise, or were expedient or advantagious, as to the premises.
After the confirmation of this Peace, and King Edward in possession of a con|siderable part of the Territories, both of his own inheritance, or invested in him by the said Peace (which he was to enjoy without resort or Soveraignty to the Crown of France) The Nobility of these Provinces desiring to be gover|ned by a Prince of their own, rather than by the Kings Lieutenants as before; they addressed themselves to the King, to confer the Government thereof on this Prince, and send him thither, where he had so great Possessions and Revenues to maintain his State and Dignity. Hereupon the King 19. Iuly Rot. Vasc. 36. E. 3. m. 16. Created him Prince of Guyenne, and gave him Guyenne and Gascoigne by the name of a Principality du|ring his life: and also granted to him those other Countries, Towns, and Castles near adjoyning (delivered into the Kings possession, by vertue of the foresaid Treaty) together with the Government of them also, retaining nevertheless the

Resort and Soveraignty over all, thereby given and granted to himself.
This done, he forthwith prepared for his Voyage thither, taking along with him his Froiss. c. 216. Lady the Princess, with whom, being arrived at Rochel, they were both joyfully received. Thence he went to Poicters, whither the Ibid. c. 217. Barons and Knights of Poictou and Santonge repaired, doing him Fealty and Homage; then he departed for Bordeaux, thither the Nobility and Knights of Gascoigne came to wait on him: after which he setled English Officers in all places of his Principa|lity, and there kept his Court with great state and magnificence.
Immediately after the Election of Pope Vrban the Fifth, Ibid. Peter of Lusignan King of Cyprus and Ierusalem, came to Avignon, and there engaged Iohn King of France in a Crusade; he thence went to the Emperor at Prague, and after|wards into Flanders and England, whence after he had been nobly entertained, he returned to King Iohn then at Amiens, and Ibid. c. 218. thinking he had not yet seen any thing, till he had seen the Prince of Wales, took a Journey to Poicters, and so to Augoulesme, where the Prince held a Royal Justs of 40 Knights, and as ma|ny Esquires, in honor of the birth of his Son Edward; and here the King of Cyprus was received with great honor, and nobly feasted while he stayed.
Not long after, this Noble Prince was induced to re-establish Ibid. cap. 231. Don Peter King of Castile, who had 39. E. 3. Hol|linsb. Chron. p. 397. made a personal application to him in so great distress, be|ing driven out of his Kingdom by his Bastard Brother Henry, with the assistance of some part of the late disbanded Army, called the late Comers, or Companions, under the command of Sir Bertrand de Guesclin, and some English and Bretagn Forces that went along with them, commanded by Sir Eustace Dabrichecourt, and other Knights: Hereupon the Prince first sent his Letters to remand them back, and after (which strengthened his undertaking) Froiss. c. 233. he received aid from the King his Father, commanded by Iohn of Gaunt his Brother.
Iames Son of Ferdinand, King of Mojorca (whom the King of Aragon had im|prisoned at Barcelona, and there put to death) made also address to the Prince for assistance in the recovery of his Realm; which the Prince promised after his return out of Spain (whither he was then engaged) and towards which he be|gan his Voyage the Ibid. c. 234. Sunday after Epiphany, an. Dom. 1366.
Upon his Ibid. c. 237. entry into Castile (with 30000 Horse and Foot) Don Henry prepa|red to give him Battel with 86000, the Armies joined between Ibid. c. 238. Navarr and Naveret, on Saturday the 3. of April, Walsingh pag. 176. an. 40. E. 3. and here the Prince got a Vi|ctory, which re-established Don Pedro in his Kingdom: Froiss. c. 239. thereupon Don Pedro went to Sevill, Ibid. c. 245. and promised to return the Prince money to pay his Army, but after four Months stay and expectation, the Prince was constrained to return into Aquitane without any; so forgetful was Don Pedro of the courtesies he had received from him. This Victory got the Prince great renown throughout the Empire, and the repute of being the valiantest Prince in that Age, even worthy to govern all the World; but in this Voyage he contracted a sickness he never recovered, which his Physicians and Surgeons judged to be an incurable Dropsie; others, that he was poysoned.
In an Instrument dated about this time, to wit 8. October 1366. (whereby he granted to his Brother Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, the Village and Castel|laine of Roche sur Ion, to him and his Heirs males) I find him thus stiled: Cod. MS. in Offic. Ducat. Lancastr. sub titulo de parti|bus transinari|nis. Ed|ward ainsne filz du Roy de France  d' Engleterre, Prince d' Aquitaine  de Gales, Duke de Cornwall, Conte de Cestre, Seigneur de Biscaie,  de Castre de Dordiales, but after he had resigned the Principality of Aquitaine, his Titles were these only, Ex alio Cod. MS. sub Tit. Com. Cestr. cap. 24. Edwardus Regis Angliae  Franciae primogenitus Princeps Walliae, Dux Cor|nubiae,  Comes Cestriae 6. Feb. 49. E. 3. so an. 47. E. 3. vide Lib. Miscell. R. Glo|ver Somerset, p. 111.
Some time after his return into Aquitaine, the discontented Gascoigners and French (taking occasion to rebel upon raising a Subsidy, called Froiss: c. 141. Fouage, for 5 years, consented to by most of his Subjects, viz. the Poictouins, and they of Xan|ctonge Limosin, Rouergue, and Rochell, but other parts of Guine refused) entred (in a hostile manner) the Princes Territories, whereupon Sir Hugh Caurel coming out of Aragon to the Prince, was made Captain of the Companions, whom he

had sent for out of Normandy, and ordered to Ibid. c. 249. march with them into the Country of the Earl of Armaignac, and the Lord d' Albret (two of the great Ring-Leaders of the Rebellion new begun) to wast those parts. He also had sent before a body Commanded Ibid. c. 245. by Sir Iohn Chandos to Montauban, and a third under the Command of the Ibid. c. 250. Earl of Cambridge, and Penbroke, into Peri|gort, and which took Bourdeilles after 11. Weeks Siege.
After this, the Prince Ibid. c. 277. receiving Intelligence that two Armies under the con|duct of the Dukes of Anjou and Berry, were design'd to enter Aquitaine, and besiege him in Angoulesme, resolved his Enemies should not find him there; and therefore summond in the Nobility, and appointed a Rendevouz at Cog|nac, leaving his Princess at Angoulesme, but taking his young Son Richard with him.
The King of England (having upon this great rupture of the Peace conclu|ded at Bretigny, resumed his Name and Title to the Crown of France) 19. Iun. Rot. Vasc. 43. E. 3. m. 3. sent forthwith to the Prince, to give him notice that the Parliament at Westminster had Ordained, that all his Subjects of what Nation or condition soever, should maintain his Interest against his Enemies in the Realm of France, to recover and conquer the same. And likewise directed his Letters to the Ibid. m. 2. Nobility of Gascoigne, desiring their assistance herein. The year following, he sent over Iohn Duke of Lancaster his third Son, to the assistance of this Prince, and gave him 1. Iuly Rot. Vasc. 44. E. 3. m. 5. Commission to receive into favour, and wholly pardon, such of his Cities, Castles, Towns, and Inhabitants, aswell in Aquitaine as other parts of France, as should return to his Obedience, and to do and exercise all powers given in his said Commission, with the consent of the Prince, if present, and in his ab|sence, what the King could do in his assistance, if personally there. And that care might be taken in Civil Affairs, the King (having reserved to himself the Soveraignty and resort in those Territories) sent a blank 10. Iune pre|ceding Ibid. Commission for the Prince to insert the names of such as he should think fit to appoint for Judges or Delegate, to hear all Causes as well Criminal as Civil, upon Appeals from the Princes Courts.
Froiss. c. 279. The Duke of Lancaster shortly after arrived at Bordeaux, and came to the Prince at Cognac, but the Duke of Anjou thought better to withdraw his Forces into Garrisons, than to fall into action. The Duke of Berry took Ibid. c. 280. Limoges, which the Prince c. 283, 284 retaking, put the Inhabitants to the Sword, and burnt the Town. But the Prince's disease growing daily upon him, he was Ibid. c. 287. advised by his Phy|sicians and Chirurgeons, to return into England, for the recovery of his health, which caused him to assemble the Nobility of Aquitaine, Gascoigne, Poictou, and Santonge, at Bordeux, to whom he communicated his intentions, and withal that he would leave the Duke of Lancaster in Chief Command behind him, to whom they did fealty and Homage in the Princes presence, and kist his mouth. The Affairs of these Countries being thus Ordered, the Prince and Princess, their young Son Richard, the Earls of Cambridge, and Penbroke, took Shipping for England, and arrived at Walsingh. sub an. 44. E. 3. pag. 181. Plimouth about the beginning of Ianuary, whence they rode to the King at Windesor, where after some stay he took his leave and retired to his own House, and about two years after Rot. Vasc. 461. E. 3. m. 2. surrendred the Dignity of Prince of Guynne, and his whole right therein, to his Father King Edward.
While he was yet in Minority, Of his Wife and Children. there were several matches designed for him, as first, being but a year old, 15. Iuly Pa. 5. E. 3. par. 2. m. 28. a Commission was given to Iohn Darcy, and William Trussell Knights, to treat and agree with Philip King of France, or his Deputies, upon espousals and Matrimony between this young Prince and King Philips Daughter; but the quarrel breaking out afterwards with that King, there was no further progress made in his Affair.
The next proposal was for Margaret, one of the Daughters of Iohn Duke of Brabant and Lorraine, to which purpose a 12. May Rot. Alman. 12. E. 3. p. 1. m. 17. Commission was made out to Henry Bishop of Lincoln, and William de Bohun Earl of Northampton, to trea with the said Duke or his Deputies upon this matter, and for which, in regard they were both within the third Degree of Consanguinity, the Popes Dispensations was

several times endeavoured to be obtained by Rot. Rom. 14. E. 3. m. 2.  18. E. 3. m. 2.  19. E. 3. m. 3.  4. Letters sent from the King; but he could not be induced to do any thing therein.
Another match was proposed with a Daughter of the King of Portugal, and thereupon the King 8. Nov. Pat. 19. E. 3. part 3. m. 11. Commissionated Mr. Andrew Offord, Richard de Soham, and Philip de Barton, to treat of a Marriage, not only between the Prince, but any other of his Sons, and any one of the Daughters of the said King; That also taking no effect, there was 6. Iuly. Pat. 21. E. 3. part 2. m. 13. another Commission issued to Robert de Stratton Canon of Chichester, and Richard de Soham, to treat with the said King con|cerning a marriage between the Prince and his Daughter Leonora.
But none of these which were of others providing took effect, but at length Walsingham p. 171. an. 35. E. 3. he married with a Lady of his own choice, namely Ioan Coun|tels of Kent, Sister and Heir to Iohn Plantagenet Earl of Kent, and the Relict of Sir Thomas Holland (one of the first Founders of this most Noble Order) com|monly called (for her Excellent Beauty) the fair Maid of Kent. And because the Prince had married her, notwithstanding nearness of Kindred between them, and of his Christning her eldest Son, it was thought requisite to have a Papal Absolution from Excommunication, and Dispensation for Marriage; 7. Id. Sept. Ex Lib. in Of|fic. Princip. Cantuar. vo|cat. Islip. fol. 177. b.  178. a. both which were obtained from Pope Innocent the Sixth, in the 9. year of his Popedom.
By her he had two Sons, namely Edward the Eldest, born at Angoulesme, in Holinsh. pag. 397. a. Feb. 1365. (In Collect suo. Leland saith 1364.) who dyed in Gascoigne, at 7. years of Age; and Richard the second Son born at Bordeaux, on Twelfth-Day being Wednesday, at three a Clock in the Afternoon, Walsingh. p. 175. 1366. and had three Kings to his Godfa|thers, viz. Ex Chron. W. Thorn, Hist. Angl. Script. Coll. 2142. of Spain, Navarre, and Portugal.
Besides these he had two Natural Sons, Bakers Chro. p. 143. Iohn Sounder, and Sir Roger de Claren|don, to the latter of these he gave by his Will a Silk Bed, with all thereunto belonging; This Roger was after made one of the Knights of the Chamber to King Richard the Second, to whom the said King Claus. 14. R. 2. m. 13. the first of October, 13. R. 2. gave for life 100 l. per annum, out of the Issues of his Subsidies in the Coun|ties of Bristol, Gloucester, Somerset, Dorset, and Cornwall.
His Death.His Disease contracted in Spain grown now uncurable, and he drawing near to his end, made his Will in the Kings great Chamber at Westminster, the Lib. in Of|fic. princi|pal. Cantu|a. vocat. Sud|bury f. 90. b. 7. of Iune, an. 50. E. 3. and disposed of his Body to be buried in the Cathedral Church of the Trinity in Canterbury. And such was his care of those who had done him service, that he charged his Son Richard by his Will, Lib. in Of|fic. princi|pal. Cantu|a. vocat. Sud|bury f. 90. b. to continue the pay|ment of those Pensions which he had given them. The Executors nominated therein were his Lib. in Of|fic. princi|pal. Cantu|a. vocat. Sud|bury f. 90. b. Brother of Spain the Duke of Lancaster, William Bishop of Winchester, Iohn Bishop of Bath, William Bishop of St. Asaph, Robert de Walsham his Confessor, Hugh de Segrave Steward of his Lands, Aleyn de Stokes, and Iohn de Fordham.
The next day after his Will was made (being Walsingh. p. 186. Trinity Sunday) this Noble Prince (the Flower of Chevalry and delight of the English Nation) departed the World; his body being imbalmed, was wrapt in Lead and kept till Michaelmas (the Parliament being then to meet) to be interred with greater Solemnity, which was performed at Canterbury, near the Shrine of Thomas Becket, over whose Grave a stately Monument was erected for him, which yet remains undefaced.


(3) Henry Earl of Lancaster.
THE second Stall on the Soveraign's side, was assigned to Henry then Earl of Lancaster and Derby, Son to Henry Earl of Lancaster (Brother and Heir of Thomas Earl of Lancaster Beheaded at Pontefract, on Pat. 16. E. 2. part. 1. m. 25. Monday before our Lady-Day, an. 15. E. 2.) and Maude Daughter and Heir to Sir Patrick Cadurces (or Chaworth) Knight, Lord of Kidwelly and Ogmore in Wales.
The first considerable Military Honor conferred on him, was that of 7. April Rot. Scot. 10. E. 3. m. 28. Comman|der in Chief of all the King's Forces sent into Scotland an. 10. E. 3. for the Ibid. m. 30. Truce with the Scots having been upon the request both of the Pope and King of France, and earnest sollicitation of their Ambassadors, several times prorogued, between the 23. of Nov. an. 9. E. 3. and the Sunday next after Ascension day following, it then expired; before which, the King had intelligence of their confederacies abroad, and great preparations for War, and being engaged to assist and defend Edward Baliol King of Scots, who had done him Homage for that Kingdom, he thereupon raised an Army for that purpose, and gave this noble Knight com|mand thereof, by the name of Henry de Lancaster only, though I find him in Claus. 11. E. 3. p. 1. m. 22. another place relative to this employment; called Henry de Lancastre Banneret. And by another Commission he 10. Apr. Rot. Scot. 10. E. 3. m. 28. gave him power to receive to Faith and Peace, the Scots or their adherents, and to grant them pardon.
Shortly after, 4. May Rot. Scot. 10. E. 3. m. 26. he a Tho. Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, Henry de Bellomont Earl of Bogham, and William de Bohun had Commission given them, to treat with Sir Andrew Murrese a Scotch Knight, about a Truce between the King and his Subjects in Scotland, and the said Sir Andrew and other the Scots, to hold till Midsummer following.
Towards the latter end of this year, Rot. Scot. 10. E. 3. m. 3. David Bruys (then in France) had ob|tained that Kings assistance, and gotten together a great Navy, with which he did much mischief to the Merchants about the Isle of Wight; besides, he had entred the Isles of Gerusey and Iarsey, and killed divers of the Inhabitants. The King therefore 11. Dec. Ib. gave Commission to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and others, of whom this Henry was one (himself being then at Botheuill in Scotland, so bu|sied in the War, that he could not be at the meeting appointed) to treat on his behalf, with certain Prelates and others, whom he had commanded to meet at London, on Wednesday after Newyears day following, upon the defence and safety of the Kingdom, repulsion of the Enemies, and other things relating to the State of the King and Kingdom; as also seriously and fully to acquaint them with the King's intensions, to ordain and do all things referring thereunto, and to his honor, as if he were there personally present.
The following year he was 16. Mar. Chart. 11. . 3. created Earl of Derby, and invested by girding him with the Sword, his Father yet living; by the Charter of his Creation did the King grant to him and his Heirs, an Annuity of Honor of 20 l. out of the Farm of the County of Derby; and to the end he might better maintain the State of an Earl, he also 18. Mar. P 11. E. 3. p. 1. m. 27. granted him an annual Pension of 1000 Marks during his Fathers life, out of the Customs in London, St. Butolphs, and Kingston upon Hull, until the King should provide for him 1000 Marks per annum in Lands or Rents; and in case the issues of the said Customs fell short of that annual sum, then was it provided, that it should be made up out of the Exchequer, and for more surety out of the Custody of his Wards.
The Pat. 11. E. 3. p. 3. m. 26. third of October following, the King granted to him the Manor of Wygh|ton and Hundred of Northgreneho, with their appurtenances, in the County of Norfolk, as also the Mannor of Laghton in Morthynges, with its appurtenances, in the County of York, which Ralph Earl of Eu had lately held, and were then seised into the Kings hands, to hold also during the life of his Father, at the annual value of 72 l. 7. s. 6 d. q. (at which rate they were extended) in part of satisfaction of the said annual Pension of 1000 Marks.
But the Letters Patents of the 18. of March, were resigned up to be cancel|led the 24. of October an. 13. E. 3. and the King thereupon, by other Letters Pa|tent, dated the Pat. 13. E. 3. p. 2. m. 20. 20. of September preceding, granted him (during his said Fathers life) all the Issues of the small Customs in London, for the payment of 891 Marks 5 s. 9 d. q. above the extent of the Mannors and Hundred aforesaid (both which sums made up the foresaid annual Pension of 1000 Marks) and in case the small Customs fell short of 891 Marks 5 s. 9 d. q. then, what they wanted was to be paid him out of the great Customs of the said City; but if they exceeded that sum, then the surplusage to be paid into the Exchequer: which Lands and Pen|sion out of the small Customs, reverting to the King upon the death of this Earls

Father, were 26 Sept. Rot. Pat. 19. E. 3. p. 2. m. 12. then granted to the Queen, for the support and maintenance of her Children, until the King should otherwise provide for them.
In the 11. year of King Edward the Third, the King having sent over the Bishop of Lincolne, and others, into Flanders to make Alliances for him with Flemings, the Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 30. French King had laid a Garrison in the Isle of Cagaunt, with de|sign to take these Commissioners in their return home; but they having no|tice thereof, and the friendship and assistance of Iacques Dartuel, took their way to Dort in Holland, and so escaped that snare. And the King resolving to clear that Island of this Garrison, designed for this Service the Earl of Derby, who raised part of his men in Staffordshire, a Country where he was exceeding|ly beloved, in which his Father had then great Possessions, that after his death descended to him, and of which for the better conservation of the Peace there, the King made him high Extract. Do|nat. 19. E. 3. m. 3. Sheriff during lif These men, levied by the King's Writ, he was 28. Iune Rot. Vasc. 11. E. 3. m. 23. commanded to have in readiness with hself at London, on the Feast of St. Margaret the Virgin next ensuing.
At the Froiss. c. 31. arrival of the English in the Haven, they found the Town of Cagaunt well garrison'd, and therein divers stout Commanders chosen by the Earl of Flanders for its defence, well arm'd, and ready to forbid their Landing, so that with great difficulty and some loss they got ashore; and here our Earl pressing on, and fighting for his passage, was struck down to the ground, but relieved by the Lord Manny.
In fine, the Town (on Hollish Chron. p. 354. Sunday before the Feast of St. Martin) was taken by the English, and above 3000 Flemmings slain; after which, they plundered and burnt it, and brought their Prisoners to their Ships, among whom was Sir Guy the Bastard of Flanders, who after made Fealty to the King, and sided with him in the War.
The Rot. Alman. 13. E. 3. m. 16. Dorso. 16. of February an. 13. E. 3. he was put in Commission with others, to array men in the County of Leicester, against the Invasion of Enemies; and the Pat. Concess. hminib. Angl.  Vasc. 13. E. 3. m. 17. 3. of Iuly after made one of the 8 Commissioners to treat with Philip de Valois, upon all Controversies between the King and him: and also one of the H. Bishop of Linc. H. Earl of Derb. W. Earl of Salisb. W. de Exon.  Alex. de Oneby. 5 Com|missioners constituted the second of Ianuary following, to treat with the said Philip, as also with the Cardinals of St. Praxide, and St. Mary in Aquiro upon the same Affair.
The Rot. Alman. 14. E. 3. m. 29. Dorso. 6. of March an. 14. E. 3. he had Commission given him, to raise men in the Counties of Derby, Leicester, Staffordshire, and Lancashire, to pass over Sea with the King or himself, at the Kings next Voyage beyond Sea.
This Earl attended the King in his first Expedition into France, and had Froiss. cap. 41. Command in the Battel ready pitcht to fight the French neer Vyronfoss, as also at the Ibid. cap. 50. Battel of Sluce an. 14. E. 3. and the Rot. Alman. 14. E. 3. m. 8. 10. of August the same year, command issued to Robert de Morley, Admiral of the Fleet from the Thames towards the North, to send forth 10 Ships to Orewell, to take in his Troops of Horse, that were to pass over into Flanders after him.
In the 27 Iuly Pat. 15. E. 3. p. 2. . 29. following year He, and Henry de Percy, Ralph de Nevil, and Robert de Dalton had Commission given them to treat with the Bishops, Earls, and all other persons, as well Ecclesiastick as Secular, in the Northern parts, touching the de|fence of the Kingdom against the Scots; and to sollicite them, who had Lands in those parts, to dwell there, or otherwise to assign other persons there to remain in their stead.
He was again made the Kings 7. Oct. Rot. Scot. 15. E. 3. m. 4. Lieutenant in the North parts of England and in Scotland, as also General of the Army sent against the Scots, who had invaded England; having power given him to defend the Marches, to march into Scot|land, to create Stewards, Constables, Marshals, and other Officers necessary for the Government of the Army, and Ibid. m. 5. three days after had a Commission given him, and power to treat and agree with the Scots about a Cessation of Arms, to ad|mit such of them as were willing, to the Kings Peace, to receive their Fealty, to grant them pardon, and restore their Lands.
The Rot. Scot. 16. E. 3. m. 14. 3. of April in the following year, he and R. Bishop of Durham, Hen. Earl of Derby, Ralph de Ne|vil, Iohn de Strivelin, Will. de Careswell Governor of Berwick, Walt. de Creyk, Rob. de Mavers. 6 other, whereof he was to be one, were commissionated to treat with David Brus, and other Scotchmen

his Adherents upon a final Peace or Truce, as also upon all debates and differences whatsoever between the King and them, and amicably to compose them. And the same day he had power likewise given him to grant to Rot. Scot. 16. E. 3. m. 14. Adam Bishop of Brechin, to Patrick Earl of March, Sir William de Douglas, and Sir Thomas de Caruato, Knights, and William Bullock, and other Scotch Men, as he should see cause, the the King's special Letters of safe Conduct and Protection for so long time, as this Earl thought fit, to come into England, with as many Horse as he should appoint, to treat either of a Truce or Peace with this Earl, and others deputed thereto by the King.
Having in this expedition undertaken upon certain conditions, the Custody of the Marches of Scotland, the King 10 Octob. Extract. do|nat. 16. E. 3. m 10. gave him in reward, the 1000. Marks which Io. de Wesenham stood engaged to pay the King for Wooll.
He went over with the King in his Voyage into Rot. Franc. 16. E. 3. m. 20.  23. Claus. de eod. an. p. 2. m. 31. Bretagne, having under his Command 5. Bannerets, 50. Knights, 144. Esquires, and 200. Archers on Horse|back. The daily Wages allowed him for himself was 8 s. for each Banneret 4 s. each Knight 2 s. each Esquire 1 s. and each Archer 6 d. At the Siege of Vannes he was Hollinshed Chron. pag. 3.264. constituted one of the Kings Commissioners (the other being the Earls of Northampton, and Salisbury, the Lord Stafford, Burghershe, Cantelowe, Cobham, Manneys, and Berkley, and Mr. Iohn Vfford Archdeacon of Ely) where a Truce was concluded for three years.
The Rot. Vasc. 18. E. 3. m. 9. 24. of March, an. 18. E. 3. The King by his Letters Patent constitu|ted this Noble Earl, and Richard Earl of Arundel, his Lieutenants in the Duke|dom of Aquitaine, and the Countries adjoining, to govern and defend those Ter|ritories, to demand and receive the possession of the Castles, Places, and Rights, unjustly detained from him, to recover and retain the same by force of Arms, if need should be, and to receive such as should return to their Obedience, to the grace and favour of the King, as also the Homage and Fidelity from whom|soever in those parts due; and generally to do all things for defence and reco|very of the Kings Rights, and good Government of those Countries and his Sub|jects, with Command to the Archbishops, c. to yield Obedience to them.
And whereas the King upon false suggestions, had been deceived in many of his Grants and Donations in that Dukedom; He by other Ibid. Letters Patents of the same date, gave him power to seize into his hands all the Castles, Lands, Liberties, and Profits, formerly granted by him, and those that should appear to have been obtained upon untrue suggestions, to retain without Restitution, but upon true, to restore entirely. A like Ibid. Commission was given them which ex|tended to the grants made by his Father King Edward the Second, upon like pretences, as well as by himself.
They also had a General Commission Ibid. to treat and conclude with all persons of whatsoever state or condition, Kingdom or Nation, for the setling of Alliances, and mutual Assistance between the King and them, to retain men for the Kings Service, and to agree about Fees, Wages, and Rewards to be paid unto them.
By other Ibid. Commissions of the same date, these two Earls had power to treat and conclude with Alphonsus King of Castile, (there stiled Alphonsus Rex Castiliae,  Legionis, Toleti, Galiciae, Siviliae, Cordubiae, Murciae, Gyennii,  Algarbiae,  Comes Molmae) or his Deputies upon all differences arising between their Subjects, especially Mariners, and amicably to compose them, as also of a perpetual League of Friendship between them, c. their Subjects, and to af|ford each other their mutual assistance, with Power to make Substitutes in their stead.
The said Earls had like Ibid. Commissions, with the same Power, to treat with the King of Portugal, therein stiled, Alphonsus Rex Portugaliae  Algarbiae. And with the King of Aragon, stiled therein, Petrus Rex Aragoniae, Valenciae, Majorcae, Sardinii,  Corsicae, Comes Barthon.
Sir Cap. 102. Iohn Froissard tells us, that some of the Gascoigne Lords came hither about this time, to acquaint the King, with the weak condition of that Country and City of Bordeaux, and to desire relief, and that in this Earls company went also the Earls

of Penbroke and Oxford, the Lord Stafford, Sir Walter Manney, the Lord Frank de la Hall, and divers others of note, being about 500 Knights and Esquires, and 2000 Archers, and having landed at Bayon the 6. of Iune 18. E. 3. 1344. went thence to Bordeaux.
His first attempt was upon the Froiss. c. 103. Town of Bergerac, which surrendred to him, and next Ibid. c. 104. Longo Castle and le Lake, Mandurant he took by assault, so also the Castle of Mountgyse, Punache, and the Castle de la Lewe, Forsathe, and Pondayre, he won with little opposition, and the great Town of Beaumont in Layllois. Hol|linsh. Laylloyes after three days, the chief Town appertaining to the Earl of Laylle (who lived as King in those parts of Gascoigne) was delivered to him after some dispute.
After this success he marched to Froiss. c. 105. Bonu, this he assaulted and took, he also took the Castle of Auberoche, and the Town of Libourne yielded themselves to him. Auberoche being presently after besieged by 12000 French, this Earl on St. Laurence Eve assaulted the Enemy in their Tents with 300 Spears and 600 Archers, and took the Earl of Laylle, and 8 other Earls and Viscounts, and 200 Knights, and so many Esquires, and other Soldiers, that each Englishman had 2 or 3 Prisoners, many of whom they let go upon their paroll to return to Bergerac or to Bordeaux on a certain day, and others they carried with them to Bourdeaux; and by this valiant Exploit having relieved the Castle, he after|wards disposed of his Army into Winter Quarters, and returned into England.
Upon these great successes, the King 1. May Rot. Vasc. 19. E. 3. m. 6.  Rot. Fr. E. 3. m. 6. made him his sole Lieutenant and Cap|tain in the Dutchy of Aquitaine, and the parts adjacent, with power to do and execute all things that belonged to that Command: and gave command to all Archbishops, Earls, Barons, Viscounts, Castellans, and other persons throughout that Dukedom, and adjacent Countries, to yield obedience to him as the Kings Lieutenant.
Ibid. Five days before, the King gave him Commission with power to treat and conclude with all persons of whatsoever state or condition, Kingdom or Nation, for setling firm alliances and mutual assistance between the King and them, as also to retain men for the King's Service, and to agree about their Fees, Wages, and other Rewards.
The Claus. 19. E. 3. p. 1. m. 12. 11 of Iune following, Command was sent to the Sheriff of London, that forasmuch as the Earl had shipt most of his Horse at Southampton, and was rea|dy to depart, to make proclamation, that all the men at Arms, Archers, and others who were to go with him, should march to Southampton with all possi|ble speed.
Froiss. c. 108. Immediately after his arrival in Gascoigne he took the Field, and laid Siege to Bosyll which surrendred to him. The Castle of Rochemyllone being well for|tified, he took by assault, and slew all but those that fled into the Church: the next day he laid Siege to the Town of Mountsegur, and battered it with great Engines for 15 days together, and at length it was Ibid. c. 109. yielded to him upon Com|position. After this the strong Castle of c. 108. Aguillon was yielded up to him, and then he laid Siege to c. 109. Reole, which surrendred on mercy, but the Castle stood out 11 weeks, and then also c. 111. surrendred.
After his taking of Reole, he marched to c. 112. Mountpesance Castle which he took by Storm, and then he sat down before Mauleon, and took it by the stratagem of an Ambush: He took also the Ville Franche in Agenois, with its Castle by as|sault, after which he marched through the Country, and took many other Towns and Castles, with little difficulty.
At the end of three days Siege c. 113. Myremont yielded to him, and some of his Forces took Tonneins. Thomynes on the River Garonne, and the strong Castle Damasan. Last of all c. 114. Augoulesme yielded to him after a Months Siege, and thence he re|tired to his Winter Quarter at Bordeaux.
This Winter the Duke of Normandy entred c. 118. Gascoigne, with 100000 men, and shortly after Christmas took the Field; in this Expedition he regained se|veral places from the English, and sat down before Aiguillon; but after the 20. E. 3. Bat|tel at Cressy, being sent for back by the French King, he was constrained to raise his Siege.
Froiss. c. 136 Shortly after the retreat of the Duke of Normandy, this Earl (the King ha|ving sent to the 6. May Claus. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 11. dorso. vide Rot. Franc. 20. E. 3. p. 2. m. 2. Prior of the Order of the Friers Preachers in London, to offer up Prayers, that God would please to protect and defend him, and give his For|ces Victory over his Enemies) with 1200 men at Arms, 2000 Archers, and 3000 Foot passed the River Garonne towards Xantonge and took Myrembeau. Myrabel by Storm, as also the Town and Castle of Aunay Hol|lish. Alaay, and Sargeres and Benon. He likewise took Mortagne on the Sea side in Poictou by assault, and burnt Lusignen, and took the Town and Castle of Taillebourge; at length he lay Siege to St. Iean d' Angely, which surrendred to him upon Conditions, after which he took Maxinent by assault, and won the Hollinsh. pag. 375. Town of Monstrevil Bonnin; he thence marched to Poicters, and that he took by Assault, where 700 of the Inhabitants were slain, and some Churches spoiled, and more had been, but that this pious Earl commanded the contrary on pain of death: Nevertheless they plundred the Town, and left it desolate, and here the Soldiers got so great Wealth, that nothing was of value but Gold, Silver, and Feathers for the Troops. From hence he returned to St. Iean d' Angely, and thence to Bordeaux, and in this Expedition, he gained so great esteem, that he was reported to be the Noblest Prince that ever rode on Horseback.
Having behaved himself so gallantly and faithfully in prosecuting and recover|ing of the King's right in these parts, the first of Febr. an. 21. E. 3. the King sent for him, back to be near unto himself for the future, upon all occasions, and to direct and assist in his Martial and other Affairs, whereupon he returned into England, and because King Edward understood: that the French King was ma|king great preparations to draw down to Calais about Whitsontide, he 14. May Rot. Fr. 21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 10. enjoyned him speedily to repair to his assistance, in reference to whose passage, 19. May Ibid. m. 6. Command was sent to Io. de Montgomery Admiral of the Fleet Westward, to provide Ships in readiness at Sandwich and Dover, for the Transportation of the Army he had raised, with all speed; and immediately upon his coming thither, and conside|ration had of his victorious Successes and good Services, done the King in the Dukedom of Aquitain and parts adjoining, the King Primo Iunii Rot. fact. apd Calais 21. E. 3. m. 13. granted to him and his Heir Males by Charter, the Castle, Town, and Place of Brageriac (in Diocess. Pe|tragoriensis) with the whole Castellany and all Iurisdiction high and low, Royal Authority, absolute and mixt, as also the Coinage of Money there. To which he afterward added a 14. Mar. Rot. Vasc. 23. E. 3. m. 8. grant of the Examination of the Assay, with both the Criminal and Civil punishment of all Offenders for coyning Money.
And because this Town and Castle stood upon the Frontiers of the Enemy, the King 17. Iunii Rot. Caley 21. E. 3. m. 16. granted, that during the War, there should remain in that Garrison 100 men of Arms, and 200 Foot at the King's pay, subject nevertheless to the Com|mand of the Steward of Gascoigne, to be drawn out upon occasion by him, leav|ing sufficient strength to defend the same.
This Earl having taken divers Prisoners at the Town of St. Iohn d' Angely, and reduced it to the obedience of the King, he therefore 3. Oct. Ibid. m. 4. granted to him all the Lands, Tenements, Vines, and other Goods of those Prisoners, until their Ransoms were fully paid. And a 8. Oct. Ibid. m. 1. little after granted unto him and his Heirs for ever, the Houses, Lands, c. of Bernard Barram Burgess of that Town, to hold by the Service, of rendring to the King and his Heirs one Rose annually at Midsummer.
Moreover, on the 10. of November following, he had further Extract. Do|nat. 21. E. 3. m. 10. granted the Ca|stle of Horston with the appurtenances in the County of Derby, and 40 l. per an. out of the Farm of the Town of Derby, to him and his Heirs Males, then the same to revert to the King and his Heirs. All these Grants were made to him upon the account of his good and grateful services formerly performed.
Upon the Froiss. c. 144. French King's coming towards Calais (in Iuly before) with design to relieve it, the King appointed him to keep Newland bridge, for by securing that passage, the French could not pass on that side, unless through the Marches, which were not to be attempted without danger. Ibid. c. 145. His order in keeping this place was much commended by the four French Commissioners, who passed

by it when they came from their King to King Edward, to demand a place to fight in.
At this time the Hollinsh. pag. 377. Pope having sent two Cardinals to the King, they obtained his condescention to treat with King Philip, whose Commissioners were the Dukes of Burgoigne and Burbone, the Lord Lewis de Savoy, and the Lord Iohn of Henalt, otherwise called Lord Beaumont; and on King Edwards part were the Noble Earls of Derby and Northampton, the Lords Cobham and Mannie: but three days being spent without coming to any conclusion, the Treaty broke up, and the Cardinal Mediators departed.
5. Sept. Rot. Franc. 22. E. 3. m. 11. dorso. He was after made choice of by the King, and Ralph Earl of Eu and Guynes, Constable of France by the French King, to agree upon a Truce, in hopes of a Peace to hold for 6. Weeks, throughout Picardy, Normandy, Artois, Boulogne, and Flanders, to commence the 13. of the same September.
The Rot. Franc. 22. E. 3. m. 1. Vide Claus. 22. E. 3. p. 2. m. 8. dorso. 25. day of September following, he was constituted the Kings Lieutenant, as well in the parts of Flanders and Calais, as elsewhere in the Kingdom of France, and therein power was given him to treat and agree with any of the Kings Adver|saries, or their Adherents, or other persons whatsoever. And after, by a particu|lar 11. Oct. Ibid. m. 4. Commission, he and William Bishop of Norwich, the Earls of Suffolk and Huntington and others, were impowred to Treat and agree with the Earl of Flanders and his Allies, touching any difference between the King and them; and it seems their Endeavours took so good effect, that an Agreement was made with that Earl the Ib. m. 3. dorso. 10. of December following: whereupon he was sent to Denemere, and there received the said Earls Fealty and Homage.
As to his transactions relating to France, 18. Nov. Rot. Franc. 23. E. 3. m. 10. dorso. He with the Bishop of Norwich, the Earl of Suffolk, and Sir Walter Many agreed to the Prorogation of the Truce from the 18. of November, to the first of September following.
Upon the Death of his Father, which fell out Pat. de eod. an p. 2. m. 12  Escaet 20. E. 3. an. 19. E. 3. he succeeded him in the Titles of the Earldoms of Lancaster and Leicester; and, for that a great part of the Lands, sometimes the Earl of Lincolns, were come to his pos|session, the King 20 Aug. Chart. 23. E. 3. m. 3. Created him also Earl of Lincoln. He had by his Charter of Creation granted unto him the Creation annuity of 20 l. to be paid him by the Sheriff of Lincolnshire for the time being, in lieu of the third penny of that County for ever, as Thomas late Earl of Lincoln his Uncle had, to enjoy whilst he lived.
About 8. days after, the King renued his Commission for being his Rot. Vasc. 23. E. 3. m. 3. Captain and Lieutenant in Aquitain, and the parts adjacent, with all Powers requisite for the better Government of those Dominions, Pat. 23. E. 3. part 2. m. 6.  7. whether he shortly after pass'd. And by other Letters Patent he Ibid. 18. Oct. constituted him his Captain and Lieutenant in Poicters, with full power to exercise all things which appertained to that Command.
But for further increase of Honor, the King 6. Mar. Pat. 25. E. 3. part 1. m. 18. Created him Duke of Lan|caster, and granted, that during life he should have within that Country his Chan|cellor and Iustice, as well to the Pleas of the Crown as other Pleas whatsoever, to be held according to Law, and the Executions of them; and likewise all other Liberties and Royal Jurisdiction to a County Palatine appertaining, as freely and wholly as the Earl of Chester was known to enjoy in the County of Chester; the tenths and fifteenths, and all other payments granted by the Clergy or Ca|nons, and pardons for life and members to the King, excepted.
The Rt. Franc. 25. E. 3. m. 15. 8. of March ensuing, he was constituted Admiral of the Fleet from the mouth of the River Thames Westward, and two days after the King Assigned him several Lieutenants; namely, Reginald de Ferers on the River Thames and Medway, Robert Ledred Serjeant at Arms within the Cinque-Ports, Philip de Wetton, and Walter de Harewell Serjeants at Arms in the Port of Seford, and in every part and place thence by the Sea-Coast to Fowy, Richard Lengles in the Port of Fowy, and thence to Bristol, and there, and in the Port of Chepstow, and River of Severn, and Ralph de Lullebrock in all places and Ports, from Chepstow to Che|ster, and there; and in all Parts and Maritine places in Wales.
Upon a Rumor that the French had provided an Army and Navy to invade England, among the Maritine Counties on the South of England, Hants, Wilts,

Somerset, and Dorset, were 14 In. Rot. Franc. 20. E. 3. m . committed to this Duke to secure and to resist the Enemy. So also was the I Maritine parts of Lancashire. And because the King had occasion to raise men for Land Service, he  gave him Commission to array 300. Archers within that Dutchy, before the Quindena of the Holy Tri|nity then next following, to be ready to march in the Kings Service.
The Scots also designing to invade England the following year, this Duke had 0. Oct. R. Scot. 27. . . m 1. Commission to array all able men in Lancashire, between the Age of 1 and 60 to march against them, in case they should presume to enter the King|dom. The like Rt. St. 9.  3. m 13. Commission was given him the 26. of February an. 29. . 3.
The R. 1. an. 29.  3. m . 14. of September an. 29. E. 3. this noble Duke was constituted Lieutenant for the King, and Iohn Duke of Bretagne, then under age. And by other Iid. Letters Patent of the same date, Command was given to Sir Thomas Holland, the Kings late Lieutenant, to deliver up to him all the Castles, Forts, Cities, Towns, and other Places, Lands, Tenements, and Rents in the said Dukedom under his custo|dy, with all the Corn, Victuals, Money, and Issues of the said Dukedom, as also all Victuals, Engines, Arms, and other Ammunition in the said Castles, c. which belonged to the King in Bretagne. The Ibid. 30. E. 3. m 1. 8. of August, an. 30. E. 6. he was by the Kings Letters Patent constituted Lieutenant and Captain in the Dukedom of Bre|tagne and parts adjacent, for the good Government thereof, both for the King and the said Iohn de Montford Duke of Bretagne then under age, and in the King's custody, from Michaelmas following for one year.
Cap. 170. Froissard saith, this Duke was in Normandy, and with him the Lord Philip of Navarre, and the Lord Godfrey of Harecourt, carrying on the War in that Country, under the Title of the King of Navar, at such time as the Prince was foraging of Berry, and used all endeavour to have joined his Forces with the Prince at Poicters; but the passages being so well kept on the River Loire, he could not pass, and having heard that the Prince had got the Victory there, he returned into England.
In Hollis pag. 385. this Voyage, being 4000 strong, they marched to Lisieux, to Orbe, to Ponteau, and relieved that Castle, besieged above two Months; but the Enemy hearing of the approach of the English, raised their Siege in such hast, that they left behind them their Ensigns and Artillery.
This Duke then marched to Breteuil which he relieved, next to Verneuil in Perche, took both Castle and Town, and burnt a great part of it. Upon the information of which, the French King raised a mighty Army, with design to fight him, but he withdrawing to Laigle, and the King being come within two Leagues of it, found the Forest so thick and hazardous, that he thought it not safe to pass further; and in his return took from the Navarrois the Castles of Tilliers and Breteuil, and so marched forward towards the Prince, then harrasing Berry.
About the iss c. 175. middle of May an. 31. E. 3. he took the Field in Bretagne with 1000 men at Arms and 500 Archers, and laid Siege to Rennes, Honsh. Chon. p. 291. which though well defended, was at length surrendred; and the Rot. Franc. 31. E. 3. m. 10. 25. of Iuly his Commission of Lieutenancy, both for the King and Duke of Bretagne, was renued for another year, to commence at Michaelmas following; but the Rot. Franc. 32. E. 3. m. 8. 8. of August before the expiration thereof, Sir Robert Herle and Iohn de Buckenham Clerk, were ap|pointed to succeed him, being jointly and severally constituted Captains and Lieutenants both to the King and Duke for the following year, from Michaelmas then next ensuing. Ibid. At that time Tho. Douvedale was the Dukes Lieutenant in that Dukedom, to whom command was given, dated the Ibid. 5. of August preced|ing, to deliver up all things in his custody there, and belonging to the King, to such as the King had appointed to receive them; in like manner as they were formerly delivered up to the Earl by Sir Thomas Holland, late Captain there.
In the Expedition made by the King into France, in the 33. year of his Reign, this Duke Hllish. pag. 392. was sent before to Calais, with 400 Spears and 2000 Archers, where being arrived, he took with him those Lords of the Empire, and other Com|manders, who there waited the Kings coming to Calais, and marched to St. Omars, Cambray, and other places; wasting all the Country as he passed, until he heard of the arrival of the King, and then returned to Calais.
This Voyage with the King into France, was the last Martial Employment this Great Duke undertook; and as he had manifested to the World, the wis|dom and valour of a great Commander, and succeeded happily in Martial Af|fairs, so was he no Enemy to Peace, but as ready to lay hold of it on fair and honorable terms, as he was forward to draw his Sword in defence of the Kings honor and right: And this was most evident at the Treaty of Bretagne neer Chartres, where Froiss. c. 211. though the King was very unwilling to accept of a Peace, up|on terms offered by the French, yet moved by the perswasive Arguments of this worthy Duke, he condescended thereunto. It was also upon his Ibid. c. 213. motion, both to the King and King Iohn of France, that the Truce made at Rennes be|tween Charles de Bloys, and the Earl of Montfort, which was to expire the first of May, was enlarged to Midsummer following, in hopes of a final Peace to be by that time made between them.
His Wife.He married Brooke in Lancaster. Isabel Daughter of Henry Lord Beaumont, Cousin-german to Queen Isabel, Wife to King Edward the Second, and by her had two Daughters and Heirs; Mand his eldest Daughter, was Wife Claus. 21. E. 3. p. 2. m. 6. first to Ralph, Son of Ralph Earl of Stafford, and next to Esc. 35. E. 3. n. 122. William Duke of Bavaria, Earl of Henault, Holand, and Zeland, Lord of Frisland, stiled also Earl of Pat. de eod. an. p. 3. m. 19. Leicester; and Blanch the youngest, to Iohn of Gaunt created Duke of Lancaster, an. 36. E. 3.
His Lib. in Offic. principal. Can|tuar. vocat. Islip. fol. 172. Will was made in his Castle at Leicester the 15. of March 1360. in which he is stiled Duke of Lancaster,His Death. Earl of Derby, Lincolne, and Leicester, Steward of England, Lord of Bergerac and Beaufort: and by which he appoints his Body to be interred in the Collegiate Church of our Lady at Leicester, where his Fa|ther was buried.
He dyed within few days after, viz. on Esc. 35. E. 3. n. 122. Tuesday next before Easter an. 35. E. 3. and was buried at Leicester, according to the appointment of his Will.


(4.) Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick.
THis noble Earl was eldest Son to Guy Earl of Warwick, and Alice Sister and Rot. Fin. 3. E. 2. m. 7. Heir of Robert Toney. He was born in Rot. Ioh. Rows. Warwick Castle, and had to his Godfathers Rot. Ioh. Rows. Thomas Earl of Lancaster, Henry his Brother, and Thomas de Wa|rington Prior of Kenilworth.
On Claus. 3. E. 3. m. 35. New-years day, in the second year of King Edward the Third, he was made Knight, though then within age; and the Claus. 3. E. 3. m. 35. 20. of February following, ha|ving made his Homage, had Livery of his Fathers Lands. In the fifth year of the same King, the Government of the Isles of Pat. 5. E. 3. p. 2. m. 2. Gernsey, Sark, and Aureney was conferred on him. About two years after, he attended Claus. 7. E. 3. m. 16. dorso. King Edward the Third, in that famous and successful Expedition against the Scots; and in Hollinsh. Chron p. 351 a. Christmas Holy-days, an. 8. E. 3. he and the Earl of Oxford were sent with Edward King of Scots, to secure Carlisle, and defend the West Marches of England: who, with some Forces raised in Lancashire, Westmerland, and Cumberland, entred Scotland about Twelvetide, wasted Gallaway, and returned to Carlisle. He attended the King again into Scotland, Rot. Scot. 9. E. 3. m. 27. an. 9. E. 3. when King Edward, by Carlisle, and Ed|ward King of Scots, from Berwick, entred again that Kingdom: after which he was one of those Noblemen to whose trust the King committed the Walsing. pag. 118. Guar|dianship of the Marches. The following year Hollinsh. pag. 352. he and other of the Nobility of England, entred Scotland about Whitsontide, and passed as far as St. Iohns Town, which they fortified; and in this Kingdom he Rot. Scot. 10. E. 3. m. 27. remained all the year.
About the beginning of Hollinsh. pag. 353. Sept. an. 11. E. 3. he again entred Scotland with an Army by Berwick, whilst the Lords Wake and Clifford entred by Carlisle; and within two days both their Forces united, whereupon they wasted Tividale, Moseteidale, and Nidesdale, whilst Anthony Lord Lucy wasted Gallaway; but not being able to prosecute their Voyage, by reason of the great Rains, they returned within twelve days to Carlisle: and so much to the satisfaction of the King did he behave himself in this Expedition, that the Pat. 11. E. 3. m. 9. 19. of March follow|ing, he made Letters obligatory to him for Pat. 11. E. 3. m. 9. 500 Marks as a gift, to be paid him at Michaelmas following.
When the King undertook his first Expedition into France, an. 13. E. 3. (by the way of Flanders) he likewise attended him thither, and had Froiss lib. 1. cap. 41. Command of a Wing in the field pitch'd between Vyronsos and Flamengery, in which, among others were the Earl of Penbroke, the Lords Berkley, and Moulton.
He went over with the Rot. Alman. 14. E. 3. m 25. King into Flanders, when by the way, that memora|ble Naval fight hapned before Sluce, where the King obtained a signal Victory against the French: and was Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 63. one of the Commissioners nominated at the Treaty agreed on at the Siege of Tournay, to be sent to Arras, in order to a further Treaty; where after 15 days debate, nothing was agreed on, but the Surren|der of the County of Poictou (seized on by the French King the preceding year) and a prolongation of the Truce for two years.
An. 16. E. 3. he was one of the Rot. Franc. 16. E. 3. m. 39. Commissioners nominated to treat with the Kings Allies in Brabant and Flanders, about his designed Expedition into France: in which, he after attended the King with Claus. 16. E. 3. p. 2. m. 32. 80 men at Arms, 1 Banneret, 18 Knights, 60 Esquires, and 100 Archers on Horse-back; for whose passage a Writ issued to 30. Aug. Rot. Franc. 16. E. 3. m. 30 dorso. Iohn de Montgomery, Admiral of the Fleet Westward to pro|vide Ships. At Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 95. Nantes in Bretagne (to which the King had laid Siege) he be|haved himself so gallantly upon a Sally made by the Town, that they were for|ced to retreat with great loss.
Not long after his return into England, he marcht into Tho. Walsing. pag. 150. Scotland, with Henry of Lancaster Earl of Derby, to raise the Siege laid against Louhmaban Castle, whereof the Earl of Northampton was Governor; and when he came back, was imployed with 19. Aug. Rot. Franc. 17. E. 3. m. 12. the said Earl of Derby, and some others to the Pope, to treat about King Edwards right to the Crown of France, which produced nothing but an enlargement of the Truce. The following year he was constituted 10. Feb. Pat. 18. E. 3. p. 1. m. 18. Marshall of England during pleasure.
In that great Expedition Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 121. first designed for Gascoigne, an. 20. E. 3. he was made Admiral of the Fleet; but the Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 121. King altering his course upon the advice of Sir Godfry de Harecourt, took into his own Ship the Admirals Colours, and sail|ed towards Normandy. Where landing at Hoges, this Earl made the first attempt with podig. Neustr. p. 118. n. 30. one Esquire and six Archers, against 100 Normans, whereof 60 were slain upon the place, and, by this valiant action, made way for the Kings Army to land. Upon this he was constituted one of the Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 122. Marshals of the Kings Army, and Sir Godfry de Harecourt the other. And upon the Kings advance to Cressy, he was one of the Ibid. c. 128. Commanders under the Prince of Wales, who led the Van of his Army in that famous battel. He attended the King at the Siege of Calais, with MS. 3 Bannerets, 61 Knights, 160 Esquires, 154 Archers on Horse|back: and upon its surrender, Froiss. c. 128. he with the Earl of Stafford and Sir Walter Manny had the Keys of the Town delivered them by the King, and were ap|pointed to take possession of it for him. And for his great services in this Voy|age into France, the King 15. Dec. Pat. 21. E. 3. p. 3. m. 13. gave him 1366 l. 11. s. 8 d. and after assigned him Pat. 22. E. 3. p. 2. m. 5. 1000 Marks per annum for life, out of the Customs of London, Lynn, and St. Botolphs; and these, partly in recompence for his great services, and partly for wages due for attendance on his person with 100 men at Arms, according to certain Indentures of Covenants made betwixt them. He was also in that Stow p. 230. Na|val fight against the Spanish Fleet near Winchelsey quarto Calendas Septembris, an. 24. E. 3. where the English Walsing. pag. 160. took 26 of their best Ships, the rest fled or were sunk.
King Edward having received intelligence, that the French King threatned an Invasion, this Earl was constituted Admiral of the Sea, from the River Thames, Westward, and 23. Feb. Rot. Franc. 26. E. 3. m. 13. Philip de Witton made his Lieutenant. The same year he was Ibid. m. 5. constituted one of the Commissioners assigned for the Arraying all able men, as well Knights and Esquires, as others within the Counties of Warwick, Leicester, and Worcester, for defence of the Realm.
The Prince being constituted the King's Lieutenant in Aquitaine, he Rot. Vasc. 29. E. 3. m. 7. attended him thither: and there Ibid. 30. E. 3. m. 4. staid with him that year, and the year Ibid. 31. E. 3. m. 16. after. And that the Town of Vattes in Bretagne might be made defensible, he had Rot. Franc. 32. E. 3. m. 13. com|mand to take care of the fortifying it, and to furnish the Magazin with stores.
In the Battel at Poictiers, the Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 162. French King and his eldest Son encountred the Battel of the English Marshals, led by the Earls of Warwick and Suffolk: And after the Victory, the Prince sent this Ibid. c. 164. Earl and Sir Reignold Cobham, to dis|cover what was become of the French King, who after some time espied a Com|pany of Souldiers together, and riding towards them, found the French King on foot in great danger, between the English and Gascoigners (for they had taken him from Sir Denis Morbeck, to whom the King first yielded himself, and in to|ken thereof had given him his right Gauntlet) there being above 10 Knights and Esquires among them, who challenged him for their Prisoner; but this Earl entring the throng, commanded the Souldiers to fall back, and brought King Iohn to the Prince.
In this Battel, the Earl himself took William de Melleun Archbishop of Seinz Prisoner (for whose Ransom he after received Pat. 37. E. 3. p. 1. m. 25. 8000 l.) and therein beha|ved himself most valiantly, and got great renown; having fought so long, that his MS. in Bibl. Bdl. [Can|tar.] K. 84.123. hand was galled with the management of his Sword and Poleax.
This Earl was in the Rot. Vasc. 31. E. 3. m. 16. Gascoigne War, an. 31. E. 3. he also attended the King in his Expedition into France, an. 33. E. 3. And after the Peace was agreed upon at Bretigny near Chartres, and the King returned to England, he gave this Earl the Hollinsh. pag. 394. Command of all the Forces he left behind him in Guyenne, or any other place on that side the Sea.
Froiss. lib. . cap. 207. An. 36. E. 3. he marched in the Retinue of Rot. Franc. 36. E. 3. m. 5. Iohn Duke of Bretagne: The fol|lowing year he attended the Ibid. 37. E. 3. m. 4. Prince of Wales into Gascoigne, and had an allow|ance of Liberate 37. E. 3. m. 3. 452 l. in recompence of his expences and loss sustained, by stay of himself and Men at Arms at Southampton. After he had been a while in Gas|coigne he began his Autogr. pene Rob. Com. Ay|lesbur. Travels into other Countries, having a Train of 300 Horse, consisting of Knights, Esquires, Archers, and Servants. In this Journey he spent Hist. MS. Ioh. Rows, pag. 253. 3 years, having made great proof of his Valour in the East Countries against the Pagans; and in his return for England, brought along with him the King of Lituania's Son, to whom, being Hist. MS. Ioh. Rows, pag. 253. christened in London, this Earl was Godfather, and named him Thomas.
His Commission for 16. Oct. Pat. 40. E. 3. p. 2. m. 16. Marshal of England was renewed to him an. 40. E. 3. and the following year Rot. Scot. 41. E. 3. m. 5. he and the Bishop of Durham, and some others, were im|powered to supervise the Marches of Scotland, and to treat with David de Bruys about the rupture of the Truce formerly made at Berwick, and several injuries done by the Scots.
His Wife and Children. He married Dudgales Antiq. of War|wick shire, pag. 319. a. Katherine, one of the Daughters of Roger Mortimer Earl of March, who dyed some few weeks before him. He had by her these Ib. 321. a. Children; Guy his eldest Son, who died in France; Thomas, who succeeded him in his Earl|dom; Ib. 321. a. Reynburn; William Lord Bergaveny; and Roger. His Daughters were Maud, the Wife of Roger Lord Clifford; Philippa, of Hugh Earl of Stafford; Alice, of Iohn Beauchamp of Hach; Ioane, of Ralph Lord Basset of Drayton; Isabel of Iohn Lord Strange of Blackmere; Margaret, of Guy de Montfort; Agnes, of Cokesey; Iulian, and Katherine.
His Death.This noble Earls last action was in the Isle of Caux, an. 43. E. 3. for Walsingh. p. 178. n. 20. passing over to Calais in assistance of the Duke of Lancaster (as is mentioned) the French having intelligence of his coming, presently withdrew in great confusion from Chalke-hill where they had pitcht their Tents, and upon his arrival, under|standing that the English had only faced the French, and not fought them, he could not forbear to condemn their slackness, and out of a high sence and indignation thereof, said, I will go on and fight, before the English bread which we have eaten be digested; and forthwith past into the Isle of Caux in Normandy, which he entred with Fire and Sword: but returning to Calais, he fell sick of the Pestilence (then vulgarly called the Third Mortality) and died on the Esc. 43. E. 3. p. 1. n. 19. 13. of November. His Body was brought over into England, and interred in the middle of the Choire of the Collegiate Church at Warwick; the Sculp of whose Monument is to be seen in the Pag. 318. Antiquities of Warwickshire.



(5) Piers Capitow de la Bouch.
We are yet to seek who this person was, notwithstanding there hath wanted no pains in the search. That his name was Peter is most evident from the Inscription under his Plate, yet remaining in Windesor Chappel, in these very Syllables, Le Ca|pitow de la Bouch Monsieur Piers: But whether Peter de Greilly Viscount Benanges, mentioned in the following Pedigree be the same person is some question.
For first, in all those Records, where he is remembred, the Title of Capitow de la Bouch is not given him.
Secondly, we cannot trace him beyond the 22. year of the Reign of King Edward the Third; and the Order of the Garter was not Instituted till the following year.
Thirdly, Iohn his Son is called Capitan de Bouh, Rot. Vasc. . E. 3. m. 24. an. 5. E. 3. and so till he died. And if he should prove the perso (as some do take him to be) it is a strange mistake committed in the Engravement of the Plate, which seems to be as ancient as any of the rest, set up in the Chappel at Windesor.
Of this Iohn Capitan de Buch, there are many things noted by Sir Iohn Frois|sard, relating to both his taking King Edward's side against the French, and his valiant actions in those Wars: But in regard we doubt of his being one of the first Knights-Companions of the Garter, we have thought fit (for the present) to wave the Historical account of him, and intreat the Reader in lieu of it, to con|tent himself with that of some part of the descent, whereby he may guess at the greatness, yet unsuccessfulness of our pains, in endeavouring to ascertain the person.

Iohannes de Greilly domi|nus Benanges, Senescallus totius Aquitaniae. Rot. Vasc. 6.  7. E. 1. m. 9.
Claramonda filia  hae|res Galliardi de Mota domini de Laudirons. Rot. Vasc. 6.  7. E. 1. m. 9.

Petrus de Greilly miles. Rot. Vasc. 14. E. 3. m. 2.

She by her Will, made her Brother Peter, and Iohn his Son her Nepheu, the Capi|tain de Buch her Heirs. Rot. Vasc. 14. E. 3. m. 2.  17. E. 3. m. 11. dorso. Katherina de Greilly Domina Locorum St Blasii  de Laudiron. Rot. Vasc. 14. E. 3. m. 2.
Petrus de Greilly Vice|com: Benangiarum  Ca|stellionis. Rot. Vasc. 14. E. 3. m. 2.  16. E. 3. m. 13.  22. E. 3. m. 25.
Assalita soror  hae|res Petri de Burde|gal. Rot. Vasc. 5. E. 3. m. 24.
Petrus de Bur|degal. dominus de Puypaulini.

Petrus de Burdegal. domi|nus de puypaulini and Pe|trus Amanenus Captain de Bugh, were Uncles to this Iohn. Rot. Vasc. 5. E. m. 7. he was heir to them both, and Executor of their Testa|ments. Rot Vasc. 2. E. 3. m. 4. this Iohns Will is dated the 6. of March. 1368. Rot. Vasc. 7. R. 2. m. 10. Iohannes de Greilly ac Capitaneus de Buch. Rot. Vasc. 5. E. 3. m. 24.14. E. 3. m. 2.16. E. 3. m. 13.  29. E. 3. m. 6.
Blanch de Loup.

Archambaud de Greilly Capitalis de Bogio ac Vi|cecomes Benangiarum  Castillionis, It appears in this Roll that Iohn his Father used these Titles also. ac domi|nus de Podiopaulini,  Castri novi, in Medulco. Rot. Vasc. 7. R. 2. m. 10.








(6.) Ralph Earl of Stafford.
THis Noble Earl was Son unto Edmund Lord Stafford, first summoned to Parliament, Glaus. de eod. an. Dorso. an. 27. E. 1. and Fin. levat. Octob. Mich. 27. E. 1. War. Margaret, Esc. 14. R. 2. n. 9. Daughter to Ralph Lord Bas|set of Draiton: His Father dyed Esc. 2. E. 2. n. 63. an. 2. E. 2. and Claus. 17. E. 2 m. 25. and an. 17. E. 2. being of full age he did his Homage, and had Livery of his Fathers Lands.
The first military imployment that he undertook, was an. 1. E. 3. being Claus. 1. E. 3. p. 1. m. 2. dorso. summoned to be at Newcastle upon Tine on Monday next before Ascension day, to go against the Scots.
The Rot. Scot. 10. E. 3. m. 31. 12. of February, an. 10. E. 3. the King sent his Writ directed to him, Philip Chetwynde, and Philip Somervill, to raise in Staffordshire (Lichfield except|ed) 60 Hobelars, and 200 Archers, and to bring them to Berwick upon Tweed, before the following Octaves of Easter.
In his absence it seems there was some attempts made, to seize upon his Lady, and carry her away; but making his complaint to the King, he received her under his protection, and 28. Oct. Ibid. m. 6. directed his Writ to the Sheriff to protect her, so long as her Lord remained in his service.
I find this noble Lord was an. 15. E. 3. Extract. Do|not. 15. E. 3. m. 6. Steward of the Kings House, and one of those who went over Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 91. into Bretagne Rot. Franc. 16. E. 3. m. 36. an. 16. E. 3. with Robert d' Artous, to the assistance of the Countess of Montfort. He behaved himself bravely in the Sea-fight near the Isle of Gernsey with the French and Genoeses, who endea|voured to interrupt their passage thither: but after they had been a while en|gaged, a violent storm parted the two Navies, and the English landed safely; the first Town taken by them being Vannes, and that by Ibid. cap. 92. assault.
Soon after, this Town was Ibid. cap. 93. re-taken by Sir Henry de Leon, and the Lord Clis|son; but Ibid. cap. 94. the latter end of the Summer, King Edward landed with an Army, and laid a new Siege to it, and perceiving the Country was much wasted, he left the Earl of Arundel, with this Lord, before it, and went to Rennes. c. 95. It hap|ned that one day upon an assault, this Lord ventured so far, that he was got be|tween the City Gate and the Bars, and there taken Prisoner, but at another side of the Town, Sir Henry de Leon and the Lord Clisson, were both taken Prisoners by the English, and so c. 99. he was afterwards exchanged for the Lord Clisson. In this Expedition he had Wages allowed him for Claus. 16. E. 3 p. 2. m. 32. 50 men at Arms; viz. himself, two Bannerets, 16 Knights, 31 Esquires, and 50 Archers on Horseback.
An. 17. E. 3. was a year of much action, for first, this Earl with the Earl of Lancaster, and other Noblemen, went into T. Walsingh. pag. 150. Scotland, to raise the Siege laid by the Scots to the Castle of Louhmaban; and being returned, was joined in 20. May Rot. Franc. 17. E. 3. m. 12. Commission with Hugh le Despenser, Lord of Glamorgan, William de Norwich Dean of Lincolne, Sir William Trussell, and Andrew de Offord, to treat in the Pope's presence with the Agents of Philip de Valois, concerning the Kings right to the Crown of France; but we suppose he went not on that Embassy, for the Ibid. m. 12. 19. of August there was another Commission for that Affair, made out to Henry of Lancaster, Earl of Derby and others, wherein he and Sir William Trussell were omitted, and they the Ibid. m. 12. first of Iuly preceding, with Philip de Weston Canon of York, and Iohn Wawayn, were sent to treat with the Noblemen, Burgomasters, c. in Flanders, about the setlement of the Staple of Wool there, and touch|ing the Coyning of Gold and Silver, such as might be current both in England and Flanders; and whatsoever by any 3 or 2 of them should be agreed on, this Ralph Earl of Stafford being one, the King promised to ratifie. Ibid. They had another Commission, wherein power was granted them, to treat with the Prin|ces, Nobles, and People of Almaine, upon Alliances between the King and them, and to gain their assistance for him.
The following year he went in the Expedition int Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 102. Gascoigne, with the Earl of Derby; and Ibid. c. 103. commanded the Party that assaulted Bergerac by Water, who behaved themselves so valiantly, that through their Valour the Town was

forced to surrender to the Earl. Ib. c. 104.107.109.  111. He was very active in this Gascoigne War, and almost in continual Service: and in c. 112. sealing the Walls of Mountpesat Ca|stle, Richard Pennenort an English Gentleman that bare his Banner was slain.
For his Great Services in this War (after his return into England) he was made Seneschal of Gascoigne, and had the 25. Feb. Rot Vasc. 19. E. 3. m. 8. Kings Letter sent to the Prelates and Nobility of that Country, to obey and submit to his Authority, while he continued in that Office. Within a 1. Mar. Rot. Franc. de eod. an. p. 1. m. 33. few days after, the King directed his Writ to Richard Earl of Arundel, Admiral of the West-parts, to arrest 13. stout Ships, each of 80. Tun Burthen at least, to bring them to Bristol, before the Octaves of Easter, for the passage of this Lord, his men at Arms, and Archers, into that Country.
After a years enjoyment of this great Office, he became desirous to resign it, and to that purpose made an address to the King, who 15. May. Rot. Vasc. 20. E. 3. m. 2. sent directions to the Earl of Derby, to confer with him about his continuance in it, to which, if he could not be perswaded to consent, then he gave the Earl power to take his resignation, and substitute some other fit person in his room to hold it, du|ring the Kings pleasure.
This Spring Stow Chron p. 240. Iohn de Valois Duke of Normandy, laid Siege to Aiguillon, of which Town this Lord was Governor, and then within it; and though the Earl of Derby relieved him, yet had the Duke so strongly intrenched himself, that he could not raise the Siege, so that it was continued by the Duke, to the Decollation of St. Iohn Baptist in August; at which time, being called away to assist King Philip his Father against King Edward, who had entred France with a puissant Army, he raised his Siege. Upon which, the Lord Stafford sallying out of the Town, fell upon his Rear, cut off a great part of it, and having joined his to the Kings Forces, he had given him a Command in the Froiss. l. 1. c. 128. Van of the Army under the Prince, at the Battel of Cressy. And after the Victory Ib. c. 132. was sent with Sir Reignold Cobham, and 3. Heralds, to view the slain, who made report of 11. great Princes, 80. Bannerets, 1200. Knights, and above 30000. Common Souldiers.
When Calais was surrender'd, he was one of those appointed to take posses|sion of it for the King: and had Ib. c. 147 many fair Houses given him in that Town, to place Inhabitants in. Shortly after the rendition, the Cardinals of Naples and Cleremont, mediated a Peace between both Kings, whereupon this Lord, with Reignold de Cobham, Io. Darcy, and Robert de Bourghcher, were 25. Sept. Rot. Cales. 21. E 3. m. 4. nominated by the King to treat of a Peace, or Truce, between them, their Subjects, Al|lies, and Adherents.
And for his good Services done to the King in France, He 6. Sept. Rot. Pat. 22. E. 3. p. 3. m. 37. gave him a Pen|sion of 600. Marks for life, out of the Customs of London and St. Butolphs. The King also bestowed on him as a gift Ib. p. 2. m. 25. 573 l. towards his expences in his service beyond Sea.
He was with the Froiss. c. 151. King, in the Encounter with Sir Geoffry Charney at Calais. And went into Stow p. 247. Goscoigne with the Earl of Lancaster, and other Lords, to stop the Progress of the Duke of Normandy made there with his Army.
And growing more and more in the Kings favour, by his meritorious Servi|ces, he advanced him to the Dignity of an 5. Mar. Chart. 25. E. 3. m. 31. Earl; and for the better support of that Honor, and towards the defraying of his charge, in attending the King with certain men at Arms, both in Peace and War, he granted him 5. Mar. Chart. 25. E. 3. m. 31. a Pension of 1000. Marks per Annum, during life, out of his Customs in London, till he could settle on him the said annual sum in Lands or Rents.
The next day he was 6. Mar. Rot. Vasc. 25. E. 3. m. 7. constituted the Kings Lieutenant and Captain in the Dukedom of Aquitaine, and parts adjacent; and the Ib. m. 7. 3d. of April following, the King gave him power to appoint a Seneschal of Gascoigne, and a Constable of Bordeaux; and these to be such persons as he should think fit, to enjoy those Offices, during the Kings pleasure.
The next year, the King empower'd 8. Mar. Rot. Vasc. 26. E. . m. 6. him by a Commission to treat and agree with all persons of what Kingdom, Nation, or Degree soever, upon a firm friend|ship and mutual assistance between the King and them, and to retain them

against all men, to agree with them, upon Fees, Wages, and rewards, to re|ceive security from them, and give the like to them, and what he did herein, the King obliged himself and his Heirs to observe and perform.
Being ready to take another Journey into Gascoigne, a Writ 14. May. Rot. Franc. 26. E. 3. m. 11. issued to Tho|mas Beauchamp (Earl of Warwick) Admiral towards the West, to arrest all Ships of 50. Tuns and upwards, for this Earls passage thither, and to bring them to Sandwich, by Quindena Trinitatis following; and upon his Entry into that Country he Stow p. 253. b. defeated the French that sallied out of the Fortress of Gagent: and among them was taken seven Knights of the Star.
An. Rot. Franc. 29. E. 3. m. 5. 29. E. 3. he went over with the King to Calais, at the latter end of Summer, and marched along with him in pursuit of King Iohn as far as Heyden. And Rot. Franc. 33. E. 3. p. 2. m. 2. an. 33. E. 3. he attended him in his Voyage into France; which termina|ted with the Peace agreed on at Bretigny near Chartres.
Two years after he was designed for Rot. Pat. 35. E. 3. p. 2. m. 7. Ireland, in the Company of several other persons of Quality upon the Kings Service. But after this Voyage being much broken with Age, and wasted with Sickness, he became uncapable of publick Employments.
This Noble Lord Married Esc. 16. E. 3. n. 36.  Esc. 21. E. 3. n. 59. Margaret Daughter and Heir of Hugh de Audeley, Earl of Gloucester, and Margaret his Wife, who died the 7. of September, an. 21. E. 3. and by whom he had Issue, Claus. 21. E. 3. p. 2. m. 6. Ralph his eldest Son, who married Claus. 21. E. 3. p. 2. m. 6. Maud Daughter of Henry de Lancaster Earl of Derby, but died about 21. E. 3. Esc. 46. E. 3. n. 62. Hugh, who succeeded him in his Earldom; and Brooke in Stafford. Sir Richard Stafford Knight; Brooke in Stafford. Beatrix, the Wife of Maurice fitz Maurice Earl of Desmond; Brooke in Stafford. Ioan, of Iohn Charleton Lord Powes, and Brooke in Stafford. Margaret, of Iohn Stafford, Patron of the Church of Bromhall in Staffordshire.
He died the Esc. 46. E. 3. n. 62. last of August, an. 46. E. 3. and lies buried at Turnbridge in Kent.


(7.) William Montacute Earl of Salisbury.
THis Earl was Son unto Brooke in Salisbury. William Montacute, first Earl of Salisbury, of that Family, and Brooke in Salisbury. Katherine, one of the Coheirs of William Lord Grantson.
He was born the Esc. an. 18. E. 3. n. 51. Morrow after Midsummer day, an. 2. E. 3. for at the Death of his Father (found to be the Esc. an. 18. E. 3. n. 51. 30. of Ianuary, an. 18. E. 3.) he was Esc. an. 18. E. 3. n. 51. 15. years old the Midsummer before.
The Rot. Franc. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 6. 24. of May, an. 20. E. 3. the Wardship of his body was committed to Iohn de Somerton, and Thomas Waryn, until Christmass following, and then Ib. p. 2. m. 4. renued till Whitsontide, and thence till Michaelmas ensuing: and being within Age, he Ib. p. 1. m. 11. attended the King in that memorable expedition into France, an. 20. E. 3. So also did his younger Brother Ib. m. 6. Iohn.
He was in the Stows Chron. p. 250. Sea Fight against the Spaniards, near Winchelsey, an. 24. E. 3. and going into Gascoigne, in the Rot. Vasc. 29. E. 3. m. 11. retinue of the Prince of Wales, an. 29. E. 3. he obtained 8. Iuly. Ib. m. 5. Letters directed to the Seneschal there, with Command, that he should not be sued or molested, for any of his own or Ancestors debts, during the space of two years.
Froiss. c. 207. An. 33. E. 3. he attended the King in his Royal expedition into France, and from that time to the 43. of Edward the Third, we find little mention of his Martial employments; but that year, he went over with Holinsh. pag. 404. Iohn Duke of Lan|caster, in his Voyage into France, against whom the Duke of Burgoigne was sent with so great an Army, that the Froiss. l. 1. c. 268. English were but as a handful to them, and having pitched his Tents near Calais, within a Mile of the English Army, after 19. days stay he dislodged and went to St. Omars, not with much honor as some observe. After whose departure the Duke of Lancaster returned to Calais, and having re|freshed his Army for three days, and marched thence to Froiss. l. 1. c. 269. St. Omars, and the County of St. Paul, then passed the River Some, and entred the Countries

of Ve xin and Ewe, within the Archbishoprick of Roan, thence to Deepe and Har|flew, with design to burn the French Fleet which lay there, but the Earl of St. Paul was entred the Town before, and so secured the Haven. Whereupon he returned through Ponthieu, where, before Abeville, Sir Hugh de Chastelon Master of the Crossbows in France, was taken, who with the Earl of St. Paul had before entred Ponthieu, and took it from the King of England; and having wasted the Country with Fire and Sword as they past along to Calais, staid there a while, and then took shipping for England, where he arrived about the Feast of St. Martin the Bishop in Winter.
This Earl Froiss. l. 1. c. 305. attended the King, when he took his Voyage to relieve Thouars, an. 46. E. 3. who directing his course towards Rochel, was not able to land by reason of contrary Winds and Tempests, but forced to return after nine weeks being tossed upon the Sea.
The year following, Ibid. c. 308. he, with William Nevil, and Sir Philip Courtney, was sent to Sea, upon a rumour that Ievan, Prince of Wales, Son of Prince Aymon, was upon the English Coast with 6000 men, designing to land. The Earl had 40 Sail of Ships besides Barges, and 2000 men of Arms, besides Archers, and departing from Cornwall sailed to Bretagne, and coming to St. Malo, burnt seven great Spanish Ships in that Haven. Thence they sailed to Brest, and there re|lieved the Garrison (where Sir Robert Knolls was besieged by the Constable, Sir Bertrand de Guesclin) with men and provisions; which having done, they took shipping, with design to keep the Frontiers of Bretagne and Normandy, about which time the King had recruited them with 1000 men of Arms, and 2000 Archers. Hereupon he again went to Brest, with a resolution to fight the French that lay before it; but before he got thither, the Constable had withdrawn most of his men, to other Sieges, upon a Composition made with the Garrison, to surrender in case they were not relieved within 40 days, for performance of which they had taken Hostages. Upon the Ibid. c. 309. Earls arrival, he sent to the Con|stable either to fight, or to return the Hostages, but he refused both; so the Earl having Victualled the Castle departed to Sea, and kept the Marches and Frontiers as before.
In the 50. year of King Edward's Reign, he was 16 Iuly Rot. Franc. 50. E. 3. m. 14. constituted Admiral of his Fleet, from the River Thames, towards the Western parts. And the following year, a 2 Ian. Rot. Franc. 51. E. 3. m. 8. Commission issued to him and some others, to Array all able men from 16 to 60 years of Age in the County of Dorset, to be ready on occasion, to withstand an Invasion, and defend the Kingdom, there being apprehensions that the French would land.
The first year of King Richard the Second, the French being on the Sea, this Earl was assigned to secure the Sea Coasts in the Counties of Southampton and Dorset; to which purpose, 2 Iuly Pat. 1. R. 2. p. 1. m. 29. Command was sent to the Knights and Gentry of those Counties, to be assistant to him It appears also, that he was this year em|ployed in Rot Franc. 1. R. 2. m. 17.19.  21. Sea service, and an. 2. R. 2. 2 Febr. Rot. Franc. 2. R. 2. m. 9. constituted Governour of Calais. An. 8. R. 2. he, with divers others of the Nobility, had 13 Iune Claus. 8. R. 2. m. 3. dorso. Summons to appear at New|Castle upon Tyne, the 14. of Iuly with Horse and Arms, thence to march against the Scots.
The 19. Aug. Pat. 9. R. 2. m. 36. custody of the Isle of Wight and Castle of Carbroke, with the whole Demesne thereunto belonging was granted to him during his life, with all the profits, liberties, and advantages, as the King enjoyed them, without rendring any thing therefore; only, that he should maintain the Castle, and undergo all Charges of the Isle and Castle, as the Governors thereof usually had done.
He designe dto marry Ioane Daughter to Edmund Plantagenet, His Wife and Children. Earl of Kent, and gained a Contract from her; but Sir Thomas Holland, in his Lib. in Offic. Princip. Can|tuar. vccat. Islip. f. 178. Petition to Pope Clement the Sixth, alledging a precontract from her with him, upon which carnal copulation followed, and being after in Foreign parts, this Earl con|tracted with her again, and unjustly withheld her from him, thereupon the Pope gave judgment against the Earl, who complying therewith, married ano|ther noble Lady, namely, Brook in Sa|lisbury. Elizabeth eldest Daughter, and after one of the three

Co-heirs of Iohn Lord Mohun (another of the Founders of this most Noble Or|der) who outlived her Lord, and had her Dower 9 Dec. Claus. 21. R. 2. m. 3. assigned an. 21. R. 2.
By this Lady he had William, his only Son and Heir, unfortunately Brook. loco cit. slain at Windesor, an. 6. R. 2. by his own hand, in a Tilting; a place fatal also to his Father, who at the Hollinsh. p. 366. Justs held there, an. 18. E. 3. was so sorely bruised, that he dyed soon after; so that Esc. 21. R. 2. n. 35. Claus. 21. R. 2. m. 8.  16. And Death. Iohn Mountacute, his Cousin and Heir, Son and Heir of his Brother Iohn, succeeded him in his Earldom.
This Earl dyed the Esc. 21. R. 2. n. 35. Wilts. 3. of Iune an. 20. R. 2. having survived all the first Foun|ders of this most Noble Order.


(8.) Roger Mortimer Earl of March.
HE was the Son of Brook, in March. Edmund Mortimer (Son and Heir of Roger Mortimer, first Earl of March) and Esc. 30. E. 3. Buck. Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of Bartholomew de Bad|lesmere, Baron of Leeds, (who after her Husbands death was married to Willi|am Bohun Earl of Northampton) born Esc. 5. E. 3. n. 79. towards the latter end of the first years Reign of King Edward the Third.
In the Voyage which this King made into France, in the 20. year of his Reign, he attended him, being yet under age; but before he went, the King 20 Iune Rot. Franc. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 3. admitted Sir Peter de Grandison, and William de Newenham Clerk, to be his Guardians, and to prosecute and defend his Suits in any of the King's Courts.
Upon his Rot. Parl. 28. E. 3. Petition in Parliament, an. 28. E. 3. he obtained a revocation of the Judgment against his Grandfather (attainted of and executed for Treason, an. 4. E. 3.) and thereupon was restored in Blood, and to the Earldom of March, and to all his said Grandfathers Lands, Honors, and Possessions.
The next year he was made 8 Aug. Fines 29. E. 3. Custos of the Castle of Dover and the Cinque-Ports, for life; and afterwards went beyond Sea in the Kings Service, in the Voyage which Iohn of Gaunt made into France, upon the French Kings drawing down an Army towards Calais.
And in the Kings Expedition into France, (an. 33. E. 3.) upon which a Peace ensued, he Froiss. l. 1. c. 207. attended him with 500 men at Arms, and 1000 Archers.
He married Brook. loco supra citato. Philippa Daughter of William Mountacute, first Earl of Salisbury, and Sister to William Earl of Salisbury, one of the first Founders of the Garter, whose Will bears date the first day of November, an. Dom. 1378. in which she ap|points her body to be buried, in the Conventual Church of the Holy Trinity, in the Priory of Bistleham, vulgarly called Bysham Mountagu in Berkshire; Ex Codice M.S. Mis|cell. Rob. Glo|veri. Somerset. f. 150. b. where an. 1381. she was accordingly interred.
He dyed at Ex Codice M.S. Mis|cell. Rob. Glo|veri. Somerset. f. 150. b. Rovery in Burgundy the 26. of February Esc. 34. E. 3. n. 86. an. 34. E. 3. as the King was upon his march in those Countries; and his Ex Codice praed. body, afterwards brought into England, was buried at Wigmore with his Ancestors.


(9) Sir Iohn Lisle.
SIR Iohn Lisle, was the Cod. M. S. R. Glover. nuper Somerset. fol. 111. b. Son of Robert Lord Lisle (first summond to Parlia|ment an. 5. E. 2. by the Title of Robert de Lisle de Rubemont) and of Cod. M. S. R. Glover. nuper Somerset. fol. 111. b. Mar|garet, the Daughter of  Peverell.
His Father Robert being disposed to give to him 400 Marks per annum of Land, to serve the King with 6 men at Arms in his War, the King to gratifie the said Robert, and the better to support his Son, Pat. 10. E. 3. p. 2. m. 9. granted that the said Ro|bert might give him his Mannor of Harwood, with its appurtenances in York|shire, with other Lands to the annual value of 400 Marks, during his life, but afterwards to return to the said Robert and his Heirs: and some years after, his Brother Robert Claus. 18. E. 3. p. 1. m. 16. released to him and his Heirs, all his right in the said Mannor, and in the Advowson of the Church there.
Being thus provided for, he attended the King in his first Voyage into France, by the way of Flanders, an. 13. E. 3. and as Hist. l. 1. c. 41. Sir Iohn Froissard observes, was in the Battel designed to be fought near Vironfosse. Two years after he went into Rot. Vasc. 15 E. 3. m. 15. Aquitaine in the King's Service. And the Rot. Franc. 16. . 3. m. 27. year ensuing, he attend|ed the King in Bretagne, where he was one of the Froiss. l. 1. c. 94. Commanders left at the Siege of Nants in Bretagne, while the King foraged the Country, and laid Siege to Dinant.
For his good services done the King, he granted him a Pension of 26. Aug. Rot. Pat. 20. E. 3. p. 3. m. 29. 200 l. per annum for his life, to support his Degree of Banneret. This Pension was first appointed to be paid him out of the Ibid. Exchequer, until a Provision of Lands or Rents, to that yearly value, were made for him: but after there was assigned to him out of the Priory of Pat. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 21. St. Neats, then of Pat. 29. E. 3. p. 1. m. 29. Stoke nigh Clare, and of Fye, to wit, 120 l. per annum out of the Priory of Stoke, and 80 l. per annum out of that of Eye. Then 100 Marks was taken out of the Rent charge upon the Priory of Eye, and laid upon the Issues of the Counties of Cambridge and Huntingdon. And lastly, it came to be thus setled, viz. 4 Feb. Ibid. That he should receive out of the Issues of these two Counties 200 Marks per annum, and out of the issues of the Counties of Bedford and Bucks, the remaining sum of 100 Marks per annum. And having given him besides, for like services, another Pension for life of 40 l. a year out of his Exchequer also, he  20. E.  m. 6. appointed the payment of it out of the Farm of the Priory of St. Neats, during the War.
An. 25. E. 3. the King made him Extract.  donat. 25. E. 3. m. 2. Sheriff of the Counties of Cambridge and Huntingdon, and granted him the Extract.  donat. 25. E. 3. m. 2. Custody of the Castle of Cambridge for life.
He had by Maud his Wife two Sons, Sir Collect. A. V. W. Robert Lisle Lord of Rougemont and Wilbraham (whose Heir male hath now his dwelling (as I am informed) at Wil|braham in Cambridgshire) and Collect. A. V. W. Sir William Lisle Lord of Cameldon and Shefford, who died without Issue.
In the Prince's Expedition into Gascoigne, an. 29. E. 3. he Rot. Vasc. 29. E. 3. m. 8. attended him, and had Command given him in theStow. p. 256. main Body of the Army: But in the three days march into the Enemies Country, he was unfortunately hurt with a Holinsh. p. 384 Quarrel or Bolt shot out of a Cross-bow, of which he dyed the Esc. 20. E. 3. n. 40. 14. of October in the same year, his Son Robert being then about Esc. 20. E. 3. n. 40. 22 years of age.


(10.) Sir Bartholomew Burghersh.
SIR Bartholomew Burghersh was Son to Bartholomew Lord Burghersh (frequently distinguished by the Title of Senior) and Elizabeth one of the Daughters and Co-heirs of Theobald de Verdon. His Father was first summoned to Parlia|ment, an. 1. E. 3. a person of great Council, and Valour, which laid a strong foun|dation for his Sons Honor, having been several times constituted Rot. Fin. 20. E. 2. m. 3. Pat. 1. E. 3. p. 3. m. 20. Pat. 19. E. 3. p. 1.22. E. 3. p. 1. m. 32.23. E. 3. p. 1. m. 17.25. E. 3. p. 3. m. 1. Constable of Do|ver, and the Cinque-Ports, he was also made Pat. 5. E. 3. m. 7. Seneschal and Custos of Ponthieu and Monstriell, Rot. Vasc. 11. E. 3.  Rot. Vasc. 12. E. 3. m. 15. Admiral towards the West, Pat. 21. E. 3. p. 2. dorso. m. 24. Chamberlain to the King, Pat. 28. E. 3. p. 3. Lieutenant of the Tower of London, Pat. 29. E. 3. p. 2. m. 11. one of the Custos's of England, and frequently em|ploid in Embassies, and by Camb. rit.  227. some (through mistake) made one of the first Founders of the Garter. But among these, enumerated in the preamble to the Statutes, both of Institution, (with their Exemplars) and those of King Henry the Fifth, he is called Bartholomeus de Burghersh filius, and Bartholomew de Burghersh le filz. (and so in divers places of our publick Records) though we have seen some transcripts of these Statutes, wherein the point hath been at the end of the Surname, and filius (so also le filz) joined to Dom. Iohannes de Beauchamp. But this was a plain mistake of the Transcriber, since this Iohn was never married.
His first martial Service was, when the Rot. Franc. 16. E. 3. m. 20. King went into Bretagne, an. 16. E. 3. Next he went with the Rot. Franc. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 6. Prince in the Kings Expedition into France, an. 20. E. 3. where he Rot. Franc. 21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 6. staid with him at the Siege of Calais. And for recompence of his Expences, in this Voyage the King granted him the Rot. Pat. 22. E. 3. p. 2. m. 33. Custody of all the Lands

and Tenements, which had belonged to Iohn de Loueyne deceased, till his Heir should come of Age, without rendring any thing therefore.
The 23. year of King Edward, he went along with him into Rot. Vasc. 23. E. 3. m. 1. Gascoigne. And again Rot. Vasc. 29. E. 3. m. 8. thither with the Prince of Wales, an. 29. E. 3. and had Stow p. 256. command in the main body of the Princes Army. The following year, as the Froiss. l. 1. c. 157. Prince retired from forraging the Country of Berry, and was got near Romerentyne, this Knight (whom Froissard in several places calls the Lord Bartholomew Breches, Sir Bar|tholomew Ib. c. 208. de Bounes, de Ib. c. 209. Brennes, and de Ib. c. 219. Brunes, but such mistakes are too frequent in that Author in this and other mens names, as also in the names of Places) was set upon by a French Ambushment, but he and his Troops so gallantly behaved themselves, that they kept the French in play, till the Prince drew near, upon the sight of whom they fled to Romerentyne (pursued by the English) and got into the Castle, which the Prince commanded Sir Iohn Chandos to Summon; but they refusing to yield, after two desperate but fruitless assaults, the English set it on fire, which caused them speedily to surrender.
He Ib. c. 207. attended the King in his expedition into France, an. 33. E. 3. and towards the end of the year, an. 37. E. 3. Froiss. c. 219. He and divers other Knights of the Court were sent to Dover, to wait upon Iohn King of France, who, coming over to Visit King Edward, landed there the 4. of Ianuary, and was conducted by them to Caenterbury, where having offered a rich Jewel at the Shrine of Thomas Becket, he after rode to Eltham to the King, and thence to the Savoy, where he was honorably entertained.
Half a year before this, we find the 22. Iunii. Liberate 37. E. 3. m. 3. King appointed the Treasurer of his Chamber to give him 200 l. upon the Debt due to him from the King, for the Count de Vendedour his Prisoner.
He had two Wives, the first was Claus. 9. E. 3. m. 27. Cecily Daughter and Heir to Richard Wey|land, by whom he had divers Lands in the Claus. 9. E. 3. m. 27. Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Cam|bridge, Huntingdon, Essex, and Hertford; by her he had Claus. 43. E. 3. m. 1. Vide Esc. 2. R. 2. n. 12. Elizabeth his Daughter and Heir, married to Claus. 43. E. 3. m. 1. Vide Esc. 2. R. 2. n. 12. Edward le Despenser.
His second Wife was Ex Collect. praef. R. Glov. S. Margaret, Sister to Sir Bartholomew Badlismere, whom he lest a Widow; but she afterwards married Claus. 18. R. 2. m. 21. William de Burcester, and dyed about the 18. year of King Richard the Second.
The Esc. 43. E. 9. p. 1. n. 14. 5. of April, an. 43. E. 3. he dyed, leaving Elizabeth his Daughter and Heir, then about 24 years of age.


(11.) Sir Iohn Beauchamp.
HE was a Rot. Io. Row dorso. younger Son to Guy Earl of Warwick, by Alice his Wife, and Brother to Thomas Earl of Warwick, one of the Founders of this most Noble Order of the Garter. He attended King Edward the Third into Rot. Alman. 12. E. 3. p. 1. m. 7. Flan|ders in the 12. year of his Reign, and was in the Froiss Chron. l. 1. c. 41. Battel pitcht between Vyron|fosse and Flamengery, an. 13. E. 3. So also the following year in the Ibid. c. 50. Naval fight at Sluce.
A. 15. E. 3. I find him stiled Claus. 1. E. 3. p. 1. m. 39. Banneret; towards the support of which Dig|nity, he had a considerable Pension given him.
He attended the King in his Voyage into Rot. Franc. 20. E. 3. m. 5. France, an. 20. E. 3. and, at the Battel of Cressy, Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 1. m. 2. carried the Kings Standard Royal. The following year, he Rot. Franc. 21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 29. continued with the King at the Siege of Calais, till it was taken: And an. 22. E. 3. he was Primo Ian. Rot. Franc. 22. E. 3. m. 1. constituted Captain of that Town. The next year made Rot. Franc. 23. E. 3. m. 1. Admiral of the Kings Fleet, from the River of Thames Westward. And having his Com|mission again 24 Mar. Rot. Franc. 25. E. 3. m. 11. renewed for the custody of Calais to commence the first of April, an. 25. E. 3. he marched out of the Town with a Party of Knighton, in Hist. Angl. Script. Coll. 2602. 200 Archers, and 300 Men at Arms, and forraged the Country for 10 miles round: where meeting with 2000 Men at Arms, commanded by the Lord Bealren, encountred them, and slew the said Lord. But fresh Supplies coming in to the assistance of the French, they overpowr'd the English, and took this noble Knight Prisoner, who was exchanged within a short time after.
This year the Pat. 34. E. 3. p. 1. m. 45. Constableship of the Tower of London being resigned to him by Iohn Darcy, who had a former Grant of it for life, the King confirm|ed the resignation to him, and for the Custody thereof, allowed him Liberat 26. E. 3. m. 2. 100 l. per annum.
He was again Rot. Franc. 29. E. 3. m. 2. constituted Captain of Calais, an. 29. E. 3. and of the Castle of Guynes, the Forts of Merk, Colne, Eye, and Sandgate; as also  Mar. Ibid. m. 14. Admiral from the River Thames Westward.
An. 31. E. 3. he had his Commission again Rot. Franc. 31. E. 3. m. 18. renewed for Custody of Calais, Guynes, and those before mentioned Forts.
Two years after, he Rot. Vasc. 33. E. 3. m. 8. attended the King in his Voyage Royal into France, and, upon the death of Roger Earl of March, was Rot. Franc. 34. E. 3. m. 45. constituted Constable of Do|ver-Castle and the Cinque-Ports, the Kings Letters Patent bearing Teste Rot. Franc. 34. E. 3. m. 45. primo Martii apud Goillioun in Burgundia. This year he was made Pat. 34. E. 3. m. 6. p. 1. m. 35. Constable of the Tower of London, and also Rot. Franc. de ad. an. m. 6. Admiral of the Seas, for the South, North, and West Coast of England
He was a man of eminent esteem with the King, and by his services deserved so well, that he confer'd on him both considerable Pensions, and several gifts, and from an. 24. E. 3. so long as he lived, received Claus. de iis|dem an. dorso. Summons to Parliament.
The first donation we have met with, was 21 Mar. Pat. 10. E. 3. p. 1. m. 31. an. 10. E. 3. when the King be|stowed on him the Marriage of Margaret, the Relict of Iohn de Bohun Earl of Hereford.
An. 19. E. 3. the King granted him a Pension of 6 Oct. Pat. 19. E. 3. p. . m. 12. 30 l. per annum out of his Exchequer, towards his expences in his service, (over and above 20 l. per an|num formerly given him) till he should have Lands setled on him to that yearly value.
The 18 Dec. Pa. 20. E. 3. p. 2. m. 31. following year, the King gave him the Mannor of Oddingle, which Thomas de Haukeston held for life, after whose death it was to remain to this Sir Iohn, and his Heirs for ever.
An. 22. E. 3. he had the 18 Mar. Pat. 21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 19. custody of the Lands of Allan la Zouche granted him, till his Heir came to ull age, without rendring any thing theretofore.
The King had also given him out of the Exchequer a Pension of Pat. 22. E. 3. m. 12. 180 l. per annum, to support his Degree of Banneret, beside 20 l. per annum out of the Cu|stoms, until he should have 200 l. per annum in Lands, or Rents provided of that yearly value for his life. And upon his resignation of several Letters Paent of Pensions amounting to 280 l. per annum, he had the same annual sum 17 Mar. Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 3. m. 24. granted to him out of the Customs of London and St. Botolphs or his life also.
The next year, the King Pat. 23. E. 3. m. 24. granted to him the Bailyweek of Cors in Gloucester|shire, till the full age of the Heir of Edward le Dispenser Knight, Cousin and Heir of Hugh le Dispenser then deceased.
And lastly there being an Arrear of 50 l. at Michaelmas before he dyed, of the said 280 l. per annum formerly granted to him out of the Custom, as aforesaid, a Writ Claus. 35. E. 3. m. 7. issued to the Collectors of the Customs of St. Botolphs, to pay the same to Iohn, the Son of Giles Beauchamp his Executor.
He lived a Batchellor, and dyed the Esc. a. 35. E. 3. n. 34. 2. of Dec. an. 34. E. 3. and was buried on the South side of the Body of the Cathedral of St. Paul London; a Sculp of whose Monument is yet preserved in the Pag. 52. History of St. Pauls, by William Dug|dale Esq now Norroy King of Arms; which vulgarly (but falsely) was called Duke Humfry's Tomb.


(12) Sir Iohn Mohun.
HE was Son to Iohn Mohun and Claus. 4. E. 3. m. 9. Sibyll, the Daughter of Iohn de Segrave, which Iohn his Father dyed before his Grandfather, in Scotland, an. 4. E. 3. and lies buried at York. Shortly after his Grandfather, Iohn Lord Mohun Esc. 4 E. 3 n. 34. died, at which time he was about Esc. 4. E. 3 n. 34. 10 years old; the custody of all his said Grandfathers Lands (he being by Inquisition found to be his Cousin and Heir)

as also of his Marriage, was granted to Pat. de eod. an p. 1. m. 4. Henry Burghersh, Bishop of Lincolne, till he came of full age; the Claus. 18. E. 3. p. 1. m. 2. 28. of May an. 18. E. 3. he did homage to the King, whereupon he had Livery of the said Lands.
In the 16. year of King Edward the Third, he went over in the Kings Service into Bretagne, with Sir Rot. Fr. 16. E. 3. m. 24. Bartholomew de Burghersh; as he did also with the said Sir Rot. Fr. 19. E. 3. p. 1. m. 13. Bartholomew, an. 19. E. 3.
The following year he attended the Rot. Fr. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 14. Prince of Wales, when King Edward entred France by Normandy, and Rot. Franc. de eod. an. p. 2. m. 11.  Rot. Franc. 21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 13. continued in service at the Siege of Calais; and the Rot. Fr. 22. E. 3. m. 19. following year was again sent into France.
The last Martial service we find him employed in, was Rot. Vasc. 29. E. 3. m. 3. an. 29. E. 3. when he attended the Prince of Wales into Gascoigne.
An. 16. E. 3. which was soon after he came of age, he was summoned to Par|liament, from whence the summons were Claus. de iis|dem an. dorso. continued till an. 47. E. 3.
He married Ioane, Daughter to Sir Bartholomew Burghersh the elder, Sister to Sir Bartholomew Burghersh, one of the Founders of this most Noble Order (who died on Esc. 6. H. 4. n. 33. Saturday next after the Feast of St. Michael an. 6. H. 4.) and had by her three Daughters and Co-heirs, namely Elizabeth, Wife to William Mountague Earl of Salisbury, another of the Founders of the Order; Philippa, Wife to Ed|mond Duke of York and Albemarle; and Maude, Wife of Iohn Lord Strange of Knoching; whose Son Richard came to inherit a large Estate after the death of his Aunts, Elizabeth and Philippa, they dying without Issue.


(13) Sir Hugh Courtney.
THis Hugh Courtney, was elest Son of Hugh Courtney, second Son of Hugh Courtney, first Earl of Devonshire of that name (his eldest Son Monast. Angl. vol. 1. pag. 789. a. Iohn ha|ving taken on him a religious life, was made Monast. Angl. vol. 1. pag. 789. a. Abbot of Tavestock) and Esc. 51. E. 3. n. 6.  Esc. 15. R. 2. n. 10. Mar|garet (Monast. Angl. loco cit. Daughter of Henry Bohun, Earl of Hereford) his Wife. He was born 11. Cal. Apr. an. 1. E. 3. and commonly called Rot. Fin. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 13. Hugh Courtney junior, in regard his Father was living.
e Rot. Fr. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 13. attended the Kingin his Expedition into France, an. 20. E. 3. and in the following year, being amog other brave Martialists in the Tornament at Eltham, he had Compot. Iob. Coke Cler. mag. Gardrob. R. in Scacc. penes Remem. Regis. given him by th King a Hood of White Cloth, embroidered with men in the postures of dancing, button'd with large Pearls.
He had a Son named Esc. 51. E. 3. n 6. Hugh, who married Maud, Daughter to Thomas Hol|land Earl of Kent, one of the Founders of the Garter, but had no Issue by her; and she after his death became Wife to MS. in Bibl. Bl. K. 84. (inter Cod. Cant.) p. 147. b Waleran Earl of St. Paul.
He died Esc. 48. E. 3. n. 7. an. 40. E. 3. and his Son also died; Hugh Courtney second Earl of Devonshire, Father to the former, and Grandfather to the later, surviving both; after whose death, Esc. 51. E. 3. n. 6. Edward, Son to his Brother Edward, Nephew and Heir to his Father, succeeded him in the Earldom.


(14) Sir Thomas Holland.
HIS Father was Robert Lord Holland of Collect. A.V.W Holland in Lancashire, first sum|moned to Parliament Claus. de cod. an. an. 8. E. 2. and he his second Son by Cod. MS. Mis|cel. R. Glover Somers. Maud, Daugh|ter and Heir of Alan la Zouche.
An. 16. E. 3. he, with Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 90. Sir Iohn Dartuell were sent to Bayon, with 200 men at Arms, and 400 Archers, to keep the Frontiers; the Rt. Fr. 17. E. 3 m 13. following year he went again into France. The King having granted to him 40 l. per annum, for his good service, till Lands of that yearly value were provided for him, 21. Oct. Claus. 19. E 3. p. 2. m. 10. appointed it to be paid him out of the Farm Priory of Haylyng, during the War with his Adversary of France.
The next year he gave his Mother Maud 28. Iune Pat. 20. E. 3. p. 2. m. 28. license to infeoffe him of the Man|nors of Hals, Brackeley, and Kyng sutton, to hold to him and his Heirs for ever. And shortly after Rot. Fr. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 3. he attended the King into Normandy, where he had a com|mand under the Froiss. c. 122. Earl of Warwick: At the taking of Caen (in this Expedition) the Ibid. c. 123.  cap. 124. Earl of Eu and Guynes, Constable of France, and the Earl of Tankervile (who defended it for the French) seeing this Knight (whom Froissard notes to have but one Eye) as having formerly known him in Prusia, Granada, and other places, called to him, and yielded themselves and 25 Knights his Priso|ners. After he had secured them, he again took Horse and rode into the Streets, where he preserved the lives of many Ladies, Maidens, and Religious Women. Rot. sact apud Ca|les. 21. E. 3. m. 8. Afterwards the King bought of him the said Earl of Eu, for Rot. sact apud Ca|les. 21. E. 3. m. 8. 80000 Florens de Scuto, six of which went to a Pound English money.
Not long after, when the Ibid. c. 125. Army left Poysy, he with Sir Reginald Cobham hav|ing command of the Rear, upon the Townsmens revolt, and killing some few of the English Souldiers that stayed behind, returned, and burnt the Town, razed the two Castles, and flew most of the Inhabitants. At the Battel of Ibid. c. 128. Cressy he had command in the Van, under the Prince of Wales; and was at the Rot. Fr. 21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 1. Siege of Calais.
The Pat. 26. E. 3. p. . m. 13. 24. of August, an. 26. E. 3. the King granted to him and Ioane his Wife na annual Pension of 100 Marks out of his Exchequer, towards her support during her life; but in case her Brother Iohn Earl of Kent died without Issue, and she enjoyed his Estate, then the payment of the said Pension to cease.
An. 27. E. 3. he was summoned to Parliament: and the next year 18. Mar. Rot Franc. 28. E. 3. m. 8. constituted the Kings Lieutenant and Captain in the Dukedom of Bretagne, and in the parts of Poictou adjoining to that Dukedom, and of all other places belonging to Iohn Duke of Bretagne then a minor, and under the Guardianship of the King; and 18. Mar. Rot Franc. 28. E. 3. m. 8. towards his expences and the maintenance of his Army while he stayed there, he had allowed him all the profits and issues of the said Dukedom, without rendring any account or profit to the King. The 11. of November following, this Commis|sion was renewed, and thereupon he Ibid. m. 3. continued in Bretagne all that Winter; and the Rot. Fr. 29. E. 3. m. 14. 8. of February following it was again renewed to him, to hold from the Rot. Fr. 29. E. 3. m. 14. 13. of April then next coming for one whole year; but before half that time was expired, Henry Duke of Lancaster was constituted the Kings Lieutenant there, and the said Ibid. m. 6. Thomas command to surrender to him or to his Deputy, all that was within his command.
It appears, Rot. Fr. 29. E. 3. m. 14. that his servants, making provision at Totnes in Devonshire, for his, and his Ladies passage for Bretagne, were robbed of as many of his Goods as were valued at 200 l. which accident retarding his passage, the King upon his complaint, 26. Mar. Pat. 28. E. 3. p. 1. m. 18. dorso. sent forth his Writ to Iohn de Stonsord, Iohn de Ferers, Knights, and Roger Pyperell, to enquire into the matter.
Afterwards, he had 18. Nov. Rot. Franc. 31. E. 3. m. 5. granted to him the custody of the Fort and Place of Cruyck in Normandy, part of the Kings late Conquests, with all the Revenues and Profits thereto belonging, to hold during pleasure: and a command was gi|ven to Donald Aselrig, Lewis Clifford, and Waelter Mewe, to deliver them up to him or his Lieutenant.
Rot. Fr. 32. E. 3. m. 7. An. 32. E. 3. he and his Lady went into Normandy, and the ensuing year the 7. Febr. Rot. Fr. 33. E. 3. m. 19. custody of the Castle and Fort of St. Saviours le Viscount, and of all the 6. Oct. Ib. m. 7 Ca|stles, c. that were Sir Geoffry de Harecourts was committed to him; as also that of ^e Barflu in Normandy. And shortly after, Philip of Navarre Earl of Longueville, Lord of Casell, and this Noble Lord were 28. Oct. Ro. Franc. 33. E. 3. p. 2. m. 6. constituted the Kings Lieutenants and Captains in Normandy, conjunctim  divisim during pleasure: But the Rot. Fr. 34. E. 3. m. 5. following year these Dignities were committed to him alone.
He married Ioane, Daughter of Edmund of Woodstock Earl of Kent, Sister and Esc. 26. E. 3. n. 54. Heir of Iohn Earl of Kent, in whose right he sate in Claus. 34. E. 3. m. 4. dorso. Parliament an. 34. E. 3. as Earl of that County; after whose death Edward Prince of Wales married her, whose Widow she remained till an. 9. R. 2. and then Esc. 9. R. 2. n. 54. died.
By this Lady he had Issue, two Sons; Boork in Kent  Huntingdon Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, and Iohn Holland Earl of Huntingdon and Duke of Exceter; as also two Daughters,

Ioane and Pat. 39. E. 3. p. 1. Esc. 48. E. 3. n. 14.  Esc. 51. E. n. 6. Maude, the later was Wife to Hugh Courtney, eldest Son to Sir Hugh Courtney, one of the Founders of this Order, an. 39. E. 3.
This noble Earl, after the performance of many brave acts in the Kings Ser|vice, died the Esc. 35. E. 3. n. 104. 26. of December, an. 34. E. 3. Thomas his Son and Heir being then much about the tenth year of his age.


(15) Sir Iohn Grey of Codnore.
HE was Claus. 11. E. 3. p. 1. m. 21. dorso. eldest Son of Richard Lord Grey of Codnore in Derbyshire (by Claus. 11. E. 3. p. 1. m. 21. dorso. Iane his Wife) who had been Rot. Vasc. 6. E. 3. m. 1. Seneschal of Gascoigne, in the Reign of King Edward the Second.
In that notable and famous Expedition made into Scotland, Rot. Scot. 7. E. 3. m. 31. an. 7. E. 3. he had Command, where his valour was so far taken notice of, that not long after, the King in Claus. 9. E. 3. m. 8. Dorso. part of recompence thereof, and of his Claus. 9. E. 3. m. 8. Dorso. great expences in those Wars, acquitted him of all such debts as he then owed unto his Exchequer.
Towards the end of the Rot. Scot. 9. E. 3. m. 33. 9. year of E. 3. he went again to the Wars of Scot|land (being of the Retinue of Hugh Andley) and Rot. Scot. 11. E. 3. m. 4. two years after, in another Ex|pedition then made thither.
An. 12. E. 3. he Rot. Alman. 12. E. 3. m. 6. attended the King into Flanders, and Rot. Alman. 14. E. 3. m. 6. an. 14. E. 3. went over thither, when by the way, that famous Naval Fight hapned neer Sluce. The following year he undertook employment in the Rot. Scot. 15. E. 3. m. 2. Scotish Wars. An. 18. E. 3. he with Nicholas de Langford and Edward de Chandos were Rot. Scot. 18. E. 3. m. 9. assigned to Array all able men in Derbyshire, from 16 to 60 years of age, and to have them in readiness to march with them, or others whom the King should appoint, within three days warning against the Scots, then ready to invade this Kingdom.
The following year, he went in the Rot. Fr. 19. E. 3. p. 1. m. 15. Retinue of Henry Earl of Derby into Gascoigne; and in regard he stayed there the next year in the Kings Service, his Rot. Fr. 20. E. 3. m. 10. Dorso. Lands in Kent were exempted from finding men for guarding the Sea-Coasts. With this Earl he returned to England, and went to Calais in his Retinue, Rot. Fr. 21. E. 3. m. 8. an. 21. E. 3. and stayed there the Rot. Fr. 22. E. 3. m. 4. following year.
There being an Invasion threatned by the French an. 26. E. 3. he was Rot. Fr. 26. E. 3. m. 5. joined in Commission with the Lord Deyncourt, to Array all able persons in Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire, and to conduct them to such places, as might stand in need of them, for defence of the Realm.
He went in the Expedition which the foresaid Rot. Fr. 29. E. 3. m. 5. Earl made into Bregne, an. 29. E. 3. And after attended the Rot. Fr. 33. E. 3. m. 6. King in his Voyage royal into France, an. 33. E. 3. and the same year was Rot. Fin. 33. E. 3. m. 9. constituted Governour of the Town and Castle of Rochester for life.
More of his Military Services we find not, before he obtained the Kings Li|cense Pat. 39. E. 3. p. 1. m. 7. an. 39. E. 3. to go on Pilgrimage. And an. 45. E. 3. being grown Pat. 45. E. 3. p. 1. m. 16. very aged and not able to endure Travel, he obtained a special Pat. 45. E. 3. p. 1. m. 16. Dispensation (where|in his many and great Services performed with much fidelity and valour, are by the King acknowledged) to exempt him from coming to Parliaments (to which he had received Summons, from the time of his Fathers death, which hap|ned Esc. 9. E. 3. n. 45. an. 9. E. 3.) and Councils; and charging him with setting forth of Soldi|ers in the Wars for the future.
He married Collect. W. D. N. Alice de Insula, by whom he had Collect. W. D. N. Henry his eldest Son, who married Collect. W. D. N. Ioane Daughter of Reginald Cobham of Sterborough, but died before his Father, and Iohn his second Son, who both went in the Rot. Fr. 45. E. 3. m. 13.  15. Retinue of Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, in his Expedition into France, an. 43. E. 3. and Alice, a Daughter, Wife of Collect. R. Glov. Somers. William, Son of Sir Adam de Everingham, of Laxton in the County of Nottingham.



(16.) Sir Richard Fitz Simon.
WE have met with little concerning this Noble Knight; but that he had command under Rot. Franc. 19. E. 3. p. 1. m. 15. Henry of Lancaster Earl of Derby, in Gascoigne, an. 19. E. 3. The following year he went with Rot. Franc. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 11. Robert Vfford Earl of Suffolk, when he attended the King in his Expedition into France, Rot. Franc. 21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 14. An. 21. E. 3. he was imployed in the Kings Service beyond Sea; and lastly, he was in command under the Rot. Franc. 22. E. 3. m. 4. Prince of Wales, an. 22. E. 3. and in these Expeditions he perform|ed so great Services, that he was thought worthy to be Elected one of the first Founders of this most Noble Order.


(17.) Sir Miles Stapleton.
THis Sir Miles Stapleton was Son and Heir to Sir Miles Stapleton, of Bedall in the County of York Knight.
His first employment in the Wars, was, when King Edward the Third made his Expedition into Rot. Franc. 16. E. 3. m. 20. Bretagne. He also Rot. Franc. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 14. attended the King in his Voyage Royal into France, Rot. Franc. 21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 15. an. 20. E. 3. and lay at the Seige before Calais. Rot. Franc. 23. E. 3. m. 6. An. 23. E. 3. about the Month of Iuly he was employed in the Kings Service beyond Sea; and the like Rot. Franc. 29. E. 3. m. 8. an. 29. E. 3.
In the 30. year of King Edward the Third, Froissard l. 1. c. 258. Philip, Brother to the King of Naevarre (taken Prisoner by the French King the year before) came over into England, and obtained assistance for recovery of his Lands in Normandy: where|upon the King joyned to him this Sir Miles Stapleton, a man of great integrity and in martial affairs very skillful, as Froissard Characterizeth him. These two, with 2000. men passed through Normandy, and, as they marched, took and burnt several Towns and Fortresses, till they came within 9. Leagues of Paris, and did not retreat, till they had forced the French to enter into Truce for a Year. For this Expedition the said Philip of Navarre, was 16. Ian. Rot. Franc. 31. E. 3. m. 2. constituted the Kings Captain and Lieutenant in the Dutchy of Normandy.
In consideration of the 21. Iune. Pat. 34. E. 3. p. 2. m. 30. constant fidelity and eminent valour of this Noble Knights, as also his great service in the Wars, the King 21. Iune. Pat. 34. E. 3. p. 2. m. 30. granted to him a Pension of 100 l. per annum out of his Exchequer for life, until he had that annual value in Lands or Rents provided for him. And shortly after, Upon information that seve|ral injuries and damages had been done to the French by the English, after and against the Truce taken near Chartres, the King, desirous that it should be kept without violation, and the infringers thereof punished: 3. Iuly. Rot. Franc. 34. E. 3. m. 5. constituted him with Sir Nele Loring, and Sir Richard Stafford, his Commissioners, 3. Iuly. Rot. Franc. 34. E. 3. m. 5. to inform them|selves of the way and manner how these injuries might be discovered and re|paired, and gave them power to arrest and imprison, to seize and confiscate their Estates, and to punish them according as they deserved.
He married Pat. 2. E. 3. p. 2. m. 22. Ioane the Daughter and Heir of Oliver de Ingham, and Ib. m. 21. Relict of Roger le Strange; and dyed on Esc. 1. R. 2. n. 32. Wednesday next before the Feast of St. Nicho|las, an. 38. E. 3. leaving his Son Miles, then about 20 years of age. The Cu|stody of his Lands was 21. Feb. 39. E. 3. granted to the Queen, who 12. May fol|lowing. granted it to Bryan Sta|pleton Knight, Iohn de Boys, and Roger de Boys, till his said Son came of age; which Grant the King confirmed the same day by his Letters Patent. He and his Wife were both buried at the House of Collect. Fr. Thynn Lancast. penes Will. Peirpoint Ar. Ingham founded by his Mothers Ancestors.


(18.) Sir Thomas Wale.
HE was the Son of Esc. 17. E. 3. n. 40. Sir Thomas Wale, and Esc. 17. E. 3. n. 40. Lucy his Wife; which Lucy held the Mannor of Wedon-Pinkney, in the County of Northampton, with its ap|purtenances, in her Demesne as of Fee of the King in Capite, as of the Fee Pink|ney,

by the service of one Knights Fee: and long before her death she setled the said Mannor on this Sir Thomas and his Heirs, as appears by the Ibid. Inquisition taken after her death, wherein the said Sir Thomas is found to be her next Heir, and then about 40 years of age.
He attended the King into Rot. Alman. 12. E. 3. p. 1. m. 3. Flanders, an. 12. E. 3. and had command under William de Bohun Earl of Northampton, in the Expedition which the King made into Bretagne, Rot. Fr. 16. E. 3. m. 36. an. 16. E. 3. so also beyond Sea in the Kings service, with Richard Earl of Arundel, Rot. Fr. 18. E. 3. m. 23. an. 18. E. 3.
We find not that he had any issue by his Wife Esc. 26. E. 3. n. 21. North. Nichola, who out-lived him; but that his three Esc. 26. E. 3. n. 21. North. Sisters were his Heirs, namely, Esc. 26. E. 3. n. 21. North. Margaret, the Wife of  Malorre; Alice, of Thomas Chamberlain; and Iulian.
He dyed in Gascoigne, on Ibid. Tuesday next after the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, an. 26. E. 3. being a Hist. Tho de la Mare, vide Stow, Chron. p. 253. Knight of great vertue and worthiness: so that, of all the Stalls of the first Founders, his first became void; into which succeeded Reginald Lord Cobham, of Sterborough.


(19.) Sir Hugh Wrottesley
SIR Hugh Wrottesley was Son to Ex Autogr. penes Walt. Wrottesley de Wrottesley in Com. Staff. Ba|ronet. 9. Apr. 1663. Sir William Wrottesley of Wrottesley in the County of Stafford Knight.
It appears, that Pat. 8. E. 3. p. 1. m. 21. an. 8. E. 3. he designed a Voyage to the Holy-Land, and to that end had obtained the Pat. 8. E. 3. p. 1. m. 21. Kings Letters for appointing Peter de Hoe and Thomas de Chency his Attornies, during his absence, to prosecute his Suits in any Court of England.
An. 12. E. 3. he went in the Kings Service into Rot. Alman. 12. E. 3. m 3. p. 1. Flanders, when the King went over thither to confer with his Allies. And at the Rot. Chart.  Pat. apud Cales. 21. E. 3. m. 5. Siege of Calais, he had the Kings Licence to inclose his Wood at Wrottesley, and make a Park. Rot. Pat. 23. E. 3. p. 3. m. 33. Two years after, for his good service, he granted to him the Custody of the Lands and Tenements which were William de Pilatehall deceased, till his Heirs came of age, with the marriages of them, without rendring any thing theretofore.
An. 24. E. 3. the King 16. Oct. Pat. 24. E. 3. p. 3. m. 17. granted him a Pension of 40 l. per annum out of his Exchequer, for his life; upon the surrender of which Letters Patent, he 20. May Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 2. m. 21. grant|ed him 40 l. per annum to be thus received, viz. 16 l. 4 s. 4 d. out of the Farm of the Villages of Mere and Clent, 11 l. 10 s. out of the Farm of the Village of Swinford, 11 l. out of the Farm of the Village of Kinefare and Tetenhale, and 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. out of the Farm of the Foresters Fee of Tedesley, to hold for life, or till he had 40 l. per annum in Lands or Rents, setled on him for life; yet to be answerable for the overplus being 1 s. 8 d. These last Letters Patent were 27. Ian. Pat. 1. R. 2. m. 31. confirmed to him by King Richard the Second, in the first year of his Reign.
He married Esc. 43. E. 3. Mabill, the Daughter of Sir Philip ap Rees, and Ioane his Wife, by whom he had issue S. Eardswicks view of Staf|fordshire. Iohn, whose heir male in a direct line is Sir Walter Wrottesley of Wrottesley, in the County of Stafford, Baronet, now living. He also had to his second Wife Ex ipso Au|togr. penes praef. Walt. Wrottes|ley. Isabel, Daughter of MS. in Offic. Arm. [C. 10.] fol. 126. Iohn Arderne of Aldeford, Aderlegh, and Edds. And dyed the Esc. 4. R. 2. n. 61. Heref. Monday after the Feast of St. Vincent, an. 4. R. 2.


(20.) Sir Nele Loring.
AT the Naval Fight before Sluce, his Valour was so remarkable, that it gain|ed him the Honor of Knighthood, to which the King immediately added a Vide Co|mun. de Ter. Trin. 15. E. 3. m. 3. dorso,  Pat. 31. E. 3. p. 3. m. 6. Donation of 20 l. per annum, to him and his Heirs males, for the better sup|port of that Dignity, till Lands of the like annual value were provided for him and them: These Letters Patent bear Teste at Sluce, Vide Co|mun. de Ter. Trin. 15. E. 3. m. 3. dorso,  Pat. 31. E. 3. p. 3. m. 6. 26. of Iune, in the 14. year of the Kings Reign over England, and his first of France.
In the Kings Expedition into Rot. F. E. 3. m. 24. Bretagne, he attended him thither, and an. 18. E. 3. went beyond Sea in his Service. In the beginning of the following year, Rot. Rom. 19. E. 3. m. 4. he and Michael Northburgh, Canon of Lihfeild and Hereford, were sent to the Pope's Court, with the Kings Letter (dated 23. Feb. an. 19. E. 3.) to obtain a Di|spensation for the marriage of the Prince of Wales, with the Daughter of the Duke of Brabant. At his return he went with Rot. Fr. 19. E. 3. p. 1. m. 15. Henry de Lancaster Earl of Der|by, into Gascoigne, where he Rot. Fr. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 6. stayed the following year: After which coming over into England, he within a short time Rot. Fr. 21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 20. returned to his Commands in Gascoigne.
An. 29. E. 3. he Rot. Vasc. 9. E. 3. m. 8. attended the Prince of Wales in his Expedition into Gascoigne, and being Pat 33. . 3. p. 1. m. 20. specially assigned to attend his person in the Battel at Poictiers, he performed his duty so well, that he received both Pat 33. . 3. p. 1. m. 20. acknowledgments and re|wards from the Prince, for that days service. He was afterwards Prim Iuly, Rot. Vasc. 35. E. 3. m. 8. appointed by King Edward, to be one of his Commissioners, for receiving the possession of all Countries, Cities, Forts, c. that by the Treaty of Peace near Chartres were to be delivered to him.
When the Prince of Wales was created Prince of Guyenne, he Rot. Vasc. 36. E. 3. m. 4.  6. attended him thither again, and there Rot. Vasc. 39. E. 3. m. 5. continued four years; whence returning into England he stayed not long, but Rot. Vasc. 40. E. 3. m. 14. went back again, and remained there three years. After which, coming into England, and being again sent into Aquitaine, Rot. Vasc. 43. E. 3. m. 4. Writs were directed to Robert de Ashton, Admiral towards the West, for the passage of him and Sir Iohn de la Haye, their Soldiers and Retinue; and this year he was one of those Knights of the Prince's Retinue, sent to meet Hollinsh. pag. 402. Sir Robert Knolls, at his coming out of Bretagne, whom they met at Quercy, and assisted at the Sieges of Ibid. 403. Durmel and Domme, both which, though they thought fit to break up, yet marching further into the Country, they took Gauaches, Freins, Rochmador, and Ville Franche, upon the marches of Tholouze.
He was an active man, and did King Edward great services, which induced him to confer many favours on him, in recompence thereof; as first, he 6. Oct. Pat. 9. E. 3. m. 19. grant|ed him a Pension of 5 l. a year, during his life, to be paid him by the Abbess of Burnham, out of the 15 l. per annum she was to pay into the Exchequer, for the Fee Farm of the Mannor of Bollestrade. Next, he 24. Sept. apud Anwerp. Pat. 12. E. 3. granted him a Pension of 20 Marks per annum for his life, out of his Exchequer, until Lands of the year|ly value of 10 l. should be setled on him. The following year he Pat. concess. hominib. Ang.  Vasc. 13. E. 3. m. 10. granted him all the Lands and Tenements belonging to Iohn, the Son of Henry de Morff, in Alnetheley in Shropshire, which, by forfeiture of the said Iohn Escheated to the King, to hold to him and his Heirs for ever. Besides these, the Prince having retained him in his service, as well in Peace as for War, granted to him for life a Pension of 50 l. per annum, and that it might be more certainly paid, he after granted to him his Mannors of Neuyn and Purchely in North Wales for life, which the King 30. Apr. Pat. 23. E. 3. p. 1. m. 3. confirmed.
Afterwards, Henry Earl of Lancaster, the Kings Lieutenant in Aquitaine, for the good service this Knight had formerly done the King in England, Scotland, and elsewhere, and also to himself in Gascoigne, by Letters Patent dated the 12. of November an. Dom. 1346. gave him for his life Pedalium Sancti Macharii, with all the profits thereto belonging; which grant the King 26. Apr. Rot. Vasc. 22. E. 3. m. 34. confirmed to him, an. 22. E. 3.
This noble Knight was Son and Heir of Rot Vasc. 43. E. 3. m. 3. Roger Loring and Coll. A. V. W. Cassandrae, Daugh|ter of Reginald Perot. He married Coll. W. D. N. Margaret, Daughter and Heir of Sir Ralph Beauple of Cnubeston, in Devonshire, by Coll. A. V. W. Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter and Heir of Alan Bloyho (the relict of Stephen Tinterne Esq) by whom he had Issue, two Daughters and Heirs, namely Esc. 9. R. 2. n. 20. Isabel Wife to Robert Lord Harington; and Esc. 9. R. 2. n. 20. Mar|garet Wife to Inscript. Tu|muli apud Tud|dington. Iohn Peyvre of Tuddington, in the County of Bedford.
He died Esc. 9. R. 2. n. 20. an. 9. R. 2. and was buried in the Iiner Io. Leland. part 6. fol 7. Priory of Dunstable, to which he had been a great Benefactor.



(21.) Sir Iohn Chandos.
THE first Martial Action of his, was at St. Quintins; for while King Ed|ward (in the 13. year of his Reign) lay at siege before Cambray (being the first Town he sate down before, upon his first entrance into France) the Earl of Henault made an assault upon St. Froiss. Chron. lib. 1. cap. 38. Quintins, where this Esquire (so then called by Sir Iohn Froissard) fought valiantly with Iohn de St. Dager an Esquire of Vermandois, between the Bars and the Gate, both manifesting great Courage and Gallantry. And in this Expedition, he was ranged in the Ibid. cap. 41. third Battel, led by the King, which was pitch'd between Vironfosse and Flamengery, to encoun|ter the French.
For his Valour shewn in this Expedition, the King bestowed on him the ho|nor of Knighthood, and at his return to Antwerpe, 15. Nov. Pa|tentes concess. hominib. Angl.  Vasc. 13. E. 3. m. 10. granted him 20 Marks per annum out of his Exchequer, to support that Dignity, till he should settle on him Lands to that yearly value for his life.
When the King led another Army into Flanders, designed also against the French, he attended him, and fought valiantly in the Naval Engagement before Froiss. cap. 5. Sluce.
He was in the Voyage Royal made into Ibid. c. 121. Normandy, an. 20. E. 3. and in its march at Ibid. c. 125. Poisy, he and Sir  Basset, preserved two of the Lord of Poisy's Daughters from violation, and brought them to the King; who caused them to be safely conducted to Corbe, whither they desired to go.
At the Battel of Ibid. c. 128. Cressy he commanded in the Van, led by the Prince of Wales; and when this Prince was An. 29. E. 3. constituted the Kings Lieutenant in Aqui|taine, he attended him in that Expedition; and by his command, summon'd the Castle of Froiss. c. 158. Romorentine, which held out a while, but was at length forced to surrender.
Marching on with the Prince, the Battel of Poictiers approached, and on the Ibid. c. 161. day before, (a Truce for that day being obtained by the endeavours of the Cardinal of Piergort) this valiant Knight coasted about to make discovery of the French Army, as did also the Lord Clermont, one of the French Marshals; and as they returned, they met, and observed that both of them bore the same device, to wit, a Lady in blue, irradiated with the Sun-beams. Cleremont de|manded how long he had born his device, Chandos answered, you bear mine; I deny that, replied Cleremont; and did not the Truce hinder, I would make it good. To morrow, said Chandos, you shall find me ready to justifie it to be mine as well as yours, and so they parted.
The next day the Fight begun, during which St. Iohn Ibid. c. 162. never parted from the Princes side; and when he perceived that the French Marshals was discom|fited, he advised the Prince to advance towards the Kings Battel, telling him there was all the hazard and the glory; which he accordingly did. At the end of this famous Battel, when no more French Banners were left in the field, he prevailed with the Prince to set up his Standard in a Bush near him, to give a signal to his dispersed Army to rally, while he took some refreshment.
An. 33. E. 3. he Ibid. c. 207. attended the King in his Expedition into France, and be|ing at the siege of Ibid. c. 208. Rheyms, he and Sir Iames Audeley, and the Lord Mucident, a Gascoigne, with their Troops, rode near to Chalons in Champaigne, and draw|ing near to Chargny, in Dormois, where was a strong Castle, they gave an assault to it, at which the Lord Mucident being slain, they in revenge made a resolution to take it ere they went away, which they did, putting all to the Sword, and demolishing the Castle. He was constituted Captain and the Kings Lieutenant in the Dukedom of Normandy, and the parts of France, and had 5. Feb. Rot. Franc. 35. E. 3. m. 18. power given him to grant Pardons for Treason, Murder, c. and what|soever he did in this case, the King promised to ratifie under his Great Seal.
After the Peace near Chartres, Sir Iohn Chandos was Primo Iuly Rot. Vasc. 35. E. 3. m. 8. constituted one of King

Edward's Commissioners to take possession of the Dutchy of Aquitaine, where Sir Iames de Bourbon Froiss. c. 214. delivered him the possession of divers Lands, Towns, Ci|ties, Castles, and Fortresses, whereupon he received the Fealty and Homage of all the Nobility and others.
Shortly after he was 30. Iuly Rot. Vasc. 35. E. 3. m. 5. made Captain and Commander in chief of the Castle and Town of Rochel, and all the Country of Xntonge, and a command was there|withall sent to 30. Iuly Rot. Vasc. 35. E. 3. m. 5. Iohn de Monte Ferandi, Custos of the said Castle and Town, to deliver them up to him, with all the Arms, Provisions, and other the King's Stores in his possession. And the following year, when the Prince of Wales (now created Prince of Guyenne) took a Voyage thither, he was made Froiss. c. 217. Constable of Aquitaine, and Sir Guischard d' Angle Marshal.
When the King of Cyprus came into Aquitaine, upon a visit to the Prince, he was Ibid. c. 218. sent to receive and conduct him to Angolesme, where the Prince kept his Court: He also waited on him through Ibid. c. 219. Xantonge and Poictou, to Rochell, to view the Country, whence he returned to Angolesme; where having taken leave of the Prince, he yet attended him to the confines of the Principality.
Froiss. c. 224. Charles de Bloys, having gained new strength from the King of France, and entred Bretagne, this Sir Iohn with some few Forces left Aquitaine, and came to the assistance of Iohn Earl of Montford, who received him with great joy, having so great an opinion of his Valour and Conduct, that he conceived no misfortune could fall upon him while he stayed with him. By his advice and valour (as all acknowledged) the French were defeated, Sir Ibid. c. 226. Bertrand de Gues|clin, taken Prisoner by an English Esquire under Sir Iohn's Standard, Charles de Bloys there slain, and the Enemy pursued 8 Leagues, even to the Gates of Ren|nes. This Battel was fought on Walsingh. p. 174. Michaelmas day an. 38. E. 3. where were taken two Earls, 27 Lords, and 1500 men at Arms. The news of the Victory being brought to the King (then at Dover) by a Froiss. c. 227. Pursuivant of Arms, who had been in the Battel, the King for his good service, created him a Herald by the name of Windesor (there was also an Herald who had the addition of Ibid. c. 257.260.  264. Chandos given him in honor of this noble Knight, whom he employed in Aquitaine, upon seve|ral occasions.) This good success begat a Treaty, which setled the Ibid. c. 229. Earl of Montfort in the Dukedom of Bretagne by the King of France, to whom he did Homage, as the Dukes before had done.
In the Prince's Voyage to Spain he had command in the Van, led by the Duke of Lancaster, and immediately before the joining of the Battel, this noble Knight was created See before pag. 42. Banneret; which honor was not only well bestowed, but by his valiant carriage in the Fight, as well deserved; for Froiss. c. 237. he and his men hapning to encounter Sir Bertrand de Guesclin (who had been ransomed from his former im|prisonme at 100000 Franks) and the Marshal Sir Arnold Dandrehen, they took them Ibid. c. 238. both Prisoners, and defeated their Battel.
After his return out of Spain, he obtained leave to reside at St. Saviour le Vis|count; but when the French invaded Gascoigne, the Prince sent for him back, and employed him in the conduct of that War, wherein he behaved himself most valiantly, and in a word Ibid. 270. recovered and kept Aquitaine, the particulars of whose famous actions from hence to his death may be seen in Lib. 1. c. 245.251.256.258.264.265.268.  270. Sir Iohn Froissard, out of whom we are loth to cloy our Reader with too much of transcription, and shall therefore only note, that in this time he was made Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 263. Constable of Poictou and Vide Pat. 48. F. 3. p. 1. m. 7. Marshal of Aquitaine.
He had the 12. May Pat. 34. E. 3. m. 35. Barony of St. Saviours le Viscount, of Domvers and Dongeville, and the Lands and Tenements of St. Mary de Monte de Farsellis, and de Romelly, and all the Lands which were formerly Sir Godfry de Harecourts in Normandy, given him and his heirs for ever, by King Edward (to whom the said Sir Godfry had sold them, to be possessed after his death) which being not comprised in the Froiss cap. 213. Treaty of Peace near Chartres, the Homage for them became due to the King of France; but there having passed so great Testimonies of affection and respect, between King Edward and King Iohn, the latter, at the request of King Edward, before he went from Calais, Froiss cap. 213. sealed to Sir Iohn Chandos, a confirmation of King Edward's grant to possess them as his inheritance for ever. Whereupon command was sent

to Pat. 34. E. 3. p. 1. m. 35. Sir Thomas Holland, then Captain and Custos thereof, forthwith to deliver the Castles, Baronies, and all the Lands and Tenements to the said Iohn. And here|upon he was sometimes stiled Pat. 35. E. 3. m. 3. Baro Sancti Salvatoris le Viscount, and at other, Pat. 48. E. 3. par. 1. Vicecomes Sancti Salvatoris in Normania.
The last martial action of this most famous Knight, and which proved fatal to him, was Froiss. c. 270. near to St. Salvin, an Abbey in Poictou, which having been be|trayed to the French by a Monk who hated the Abbot, he endeavoured to re|cover it the Ibid. last of December in the night, Walsingham p. 181. an. 44. E. 3. but missing of his de|sign, and intending to return to Poictou, he encountred a party of the French at Lusach-bridge, where the way being slippery, he fell down, and as he was rising one Iaques de St. Martyn an Esquire, struck him under his Eye into the brain with a Glave; for having Froiss loc. cit. lost the sight of that Eye five years before, as he was hunting a Hart neer Bordeaux, he saw not the blow come. The French knew him by his Surcoat of Arms, and endeavoured to get his body, but his Uncle Edward Clyfford bestrid him, and defended it; and other relief coming in, the French men were taken Prisoners. He was thence carried to Mortymer For|tress, where he lay a day and night speechless, and then died, and lies there buried.
His death was exceedingly lamented by all, and when the French King heard of it he was very much troubled, saying, Walsing. loco cit. there was now no Knight left alive, that was able to make Peace between the Kings and Kingdoms of France and England; so much was he feared, so highly esteemed, and so generally beloved.
He was never married, but we find he had three Sisters; Communia Ter. Mich. an. 3. H. 5. Elizabeth, who died 9. R. 2. Alionora, the Wife of Roger Colinge; and Margaret.


(22.) Sir Iames Audeley.
THis noble Knight was Son and Heir of Nicholas Lord Audeley, and of Iane, Sister and Heir of William the Son of William Martyn, and was born an. Collect. W. D. N. 7. E. 2.
He was no sooner come of age, but he entred upon Martial Employments, wherein for several years he became engaged in the Wars against the Scots, and there did the King so great service, that in recompence thereof, and the great charge he had been at in supporting himself in those Wars, he forgave him the sum of Pat. 9. E. 3. p. 2. m. 13. 10000 Marks, which he was engaged to pay Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, by whose attainder it became forfeited to the King.
An. 16. E. 3. he was made 4. Aug. Rot. Scot. 16. E. 3. m. 10. Custos of the Town of Berwick upon Twede du|ring pleasure; and by other Letters Patent of the same date, constituted the Kings 4. Aug. Rot. Scot. 16. E. 3. m. 10. Iustice of the said Town, and of all other the Kings Lands in the parts of Scotland, to execute all things appertaining to that Office, according to the Law and Custom of Scotland.
Not long after, he was engaged to go beyond Sea, in the Kings Service, with Nicholas Audeley Earl of Gloucester, and thereupon the Kings Letters of Pro|tection were 4. Sept. Rot. Franc. 16. E. 3. m 25. obtained for him, to hold till Easter following.
The Ibid. m. 11. 20. of December after, the Kings special Letter was directed to him, to provide 20. Men at Arms, and 20. Archers, to be sent to Portsmouth by the first of March ensuing, and thence to pass in the Kings Service with the Earls of Arundel and Huntingdon.
An. 18. E. 3. he went into Rot Fr. 18. E. 3. m. 19. Gascoigne with the Earl of Derby, in his Expedi|tion thither. The following year he received Command, personally Rot. Fr. 19. E. 3. m. 4. to at|tend the King, and to serve him with his Retinue, for defence of this Kingdom against the French, at the Kings charge.
And when the King made his Royal Voyage into France, an. 20. E. 3. he Froiss. Chron. l. 1. c. 121. attended him thither. He was sent over from the Seige of Calais, with 2 Apr. Rot. Franc. 21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 17. Com|mand to raise what Forces he could, and to bring them to Sandwich, by Ascen|sion-Day,

well arm'd, to pass over to Calais, in regard the French King was drawing together a vast Army, with intention to raise the Seige.
In the Prince of Wales's Expedition into Gascoigne, an. 29. E. 3. He Rot. Vasc. 29. E. 3. m. 11. at|tended him thither, and at the Battel of Poctiers, gained everlasting Fame. For immediately before the Battels joined, Froissard l. 1. c. 162. he acquainted the Prince, that he had served his Father and him faithfully, and had made a vow, to give the onset, or dye in the attempt, at the first Battel that the King or any of his Sons should personally be engaged in, and therefore beg'd his License, to place himself there, where he might be in the best capacity to accomplish his Vow; which the Prince giving way to, he put himself into the Front of the English Army (ac|companied with his 4. Esquires, (viz. Lib. MS. pe|nes W. Flower nuper Norroy R. Armor. Dutton of Dutton, Delves of Doddington, Fowlehurst of Crew, and Hawkeston of Wrinehill) who had obliged themselves to stick close to him) and encountred with Sir Arnold Dandrehen, who com|manded in the French Marshalls Battel, and was sorely wounded by him, but taken Prisoner by others; for this valiant Knight and his Esquires refused to take Prisoners, but spent their time in execution: In this Battel he was most dangerously wounded, in the Body and Face; and at the end of it his 4. Esquires brought him out of the Field, and laid him under a Hedg, to re|fresh him, where they took off his Arms and bound up his Wounds.
His Holinshed p. 263. valour and stout performances were greatly wondred at by the French Commanders, as they acknowledged the following night, when they sate at Supper in Poictiers, and it is reported by Walingham, p. 164. that by his extraordinary courage he brake through the Enemies Battel, and made great slaughter among them.
Ib. c. 16. As soon as the Prince had sent to find out the French King, he enquired af|ter this Knight, and being told where he lay wounded, he sent to know if he could be brought to him, otherwise he would come to visit him: this being told Sir Iames, he caused 8. of his Servants to carry him in his Litter to the Prince, who took him in his Arms and kist him, acknowledging he ought to honor him, for by his valour he had gain'd great renown; and to enable him to pursue martial affairs, he retained him to be his Knight, with 500. marks Land of Inheritance.
Sir Iames being departed from the Prince, sent for his Brother Sir Peter Audeley, with some other of his nearest Relations, and called before them his 4. Esquires, to whom he declared, that seeing the honor he had that day gain'd was by his Esquires valour, he gave them the said 500. marks per annum as freely as the Prince had bestowed them on him.
This generous action the Ibid. c. 169. Prince being acquainted with, sent for Sir Iames, who being brought to him in his Litter, the Prince told him, that he had been inform'd of his Gift to his Esquires, and would therefore know, whether he liked his kindness? or why he gave it away? To whom he gave a particular account of their fidelity and services, which he thought himself obliged to reward, affirming it was by their assistance he accomplished his Vow, and had his life preserv'd, and therefore humbly desir'd pardon for doing it with|out his knowledge. Herewith the Prince was so well satisfied, that he 3. May Pat. 33. E. 3. p. 2. m. 14. after|wards gave him 600. Marks per annum more, in like manner as he had done the former; this grant was 6. Aug. Ibid. confirm'd to him by the King, during life, and for a twelve Month after, to be received out of the Coynage of the Stanneries in Cornwall, and the Kings Lands in that County.
This valiant Knight did afterwards Rot. Vasc. 33. E. 3. p. 2. m. 8. attend the King in his Royal expedition into France, an. 33. E. 3. And was in the action with Froiss. c. 207. Sir Iohn Chandos, and the Lord Mucident, when the strong Castle of Dormoys was taken by assault.
When the Prince undertook a voyage into Spain, to restore Don Pedro, he constituted him Froissard  239. Governor of Aquitaine in his absence, and afterwards made him Ibid. c. 259. great Seneschal of Poictou about this time he raised a great Ar|my there, and marched to Berry, and wasted that Country, and thence passed to Tourayn, keeping the Field; and then to the Lord of Chauuigny's

Country (he being lately revolted to the French) and destroy'd it; afterwards he took the Town of Breuse by assault, and burnt it, and so returned to Poictiers. He was with Sir Iohn Chandos at the Siege of Ib. c. 258. Dome, and of the strong Castle of Ib. c. 262. Roche sur Ion in Anjou, which at length was surrendred, and thence he re|tired to fresh Quarters in the County of Fontney.
And here Sir Iohn Froissard puts a period to his life, and faith he was bu|ried at Poictiers: but he mistakes Iames the Father for Iames the Son, who in truth died in Gascoigne, an. Esc. an. 45. E. 3. n. 1. 43. E. 3. which was near about Froissard, time, after whom his Father lived many years; having received Summons of Parlia|liament, an. 4. E. 3. and thence to all ensuing Parliaments, to the time of his Death.
This Noble Lord married to his first Wife, Monasticon Angl. Vol. 2.224. b. Vide Pat. 4. E. 3. Ioan, Daughter to Roger Mor|timer Earl of March, by whom he had Collect. W. D. N. Nicholas, his Son and Heir, Collect. W. D. N. Roger, and Rowland, who died without Issue, and two Daughters, Ioan the Wife of Iohn Tochet, and Margaret Wife of Roger Hillary, who upon their elder Brothers Decease also without Issue, became Heirs to a fair Patrimony, but the Barony came to Iohn Tochet, Son to the eldest Daughter.
By his second Wife, Esc. 20. E. 3. n. 58. Vide Pat. 27. E. 3. p. 1. m. 1. Isabel, he had Esc. 20. E. 3. n. 58. Vide Pat. 27. E. 3. p. 1. m. 1. Iames, and Thomas, who died without Issue, and Margaret the Wife of Fulk Fitz-Waren. And having lived to a very great Age, he died Esc. an. 9. R. 2. n. 1. Staff. the first of April, an. 9. R. 2. leaving Nicholas his Son and Heir, then 50 years of Age, having a little before made his Will at Heligh Castle, by which he Ex Lib. in Offic. princi|pal. Cantuar. vocat. Court|ney. f. 121. b. appointed his Body to be buried in the Choire of his Abbey of Hilton, before the high Altar in case he should dye in the Marches, but if in Devonshire, or Somersetshire, then in the Choir of the Friers Preachers, at Exce|ter, before the high Altar.


(23) Sir Otho Holland.
HE was one of the younger Sons of Robert Lord Holland, and Brother of Sir Thomas Holland, one of the first Founders of this Noble Order.
The Term. Trin. 24. E. 3. rot. 32. Angl. Earl of Ewe, Constable of France, being Prisoner of War to the said Thomas, the King bought him of him for a certain sum of Money, and after|wards by Indenture deliver'd the said Earl to the Custody of the said Sir Otho Holland, under condition, that the Earl should not go out of England, nor wear Arms publickly, until he had paid his full Ransom to the King. But it seems Sir Otho took the Earl with him to Calais, where he went up and down armed; upon which, information being given to the King, Sir Otho was brought to the Kings Bench Bar, before the Chancellor, Treasurer, the Earls of Arundel, and Huntingdon, Sir Bartholomew Burghersh, Mr. Nicholas Northburgh, Clark of the Privy Seal, William Basset, and other the Kings Justices, and be|ing not able to deny the premises, he put himself upon the Kings favour, and was thereupon committed to the Custody of Iohn de Long Marshal of the Kings Bench.
We have met with little else concerning this Knight, save that he went over into Rot. Fr. 29. E. 3. m. 7. Bretagne, with his said Brother Thomas, an. 29. E. 3. and had been Claus. 33. E 3. m. 19. dorso Governor of Gernsey, Iarsey, Sark, and Aurney. We also find, that a Term. Trin. 24. E. 3. Rot. 32. Angl. Fine was acknow|ledged at Westminster on the morrow after the Purification of our Lady, an. 33. E. 3. between him and the said Otho Querent, and Robert de Holland the elder, Knight, and Robert de Holland the younger, Deforcients, of the Mannor of Yoke|shale, and the Advowson of the Church there, to the use of the said Otho for life, and after his death to return to the said Sir Robert the elder, and Robert the younger, and the Heirs of the said Sir Robert. But he lived not to enjoy the benefit of it long, for he dyed in Normandy the Esc 34. E. 3 n. 37. 3. day of September following, being seized also for life of the Mannors of Esc 34. E. 3 n. 37. Kersey in Suffolk, Taleworth in Sur|rey, and Chesterfield in Derbyshire, and these of the gift of his Brother Thomas, and the Lady Ioane his Wife; as also of the Mannor of Esc 34. E. 3 n. 37. Dalbery in the said County of Derby for life, by the Grant of Robert de Holland.



(24.) Sir Henry Eam.
ALL we have met with relating to this noble Knight, is only what the follow|ing Instrument (made to him by the Prince of Wales, of an Annuity of 100 marks, and confirmed by the King) doth inform us of: whereby it ap|pears, that he was a Native of Brabant, and received the Honor of Knighthood from the said Prince's hands.
Pat. an. 23. Edw. 3. par. 2. m. 24. Rex omnibus ad quos, c. Salutem. Inspeximus Literas Patentes dilecti  fidelis nostri Edwardi, Principis Walliae, Ducis Cornubiae,  Comitis Cestriae, filii nostri Charissimi in haec verba. Edward eisn filz au Noble Roy d'Engleterre  de France, Prince de Gales, Duc de Cornwaill,  Counte de Cestre. A tous ceux qui cestes Lettres verront on orront, Saluz. Sachez que come nostre trescher  bien ame Mon|sit Henri Eam au temps qil avoit pris de noz meins l'Ordre de Chivaler, se ofrist  premist de sa fraunche volunt, destre entendant  noz services  terme de sa vie,  qeu temps qe nos luy ferrions sufficialment garnir, d'aler ovesqe nous queu part que nous vourrions, auessi bien pur la pees, come pur la guerre,  destre armes od nous  noz volontez countre toute gent forpris le Ducs de Brabant son Seigneur lige en la defense de ses terres propres: Nous acceptantz celles offre premesse  voillantz pour son dit service avoir,  qil soit le plus tennz  nous servir devant nul antre, tiel regard faire  luy dont il se purra le mieltz contenir  l'avenance de son estat, lui avons don un annuele rent de Cent marez  terme de sa vie,  receiure de nostre Manoir de Bradenash en Counte de Deveneshire chesun an  les termes de Pasques  de Seint Michel per oueles porcions per les meyns des gar|deins de mesmes le Manoir qi pur les temps serront les offre  premesse dussusditz en toutz pointz tenuz  gardez,  volons que  qule heure,   quant des foitz son dit paiement soit aderrier en partie, ou en tout  nul terme assign, il lise au dit Monsir Henri destreindre en le dit Manoir,  les destresses tenir tanqil soit pleine|ment paiez de quanqe lui serra  derriere, come dessus est dit. En Tesmoignance de quel chose, nous avons fait faire cestes noz Lettres overtez. Donn souz no|stre Seal Westm. le xviij. jour de Jeneuer, l'an du Regne nostre trescher Sei|gneur  Piere le Roy d'Engleterre vintisme primer,  de France octisme. Nos autem concessionem praedictam ratem habentes  gratam, eam pro nobis  haeredi|bus nostris quantum in nobis est praefato Henrico ad totam vitam suam, tenere prae|sentium concedimus,  confirmamus, sicut Literae praedictae rationabilitr testantur. In cujus, c. Teste Rege apud Westmonasterium xxviij. die Iunii.
Per ipsum Regem.


(25) Sir Sanchet Dabrichcourt.
Lib. 1. c. 9.SIR Iohn Froissard takes notice, that Queen Isabel, Wife to King Edward the Second, being driven out of France, was courteously entertained at the Castle of Amberticourt in Henault, by a Knight of that name, whose then it was, and that thereupon the Queen and the Prince brought him, his Lady and Chil|dren, over with them, where they all received advancement in the Court of England. 'Tis very probable then, that this Sir Sanchet might be Son to that Knight; and yet Ralph Brooke, York Herald, makes him to be the Son of Eustace Dabrichcourt, and Elizabeth, Daughter of the Duke of Iuliers, the Relict of the Iohn Plantagenet, Earl of Kent. But this is a great mistake, and overseen by Augustine Vincent, Windesor Herald, in his correction of Brooke. For it is clear, Ex Lib. in Offic. principal. antuar. vcat. Islip. f. 166. b. that, after the death of that Earl, his Widow vowed chastity in the Mo|nastery of Waverly, where she continued some years, and that on Michaelmas

day an. Dom. 1360. which was above 11. years after the Institution of this Order of the Garter, she was clandestinely married to Eustace de Abrichescourt, by one Iohn de Ireland, and therefore he could not be Son of these two persons, whose marriage was so long after the Institution of that Order, whereof he was one of the first Founders.
We find mention of a Pat. 19. E. 3. p. 2. m. 10. gift, which King Edward the Third made to this Knight, of all the Chattels belonging to Iohn Wardedien, who had fled for kil|ling of Robert Poteman, but nothing else.


(26) Sir Walter Paveley.
THis Sir Walter was Son and Heir of Collect. A. V. W. Walter Paveley, and Collect. A. V. W. Maud, Daughter and Heir of Stephen Burghersh: His said Father died, an. 1. E. 3. at which time he was about Collect. A. V. W. 8 years old. He was also Rot. Fin. m. 4. Cousin and next Heir to Henry Burghersh Bishop of Lincolne.
He went into Bretagne in the Rot. Fr. 16. E. 3. m. 24. Kings Service, with Sir Bartholomew Burghersh senior, an. 16. E. 3. so also the Rot. Fr. 17. E 3. m 3.  15 following year; and again Rot. Fr. 19. E. 3. p. 1. m. 8. an. 19. E. 3.
The Rot. Fr. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 3. 20. of King Edward the Third, he went with him in the Expedition the King made into France, and therefore had his Lands in Ibid. m. 16. Dorso. Northamptonshire and Ibid. m. 16. Dorso. Wiltshire discharged from finding men at Arms, c. to serve the King in that Expedition. And the next year it seems he had command abroad under Rot. Fr. 21. E 3. p. 1. m. 10. Sir Bartholomew Burghersh le fitz: So also Rot. Fr. 23. E. 3. m. 2. an. 23. E. 3.
Two years after, the Duke of Lancaster being made Admiral, he Rot. Fr. 25. E. 3. m. 4. went to Sea in the Fleet: Afterwards he went with the Rot. Vasc. 29. E. 3. m. 8. Prince of Wales into Gascoigne; and Rot. Fr. 32. E. 3. m. 4. an. 32. E. 3. into Bretagne.
These were the Expeditions this noble Knight made, which sufficiently denote his being continually employed abroad in the Kings service.
He died Esc. an. 49. E. 3. n. 21. 28. of Iune an. 49. E. 3. leaving Edward Pavely his Son and Heir.



SECT. IV. A Catalogue of their Successors, with Scutcheons of their Arms.
KNights elected in the following part of the Reign of King Edward the Third, as the Stalls became void.

27. Richard of Bordeaux, afterwards King of England, of that name the Second.
28. Lyonel of Antwerp Earl of Vlster, and Duke of Clarence.
29. Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, after created Duke of Aquitaine.
30. Edmund of Langley Earl of Cambridge, after Duke of York.
31. Iohn de Montford Duke of Bretagne, and Earl of Richmond.
32. Humfry Bohun Earl of Hereford, and Constable of England.
33. William Bohun Earl of Northampton.
34. Iohn Hastings Earl of Penbroke.
35. Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick.
36. Richard Fitz Alan Earl of Arundel and Surrey.
37. Robert Vfford, Earl of Suffolk.
38. Hugh Stafford, Earl of Stafford.
39. Ingleram de Coucy, Earl of Bedford.
40. Guiscard d' Angolesme, Earl of Huntingdon.
41. Edward Spencer, Lord Spencer.
42. William Latimer, Lord Latimer.
43. Reynold Cobham, Lord Cobham of Sterborough.
44. Iohn Nevil, Lord Nevil of Raby.






45. Ralph Basset, Lord Basset of Drayton.
46. Sir Walter Manny, Bannert
47. Sir William Fitz Waren, Knight.
48. Sir Thomas Vfford, Knight.
49. Sir Thomas Felton, Knight.
50. Sir Franc Van Hall, Knight.
51. Sir Fulk Fitz Waren, Knight.
52. Sir Allan Boxhull, Knight.
53. Sir Richard Pemburge, Knight.
54. Sir Thomas Vtreight, Knight.
55. Sir Thomas Banester, Knight.
56. Sir Richard de la Vache, Knight.
57. Sir Guy de Bryan, Knight.


Knights Elected in the Reign of King Richard the Second.
58. Thomas of Woodstock, Earl of Buckingham, after Duke of Gloucester.
59. Henry of Lancaster Earl of Derby, afterward King of England, of that Name the Fourth.
60. William Duke of Gelderland.
61. William of Bavaris, Earl of Ostrevant, after Earl of Holland, Henault, and Zeland.
62. Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, after Duke of Surrey.
63. Iohn Holland, Earl of Huntingdon, after Duke of Exceter.
64. Thomas Mowbray, Earl of Nottingham, after Duke of Norfolk.
65. Edward Earl of Rutland, after Duke of Albemarle.
66. Michael de la Poole, Earl of Suffolk.
67. William Scrope, Lord Scrope, after Earl of Wiltshire, and Lord Treasurer of England.
68. William Beauchamp Lord Bergaveny.
69. Iohn Beaumont, Lord Beaumont.
70. William Willoughby, Lord Willoughby.
71. Richard Grey, Lord Grey.
72. Sir Nicholas Sarnesfield, Knight.
73. Sir Philip de la Vache, Knight.
74. Sir Robert Knolls, Knight.
75. Sir Simon Burley, Knight.
76. Sir Iohn de Evereux, Banneret.
77. Sir ryan Stapleton, Knight.
78. Sir Richard Burley, Knight.
79. Sir Peter Courtney, Knight.
80. Sir Iohn Burley, Knight.
81. Sir Iohn Bourchier, Knight.
82. Sir Thomas Granston, Knight.
83. Sir Lewis Clifford, Knight.
84. Sir Robert Dunstavill, Knight.
85. Sir Robert de Namur, Knight.


Knights Elected in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth.
86. Henry Prince of Wales, after King of England, of that Name the Fifth.
87. Thomas of Lancaster, Earl of Albemarle, and Duke of Clarence.
88. Iohn Earl of Kendal and Duke of Bedford, after Regent of France.
89. Humfry, Earl of Penbroke and Duke of Gloucester.
90. Thomas Beauford, Earl of Dorset, and after Duke of Exceter.
91. Robert Count Palatine, Duke of Bavaria, after Emperor of Germany.
92. Iohn Beauford, Earl of Somerset, and Marquess of Dorset.
93. Thomas Fitz Alan, Earl of Arundel.
94. Edmund Stafford, Earl of Stafford.
95. Edmund Holland, Earl of Kent.
96. Ralph Nevil, Earl of Westmerland.
97. Gilbert Roos, Lord Roos.
98. Gilbert Talbot, Lord Talbot.
99. Iohn Lovell, Lord Lovell.
100. Hugh Burnell, Lord Burnell.
101. Thomas Morley, Lord Morley.
102. Edward Charleton, Lord Powis.
103. Sir Iohn Cornwall, Knight, after Lord Fanhope.
104. Sir William Arundel, Knight.
105. Sir Iohn Stanly, Knight.
106. Sir Robert de Vmfrevill, Knight.
107. Sir Thomas Rampston, Knight.
108. Sir Thomas Erpingham, Knight.
109. Sir Iohn Sulbie, Knight.
110. Sir Sandich de Trane, Knight.

Hitherto we have ranked the Knights of this most Noble Order, as they are placed in other Catalogues, and according to their greatest Dignities, because the certain years of their Elections cannot be found: but these that follow, are marshalled in an exact series of their Elections.

Knights Elected in the Reign of King Henry the Fifth.
111. Sir Iohn Dabrichcourt, Knight.
112. Richard Vere, Earl of Oxford.
113. Thomas Camoys, Lord Camoys.
114. Sir Symon Felbryge, Knight.
115. Sir William Harington, Knight.
116. Iohn Holland, Earl of Huntingdon.
117. Sigismund Emperor of Germany.
118.  Duke of Briga.
119. Sir Iohn Blount, Knight.
120. Sir Iohn Robessart, Knight.
121. Sir William Philip, Knight, after Lord Bardolf.
122. Iohn King of Portugal.
123. Ericus King of Denmark.
124. Richard auchamp, Earl of Warwick; after Lieutenant General and Go|venor in France and Normandy.
125. Thomas Montacute, Earl of Salisbury.
126. Robert Willoughby, Lord Willoughby.
127. Henry Fitz-Hugh, Lord Fitz-Hugh.
128. Sir Iohn Grey, Knight, Earl of Tankervile.
129. Hugh Stafford, Lord Bourchier.
130. Iohn Mowbray, Lord Mowbray, Earl Marshal.
131. William de la Poole, Earl of Suffolk; after Marquess and Duke of Suffolk:
132. Iohn Clifford, Lord Clifford.
133. Sir Lewis Robessart Knight, after Lord Bourchier.
134. Sir Heer Tank Clux, Knight.
135. Sir Walter Hungerford Knight, after Lord Hungerford, and Lord Trea|surer of England.
136. Philip, Duke of Burgundy.


Knights Elected in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth.
137. Iohn Talbot, Lord Talbot, after Earl of Shrewsbury.
138. Thomas Scales, Lord Scales.
139. Sir Iohn Fastolf, Knight.
140. Peter, Duke of Conimbero, third Son of Iohn the First, King of Portugal.







141. Humfrey Stafford, Earl of Stafford, after Created Duke of Buckingham.
142. Sir Iohn Ratclyff, Knight.
143. Iohn Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundell.
144. Richard, Duke of York, the Kings Lieutenant in France and Normandy.
145. Edward, King of Portugall.
146. Edmund Beaufort, Earl of Moriton, after Earl of Dorset, and Duke of Somerset.
147. Sir Iohn Grey, Knight.
148. Richard Nevil Earl of Salisbury, after Lord Chancellor of England.
149. William Nevil, Lord Fauconbridge, after Earl of Kent.
150. Albert, Emperor of Germany.
151. Iohn Beaufort, Earl of Somerset, after Duke of Somerset, and Earl of Kendall.
152. Ralph Butler Lord Sudeley, after Lord Treasurer of England.
153. Henry Duke of Viseo, fourth Son of Iohn the First King of Portugal.
154. Iohn Beaumont, Viscount Beaumont, after High Constable of England.
155. Gaston de Foix, Earl of Longevile, and Benanges, Captan de Buch.
156. Iohn de Foix, Earl of Kendall.
157. Iohn Beauchamp, Lord Beauchamp of Powik, and after Lord Treasurer of England.
158. Alphonsus, the Fifth King of Portugal.
159. Albro Vasques d' Almada, Earl of Averence in Normandy.
160. Thomas Hoo, Lord Hoo.
161. Sir Francis Surien, Knight.
162. Alphonsus, King of Aragon.
163. Casimire the Fourth, King of Poland.
164. William, Duke of Brunswick.
165. Richard Widvile Lord Rivers, after Created Earl Rivers.
166. Iohn Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk.
167. Henry Bourchier Viscount Bourchier, after Lord Treasurer of England, and Earl of Essex.
168. Sir Philip Wentworth, Knight.
169. Sir Edward Hall, Knight.
170. Frederick the Third, Emperor of Germany.
171. Iohn Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury.
172. Lionell Wells, Lord Wells.
173. Thomas Stanley, Lord Stanley.
174. Edward, Prince of Wales.
175. Iaspar Earl of Penbroke, after Duke of Bedford.
176. Iames Butler, Earl of Wiltshire.
177. Iohn Sutton, Lord Dudley.
178. Iohn Bourchier, Lord Berners.
179. Richard Nevil, Earl of Warwick.
180. William Bonvill, Lord Bonvill.
181. Iohn Wenlock, Lord Wenlock.
182. Sir Thomas Kyriell, Knight.


Knights Elected in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth.
183. George, Duke of Clarence.
184. Sir William Chamberlayne, Knight.
185. Iohn Typtoft Earl of Worcester, after High Constable of England.
186. Iohn Nevel Lord Montague, after Earl of Northumberland, and Marquess Montague.
187. William Herbert, Lord Herbert, after Earl of Penbroke.
188. William Hastings, Lord Hastings.
189. Iohn Scrope, Lord Scrope.
190. Sir Iohn Astley, Knight.
191. Ferdinand King of Naples, Son of Alphonsus King of Aragon.
192. Francis Sfortia, Duke of Milan.
193. Iames Douglas, Earl of Douglas.
194. Galeard, Lord Duras.
195. Sir Robert Harcourt, Knight.
196. Anthony Widvile, Lord Scales and Nucelles, after Earl Rivers.
197. Richard Duke of Gloucester, after King of England, of that name the Third.
198.  Lord Mountgryson of Apulia.
199. Iohn Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk.
200. Iohn de la Poole, Duke of Suffolk.
201. William Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundell.
202. Iohn Stafford, Earl of Wiltshire.
203. Iohn Howard, Lord Howard, after Duke of Norfolk.
204. Walter Ferrars, Lord Ferrars of Chartley.
205. Walter Blount, Lord Mountjoy.
206. Charles, Duke of Burgundy.
207. Henry Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, after Constable of England.
208. Thomas Fitz-Alan, Lord Matrevers, after Earl of Arundel.
209. Sir William Parr.
210. Frederick, Duke of Vrbin.
211. Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland.
212. Edward Prince of Wales.
213. Richard Duke of York, second Son to King Edward the Fourth.
214. Thomas Grey, Earl of Huntingdon and Marquess Dorset.
215. Sir Thomas Montgomery, Knight.
216. Ferdinand, King of Castile.
217. Hercules, Duke of Ferara.
218. Iohn, King of Portugal, Son to Alphonsus the Fifth.


Knights Elected in the Reign of King Richard the Third.
219. Sir Iohn Coniers, Knight.
220. Thomas Howard, Earl of Surrey, after Lord Treasurer of England, and Duke of Norfolk.
221. Francis Viscount Lovell.
222. Sir Richard Ratcliff, Knight.
223. Sir Thomas Burgh, Knight, after Lord Burgh.
224. Thomas Stanley, Lord Stanley, after Earl of Derby.
225. Sir Richard Tunstall, Knight.


Knights Elected in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh.
226. Iohn Vere, Earl of Oxford.
227. Sir Giles d' Aubeny, Knight, after Lord d' Aubeny.
228. Thomas Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundel.
229. George Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury.
230. Iohn Wells, Viscount Wells.
231. George Stanley, Lord Strange.
232. Sir Edward Wydevile, Knight Banneret.
233. Iohn Dynham, Lord Dynham, Lord Treasurer of England.
234. Maximilian the First, Emperor of Germany.
235. Sir Iohn Savage, Knight.
236. Sir William Stanley, Knight, Lord Chamberlain.







237. Sir Iohn Cheney, Knight Baneret.
238. Alphonsus, Duke of Calabria.
239. Arthur, Prince of Wales.
240. Thomas Grey, Marquess Dorset.
241. Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland.
242. Henry Bourchier, Earl of Essex.
243. Sir Charles Somerset, Knight Baneret, after Earl of Worcester.
244. Robert Willoughby, Lord Brook.
245. Sir Edward Poynings, Knight.
246. Sir Gilbert Talbot, Knight Baneret.
247. Sir Richard Poole, Knight.
248. Edward Stafford, Duke of Buckingham.
249. Henry Duke of York, second Son to King Henry the Seventh, after King of England, of that name the Eighth.
250. Edward Courtney, Earl of Devonshire.
251. Sir Richard Guildford, Knight Baneret.
252. Sir Edmund de la Poole, Earl of Suffolke.
253. Sir Thomas Lovel, Knight Baneret.
254. Sir Reginald Bray, Knight Baneret.
255. Iohn, King of Denmark.
256. Guido Vbaldo, Duke of Vrbin.
257. Gerald Fitz Gerald, Earl of Kildare.
258. Henry Stafford, Lord Stafford, after Earl of Wiltshire.
259. Richard Grey, Earl of Kent.
260. Sir Rys ap Thomas, Knight Baneret.
261. Philip, King of Castile.
262. Sir Thomas Brandon, Knight Baneret.
263. Charles, Arch-Duke of Austria, Prince of Spaines, after Emperor of Germany.


Knights Elected in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.
264. Thomas Darcy, Lord Darcy.
265. Edward Sutton, Lord Dudley.
266. Emanuel, King of Portugal.
267. Thomas Howard, Lord Howard, eldest Son to Thomas Duke of Norfolk.
268. Thomas West, Lord la Ware.
269. Sir Henry Marney Knight, after Lord Marney.
270. George Nevil, Lord Abergaveny.
271. Sir Edward Howard Knight, second Son to Thomas Duke of Norfolk.
272. Sir Charles Brandon, after Duke of Suffolk.
273. Iulian de Medices, Brother to Pope Leo the Tenth.
274. Edward Stanley, Lord Mounteagle.
275. Thomas Dacres, Lord Dacres of Gyllesland.
276. Sir William Sandes Knight, after Lord Sandes.
277. Henry Courtney, Earl of Devonshire, and after Marquess of Exceter.
278. Ferdinand, Prince and Infant of Spain, Arch-Duke of Austria, after Emperor of Germany.
279. Sir Richard Wingfield, Knight.
280. Sir Thomas Bullen Knight, after Viscount Rochford, and Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond.
281. Walter d'Euereux, Lord Ferrars of Chartley, after Viscount Hereford.
282. Arthur Plantaginet; Viscount Lisle.
283. Robert Radcliff, Viscount Fitz Walter, after Earl of Sussex.
284. William Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundel.
285. Thomas Mannors, Lord Roos, after Earl of Rutland.
286. Henry Fitz Roy, after Earl of Nottingham, and Duke of Richmond and Somerset.
287. Ralph Nevil, Earl of Westmerland.
288. William Blount, Lord Montjoy.
289. Sir William Fitz Williams Knight, after Earl of Southampton.
290. Sir Henry Guildford, Knight.
291. Francis the French King.
292. Iohn Vere, Earl of Oxford.
293. Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland.
294. Anne, Duke of Montmorency.
295. Philip Chabot, Earl of Newblanche.
296. Iames, the Fifth King of Scotland.
297. Sir Nicholas Carew, Knight.
298. Henry Clifford, Earl of Cumberland.
299. Thomas Cromwell, Lord Cromwell, after Earl of Essex.
300. Iohn Russell, Lord Russell, after Earl of Bedford.
301. Sir Thomas Cheney, Knight.
302. Sir William Kingston, Knight.
303. Thomas Audley, Lord Audley of Walden, Lord Chancellor of England.
304. Sir Anthony Browne, Knight.
305. Edward Seymour, Earl of Hertford, after Duke of Somerset.
306. Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey.
307. Sir Iohn Gage, Knight.
308. Sir Anthony Wingfield, Knight.
309. Iohn Sutton Viscount Lisle, after Earl of Warwick, and Duke of Nor|thumberland.
310. William Paulet, Lord St. Iohn of Basing, after Earl of Wiltshire, and Marquess of Winchester.
311. William Parr, Lord Parr of Kendall, after Earl of Essex, and Marquess of Northampton.
312. Sir Iohn Wallop, Knight.
313. Henry Fitz-Alen, Earl of Arundell.
314. Sir Anthony St. Leger, Knight.
315. Francis Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury.
316. Thomas Wriothesley, Lord Wriothesley, after Earl of Southampton.


Knights Elected in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth.
317. Henry Grey, Marquess Dorset, after Duke of Suffolk.
318. Edward Stanley, Earl of Derby.
319. Thomas Seymour, Lord Seymour of Sudely.
320. Sir William Paget, Knight, after Lord Paget of Beaudesart.
321. Francis Hastings, Earl of Huntingdon.
322. George Brook, Lord Cobham.
323. Thomas West, Lord La Ware.
324. Sir William Herbert, Knight, after Lord Herbert of Cardiff, and Earl of Penbroke.
325. Henry, 2. the French King.
326. Edward Fynes, Lord Clynton, after Earl of Lincolne.
327. Thomas Darcy, Lord Darcy of Chiche.
328. Henry Nevil, Earl of Westmerland.
329. Sir Andrew Dudley, Knight.


Knights Elected in the Reign of Queen Mary.
330. Philip, Prince of Spain, after King of England.
331. Henry Radclyff, Earl of Sussex.
332. Emanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy.







333. William Howard, Lord Howard of Effingham.
334. Anthony Browne, Viscount Mountague.
335. Sir Edward Hastings, Knight, after Lord Hastings of Loughborow.
336. Thomas Radcliff, Earl of Sussex.
337. William Grey, Lord Grey of Wilton.
338. Sir Robert Rochester, Knight.


Knights Elected in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
339. Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk.
340. Henry Mannors, Earl of Rutland.
341. Sir Robert Dudley, Knight, after Earl of Leicester.
342. Adolph, Duke of Holstein.
343. George Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury.
344. Henry Carey, Lord Hunsdon.
345. Thomas Percy, Earl of Northumberland.
346. Ambrose Dudley, Earl of Warwick.
347. Charles 9. the French King.
348. Francis Russell, Earl of Bedford.
349. Sir Henry Sidney, Knight.
350. Maximilian, the second Emperor of Germany.
351. Henry Hastings, Earl of Huntingdon.
352. William Somerset, Earl of Worcester.
353. Francis, Duke of Montmorency.
354. Walter d'Euereux, Viscount Hereford, after Earl of Essex.
355. William Cecill, Lord Burghley, after Lord Treasurer of England.
356. Arthur Grey, Lord Grey of Wilton.
357. Edmund Bruges, Lord Chandos.
358. Henry Stanley, Earl of Derby.
359. Henry Herbert, Earl of Penbroke.
360. Henry 3. the French King.
361. Charles Howard, Lord Howard of Effingham, after Earl of Nottingham.
362. Rodolph, Emperor of Germany.
363. Frederick, the Second King of Denmark.
364. Ioh Casimire, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, Duke of Bavaria.
365. Edward Mannors, Earl of Rutland.
366. William Brook, Lord Cobham.
367. Henry Scroop, Lord Scroop of Bolton.
368. Robert d'Euereux, Earl of Essex.
369. Thomas Butler, Earl of Ormond.
370. Sir Christopher Hatton, Knight, after Lord Chancellor of England.
371. Henry Radcliff, Earl of Sussex.
372. Thomas Sackvile, Lord Buckhurst, after Lord Treasurer of England, and Earl of Dorset.
373. Henry 4. the French King.
374. Iames, the Sixth King of Scotland, after King of England, France, and Ireland.
375. Gilbert Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury.
376. George Clifford, Earl of Cumberland.
377. Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland.
378. Edward Somerset, Earl of Worcester.
379. Thomas Burogh, Lord Burogh of Gainesborough.
380. Edward Sheffield, Lord Sheffield, after Earl of Mulgrave.
381. Sir Francis Knolles, Knight.
382. Frederick, Duke of Wirtemberg.
383. Thomas Howard, Lord Howard of Walden, after Earl of Suffolk, and Lord Treasurer of England.
384. George Carey, Lord Hunsdon.
385. Charles Blount, Lord Montjoy, after Earl of Devonshire.
386. Sir Henry Lea, Knight.
387. Robert Radcliff, Earl of Sussex.
388. Henry Brooke, Lord Cobham.
389. Thomas Scroop, Lord Scroop of Bolton.
390. William Stanley, Earl of Derby.
391. Thomas Cecill, Lord Burghley.


Knights Elected in the Reign of King Iames.
392. Henry, Prince of Wales.
393. Christiern, the Fourth King of Denmark.
394. Lodowick Stewart, Duke of Lenox, and after Duke of Richmond.
395. Henry Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton.
396. Iohn Erskin, Earl of Marr.
397. William Herbert, Earl of Penbroke.
398. Vlrick, Duke of Holstein.
399. Henry Howard, Earl of Northampton.
400. Robert Cecill, Earl of Salisbury.
401. Thomas Howard, Viscount Bindon.
402. George Hume, Earl of Dunbarr.
403. Philip Herbert, Earl of Montgomery.
404. Charles Stewart Duke of York, after Prince of Wales, and King of England, by the Title of Charles the First.
405. Thomas Howard, Earl of Arundell and Surrey, after Earl of Norfolk.
406. Robert Carre, Viscount Rochester, after Earl of Somerset.
407. Frederick Casimire, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, Prince Elector of the Empire, and after King of Bohemia.
408. Maurice, van Nassau, Prince of Orange.
409. Thomas Ereskin, Viscount Fenton.
410. William Knolles, Lord Knolles of Grayes, after Viscount Walingford, and Earl of anbury.
411. Francis Mannors, Earl of Rutland.
412. Sir George Villers Knight, after Baron of Whaddon, then Earl and Mar|quess of Buckingham, and lastly Earl of Coventry, and Duke of Buck|ingham.
413. Robert Sidney, Viscount Lisle, after Earl of Leicester.
414. Iames Hamilton, Marquess Hamilton, and Earl of Cambridge.
415. Esme Stewart, Duke of Lenox.
416. Christian, Duke of Brunswick.
417. William Cecill, Earl of Salisbury.
418. Iames Hay arl of Carlisle.
419. Edward Sackvile, Earl of Dorset.
420. Henry Rich, Earl of Holland.
421. Thomas Howard, Viscount Andover, after Earl of Berkshire.


Knights Elected in the Reign of King Charles the First.
422. Claude de Lorraine, Duke of Cheuereuse.
423. Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden.
424. Henry Frederick van Nassau, Prince of Orange.
425. Theophilus Howard, Earl of Suffolk.
426. William Compton, Earl of Northampton.
427. Richard Weston, Lord Weston of Neyland, Lord Treasurer of England, and after Earl of Portland.
428. Robert Barty, Earl of Lindsey.







429. William Cecill, Earl of Exceter.
430. Iames Hamilton, Marquess Hamilton, Earl of Cambridge, and Arran.
431. Charles Lodowick Casimire, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, Prince Elector of the Empire, and Duke of Bavaria.
432. Iames Stewart, Duke of Lenox, after Earl of March.
433. Henry Dnvers, Earl of Danby.
434. William Douglas, Earl of Morton.
435. Algernon Percy, Earl of Northumberland.
436. Charles, Prince of Wales, now King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, of that name the Second, and present Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
437. Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford.
438. Iames Stewart Duke of York and Albanie, second Son to King Charles the First.
439. Rupert Casmire, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, and Duke of Bavaria, after Earl of Holderness, and Duke of Cumberland.
440. William van Nassau, Prince of Orange.
441. Bernard de Foix, Duke d'Espernon.


Knights Elected in the Reign of King Charles the Second.
442. Maurice Casimire, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, and Duke of Bavaria.
443. Iames Boteler, Marquess of Ormond, since Earl of Brecknock, and Duke of Ormond.
444. Edward Casimire, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, and Duke of Bavaria.
445. George Villers, Duke of Buckingham.
446. William Hamilton, Duke of Hamilton.
447. Thomas Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton, after Lord Treasurer of England.
448. William Cavendish, Marquess of New-Castle, since Duke of New-Castle.
449. Iames Graham, Marquess of Montross.
450. Iames Stanley, Earl of Derby.
451. George Digby, Earl of Bristoll.
452. Henry Stewart Duke of Gloucester, third Son to King Charles the First.
453. Henry Charles de la Tremoille, Prince de Tarente.
454. William Henry van Nassau, Prince of Orange.
455. Frederick William, Prince Elector of the Empire, Marquess of Bran|denburg.
456. Iohn Gaspar Ferdinand de Marchin, Count de Gravil.
457. Sir George Monck, Knight, after Duke of Albemarle.
458. Sir Edward Mountague, Knight, after Earl of Sandwich.
459. William Seymour, Marquess of Hertford, after Duke of Somerset.
460. Aubrie de Vere, Earl of Oxford.
461. Charles Stewart, Duke of Richmond and Lenox.
362. Mountague Barty, Earl of Lindsey.
363. Edward Mountague, Earl of Manchester.
464. William Wentworth, Earl of Strafford.
465. Christierne, Prince of Denmark, since King of Denmark.
466. Iames Scot, Duke of Monmouth and Bucclugh.
467. Iames Stewart Duke of Cambridge.
468. Charles, the Eleventh King of Sweden, Goths, and Vandales.
469. Iohn George, the Second, Duke of Saxony, Iuliers, Cleves, and Monts, and Prince Elector of the Empire.
470. Christopher Monck, Duke of Albemarle.
471. Iohn Maitland, Duke of Lauderdale.



To close up all, here follows a Catalogue of the Officers of this most Noble Order.

Prelates of the Order.
William de Edyngton, Bishop of Winchester, Lord Treasurer, and after Lord Chancellor of England.
William de Wykham, Bishop of Winchester, Lord Chancellor of England.
Henry Beaufort, Bishop of Winchester, Priest Cardinal of St. Eusebius, and Lord Chancellor of England.
William de Waynfleet, Bishop of Winchester, and Lord Chancellor of England.
Peter Courtney, Bishop of Winchester.
Thomas Langton, Bishop of Winchester.
Richard Fox, Bishop of Winchester, and Lord Privy Seal.
Thomas Wolsey, Bishop of Winchester, Priest Cardinal of St. Cecily, and Lord Chancellor of England.
Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester.
Iohn Poynet, Bishop of Winchester.
Stephen Gardiner restored, and made Lord Chancellor of Englan
Iohn White, Bishop of Winchester.
Robert Honne, Bishop of Winchester.
Iohn Watson, Bishop of Winchester.
Thomas Cooper, Bishop of Winchester.
William Wyham, Bishop of Winchester.
William Day, Bishop of Winchester.
Thomas Bilson, Bishop of Winchester.
Iames Mountague, Bishop of Winchester.
Lancelot Andrews, Bishop of Winchester.
Richard Neyle, Bishop of Winchester.
Walter Curle, Bishop of Winchester.
Brian Duppa, Bishop of Winchester.
eorge Morley, Bishop of Winchester.


Chancellors of the Order.
Richard Beauchamp, Bishop of Salisbury, and Dean of Windesor.
Lionel Woodeville, Bishop of Salisbury.
Thomas Langton, Bishop of Salisbury.
Iohn Blyth, Bishop of Salisbury.
Henry Dean, Bishop of Salisbury.
Edmund Audeley, Bishop of Salisbury.
Sir William Cecil, Principal Secretary of State.
Sir William Peters, Principal Secretary of State.
Sir Thomas Smith, Principal Secretary of State.
Sir Francis Walsingham, Principal Secretary of State.
Sir Amyas Paulet, Privy Counsellor.
Sir Iohn Woollee, Secretary for the Latine Tongue.
Sir Edward Dyer.
Sir Iohn Herbert, Principal Secretary of State.
Sir George More.
Sir Francis Crane.
Sir Thomas Rowe.
Sir Iames Palmer.
Sir Henry de Vic, Baronet.
Seth Ward, Bishop of Salisbury.


Registers of the Order.
Iohn Coringham, Canon of Windesor.
Iohn Deepden, Canon of Windesor.
Iames Goldwell, Canon of Windesor, and Secretary of State.
Oliver King, Canon of Windesor, Secretary to Prince Henry Son of King Henry the Sixth, to King Edward the Fourth, to King Edward the Fifth, and King Henry the Seventh.
Richard Nix, Canon of Windesor.
Christopher Vrswick, Dean of Windesor.
Thomas Wolsey, the Kings Almoner.
William Atwater, Canon of Windesor, after Bishop of Lincolne.
Nicholas West, Dean of Windesor.
Iohn Vesy, Dean of Windesor.
Richard Sydnor, Canon of Windesor.
Robert Aldridge, Canon of Windesor.
Owen Oglethorp, Dean of Windesor.
Iohn Boxall, Dean of Windesor, and Principal Secretary of State.
George Carew, Dean of Windesor.
William Dy, Dean of Windesor.
Robert Benet, Dean of Windesor.
Giles Tomson, Dean of Windesor, and Bishop of Gloucester.
Anthony Maxey, Dean of Windesor.
Marc Antonio de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalato, Dean of Windesor.
Henry Beaumont, Dean of Windesor.
Matthew Wren, Dean of Windesor.
Christopher Wren, Dean of Windesor.
Brune Ryves, Dean of Windesor.


Garters, Kings of Arms.
Sir William Brugges, Knight.
Iohn Smert.
Sir Iohn Writh, Knight.
Sir Thomas Wriothesley, Knight.
Sir Thomas Wall, Knight.
Sir Christopher Barker, Knight.
Sir Gilbert Dethick, Knight.
Sir William Dethick, Knight.
Sir William Segar, Knight.
Sir Iohn Borough, Knight.
Sir Henry St. George, Knight.
Sir Edward Walker, Knight.


Ushers of the Black-Rod.
William Whitehorse.
Iohn Cray.
Thomas Sye.
William Evington, and Edward Hardgyll.
Robert Marleton.
Ralph Ashton, and Hugh Dennys.
Sir William Compton, Knight.
Henry Norresse, Esquire.
Anthony Knyvet, Esquire.
Sir Philip Hobby, Knight.
Iohn Norres and William Norres, Esquires.
Anthony Wingfeild, Esquire.
Richard Coningsbye and George Pollard, Esquires.
Iames Maxwell, Esquire.
Peter Newton, Esquire.
Sir Iohn Ayton, Knight.
Sir Edward Carteret, Knight.







APPENDIX.

The Statutes of Institution of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
AD honorem omnipotentis Dei, Sanctae Mariae Virginis gloriosae  Sancti Georgii Martyris, Dominus noster Supremus Edwardus tertius Rex Angliae, anno regni sui post conquestum xxiii. Ordinavit, sta|bilivit,  fundavit quandum Societatem five Ordinem militarem, infra Castrum suum de Wyndesore, in hunc modum. Primo scipsum statuit dictae Societatis sive Ordinis Superio|rem, filium suum seniorem Principem Walliae, Ducem Lancastriae, Comitem Warwici, Capi|taneum de Buche, Comitem Staffordiae, Comi|tem Sarum. Dominum de Mortimer, Domi|num Johannem Lisle, Dominum Bartholo|meum Burghersh filium, Dominum Johannem de Beauchamp, Dominum de Bohun, Domi|num Hugonem de Courtenay, Dominum Tho|mam de Hollande, Dominum Johannem de Grey, Dominum Richardum de fitz Symond, Dominum Milonem de Stapulton, Dominum Thomam Wale, Dominum Hugonem de Wirteslay, Dominum Nelelatum Loryng, Dominum Johannem Chandos, Dominum Jacobum Daudele, Dominum Otonem de Hol|lande, Dominum Henricum de Em, Domi|num Sauchetum Dabrichecourt, Dominum Walterum Pavelay.

I. Concordatum est quod Rex Angliae, qui pro tempore fuerit, inperpetuum erit Superior hujus Ordinis Sancti Georgii, sive Societatis Garterii.
II. Item, concordatum est, quod nullus eliga|tr in socium dicti Ordinis nisi generosae propa|ginis existat,  miles, careus opprobrio, quo|niam ignobiles aut reprobos Ordinis institutio non admittit.
III. Et xxvi. Commilitones Consocii hujus Ordinis praenominati deferent mantella  gar|teria apud dictum castrum ordinata quociens ibi|dem praesentes fuerint, videlicet qulibt vice qu capellam intrant Sancti Georgii aut domum Ca|pitularem, pro capitulo celebrando, aut aliquid statuendo quod ad Ordinem pertinebit. Et si|mili modo incedent in vigili Sancti Georgii, per modum processionis, proficiscentes cum Supe|riori Ordinis, aut suo Deputato, de magn ca|mer regi us ad Capellam, vel domum capi|tularem,  edem serie revertentur. Sedebunt ita cum Montellis  Garteriis in dict vigili tempore coenae tam illi qui coenare volunt, quam etiam alii non coenantes, quousque de magn ca|mer praedict consuctum tempus fuerit separandi. Sic eciam induti indere debent in crastino ver|sus dictam Capellam,  abinde revertentes, ac etiam tempore prandii  postea, quos Su|perior, ut suus Deputatus sua Ordinis Insignia deposuerit. Sic etiam proficiscentes ad secun|das vesperas  revertentes forte nee non. nec nec tempo|re coene  poste, sicut in vigili induentur; quoad us Superior Ordinis tempus esse decre|verit separandi.
IV. Et ordinati sunt xiii. Canonici seculares, qui tempore Institutionis suae aut infra annum proximum teneantur ad sacerdotium promoveri sic eciam xiii. Vicarii, qui tempore admissionis suae erunt Sacerdotes, aut saltem tempore proxi|mae collationis Ordinum extunc sequentis, cele|braturi continu pro animabus omnium fidelium defunctorum. Isti autem praenominati Cano|nici praesentabuntur per fundatores Ordinis su|pra dictos, viz. quilibet fundatorum modernorum Custodi Collegii suum Canonicum praesentabit. Ita tamen quod si quis Canonicorum moriatur, nec ipse qui eum ultimo praesentabat nec quispi|am alius Sociorum Garterii postea praesenta|bunt, sed solus superior Ordinis ad eundem Ca|nonicatum extunc in ante pro perpetuo praesenta|bit. Et sic est unanimiter concordatum de praesen|tationibus omnium aliorum Canonicorum f. soli superiori. solo Superior Ordinis reservandis.
V. Item concordatum est, quod praedicti Ca|nonici habeant suam mantellam de panno colo|ris purpurii, cum un circumferenci Armorum Sancti Georgii.
VI. Item Ordinatum est quod xxvi. Milites ve|terani, non habentes unde vivant, ibidem ad ho|norem f. Dei. do  beati Georgii competentem ha|bebunt exhibitionem, continu Deo in orationi|bus servituri. Et de electionibus eorum vetera|norum ordinatum est modo simili sicut  de prae|sentationibus Canonicorum praedictorum, sic quod veteranorum electiones quemadmodum Ca|nonicorum praesentationes soli Superiori Ordi|nis reservabuntu.
VII. Item concordatum est, quod dicti Milites veterani habebunt sua mantella de rubeo cum uno Scuto Armorum Sancti Georgii carente tantum tamn Garterio.
VIII. Item concordatum est quod si Superior hujus Ordinis, sive Societatis, fortassis esse non po|terit apud solemnizationem festivitatis Sancti Georgii, Capitulum tenebitur, hor terciarum ad solemnizandum festivitatem in Crastino, sumptibus Superioris Ordinis. Sd novas ob|servancias aut Ordinationes non faciet deputa|tus hujusmodi: Corrigere tamen  reformare sibi licebit transgressores Statutorum Ordinis quae sequuntur.
IX. Item singulis annis in vigili Sancti Georgii fit una congregatio omnium consociorun

Ordinis Sancti Georgii apud dictum castrum de Wyndesore, sive sint infra Regnum Angliae, sive extra, dum ameillc commod veire valeant,  ibidem debent apud servicium ecclesiasticum interesse,  sua mantella tempore celebrationis divinorum defferent seriatim in suis stallis exi|stentes. Et quilibet eorum babebit in capella supra Stallum suam galeam  ensem quae in sui memoriam  ecclesiae tuicionem ibidem pro tempore vitae suae remanebunt, quemadmodum mi|litaris Ordo nobilis hoc exposcit. Sed in casu quo festivitas Sancti Georgii contigerit infra quindecim dies proximos post diem Paschae, sit dicta festivitas Sancti Georgii prorogata us ad illam diem dominicam quae semper erit dies quin|tadecima post diem Paschae, ad finem quod qui|libet sociorum Ordinis illic valeat apud dictam festivitatem rationabiliter convenire, non equi|tando per aliquem trium dierum proxim sequen|tium diem Paschae.
X. Item quod conveniat in dictum locum in vigili Sancti Georgii hor terti,  si qui non veniant hujusmodi tempore assignato Nec. ne ha|beant excusationem Superiori Ordinis aut suo Deputato acceptabilem, per Superiorem Ordinis  Capitulum taliter puniri debent, qud prop|ter hujusmodi necligentiam, non intrabunt ad Capitulum ill vice, sed foris ad hostium expecta|bunt, nec vocem habebunt in aliquo quod in dicto Capitulo fieri Contigerit. contigere ill vice. Et siqui ad vesperas ante Principium non veniant, sua Stalla nullatenus tunc intrabunt, sed in basso, ante Stalla sua, in consueto Loco Ceroferariorum se constituent, durantibus vesperis supradictis, ad quas nn venerant tempestive. Et paena simi|lis statuitur contr non venientes ante inchoatio|nem Missae solempuis aut vesperarum in crastino. Et quisquis est qui ad celebrationem festivitatis non veniat, non habens excusationem Superiori Ordinis acceptabilem, sibi praecipiatur nomine poenae quod stallum suum non intrabit festivitate proxim tunc sequente, sed se tenebit ante  ex|trastallum, in loco quo supra tempore primarum vesperarum,  tempore processionis in crastino perante tres cruces processionales transibit,  re|deundo in chorum stabit in loco basso quo supra toto tempore Missae us ad Offertorium, novis|sim oblaturus. Et hujusmodi paenitentiis sic peractis, incontinenti veniet ante stallum Supe|rioris aut sui Deputati superind veniam peti|turus. Et deind dictus. Superior aut suus Deputatus cum ad Stallum suum  primaevum statum restituet. Quod si  secundo secto Sancti Georgii anno proximo tunc sequente abs excu|satione Superiori acceptabili, aut ejus Deputato, denuo se absentet existens infra regnum Angliae, extunc Stallum suum non intrabit, quoadns in|fra dictam capellam apud Altare Sancti Georgii unum Iocale optulerit valoris xx. marcarum Monetae Anglicanae; Et extunc singulis annis inantea ipsam mulctam, donec reconciliatus fue|rit, duplicabit.
XI. Item quod omnes Consocii Ordinis, ubi|cun locorum constituti, deferent Mantella sua de blodio singulis annis, ab hor primarum ves|perarum in vigili Sancti Georgii, us ad se|cundas vesperas in crastino inclusiv, quemadmo|dum facturi essent, si cum Superiori Ordinis aut suo Deputato personalitr interessent, toto tem|pore hujus festivitatis celebrandae, dum tamen sint in loco ubi gaudeant propri libertate.
XII. Item, concordatum est quod siquis dictae societatis incedat public sine Garterio, quanto|cius fuerit exinde ammonitus aut notatus, custo|di  Collegio solvet dimidiam marcam, ficut alii ant solverunt qui in edem culp fuere constituti.
XIII. Item, concordatum est, qud, tempore Offertorii apud altam Missam, semper duo ex sociis qui sunt in suis stallis oppositi simul ad offerendum incedant. Et si ex eis quenquam con|tigerit absentari, socius suus, qui sibi debert esse oppositus, solus  per se ad offerendum tran|sibit. Et notandum quod Superior Ordinis tem|pore Processionis in dict capell transibit retro totam sociorum commitivam,
XIV. Item, concordatum est, quod, in quolibet crastino Sancti Georgii, antequam socii mutu separentur aut recedant, celebretur una missa de Requie, pro animabus omnium fidelium defun|ctorum,  quod tota societas sit tunc ibidem in|tegraliter, si non fuerit eorum aliquis rationabi|liter praepeditus, vel si non habeat licentiam Su|perioris Ordinis aut sui Deputati, antequam ab illic recedat.
XV. Item, concordatum est, quod quilibet socio|rum dimittet ibidem suam clamidem, pro accessi|bus hujusmodi repentinis,  pro observandis prae|ceptis  monitis salutaribus Superioris praedicti.
XVI. Item, conventum est, quod si quenquam ex dict socictate sive Ordine per dictum Castrum de Wyndesore iinerare contigerit, pro honore loci intret, si commode poterit, nec sit ex just  rationabili caus praepeditus. Et quod ante|quam capellam ingrediatur, omnino clamide se induat, ita quod non nisi clamide indutus intret,  Canonici per tunc ibidem praesentes sibi veni|ent in obviam,  ipsum in capellam devot con|ducent. Et si fortassis ipsum contigerit illic ac|cedere hor Missae, expectet ad honorem Dei  Sancti Georgii,  audiat ipsam Missam. Quod si post meridiem veniat, intret modo  form ex|pressatis,  tunc expectet donec Canonici semel dixerint Psalmum de Profundis, pro animabus omnium fidelium defunctorum,  ibidem offerat, Psalmo dicto. Siquis autem ex dict societate per medium villae equitaverit  Capellam nn intret  offerat veluti concordatum existit, qu|libet vice qu hoc non faciat pedester transeat, virtute Obedientiae, unum miliare versus dictam capellam,  offeret unum denarium, ob honorem Sancti Georgii.
XVII. Item, concordatum est, quod Superior Ordinis, incontinenti postquam mors alicujus So|ciorum sit sibi cognita, faciat celebrari pro anim ipsius mortui Mille Missas,  quilibet Rex fo|raneus pro anim illius mortui faciet celebrari DCCC. Princeps Walliae DCC. quilibet Dux DC. quilibet comes CCC. quilibet Baro CC.  quilibet Miles Bacallarius C. Missas. Et si Superior Ordinis aut alius quispiam hoc fieri non faciat, infra unum quarterium anni postquam sit certificatus de morte, numerum missarum in toto

ad quas ab initio juxta status sui conditionem te|nebatur, duplicare,  si medieta anni sic a re|tro sit, etiam eodem modo duplicare debet,  it a de tempore in tempus usque in finem nni,  si infra annum fieri non faciat, annos eodem modo duplicabit.
XVIII. Item, concordatum est, quod quocies aliquis consociorum Ordinis fuerit sublatus de medio, Superior Ordinis aut suus Deputatus certificato sibi de merito faciat omnes consocios existentes infra regnum suum Angliae qui acce|dere poterunt, per suas literas admoneri, quod, pro eligendo novo Consocio, coram eo conveniant, in|fra sex ebdomadas postquam certificati fuerint de morte in loco ydoneo quem Superior ad hoc dux|erit assignando. Quibus omnibus sic congrega|tis, aut sex eorum ad minus praeter Superiorem aut suum Deputatum, quilibet eorum qui prae|sens in electione fuerit novem de sufficientioribus, quos omni ignomini  opprobrio crediderit ex|pertes, siv fint de subditis Superioris Ordinis aut alii foranei, sibi non subjecti, Dum tamen partem dicto Superiori adversantem non faveant aut de|fendant, nominabit, viz. tres Comites aut de statu sublimiori, tres Barones,  tres Milites Bacalla|rios,  istas denominationes seribet Principalis Praelatus Ordinis, scilicet Episcopus Vintoni|ensis qui pro tempore fuerit,  in su absenci Decanus Collegii, vel Registrator,  in Eorum absentia. eos absentibus antiquior Recidenciarius Collegii supradicti,  denominationes sic factae per omnes Consocios aut sex eorum ad minus ut praefertur, per eum qui eas scripsit, Superiori Ordinis aut suo Deputato monstrabunt, qui de nominatis hu|jusmodi eum praeeleget  admittet cui major vo|cum pluralitas suffragatur,  quem sibi ad hono|rem Ordinis  utilitatem regni  Regis magis videbitur expedire. Et in casu quo nullus soci|orum ad electionem veniat modo sequenti, veniet puniendus saltem si non just de caus fuerit im|peditus. Si tamen causam absentiae justam  probabilem allegaverit, per Superiorem, aut su|um Deputatum debet approbari. Quod si causa abseniae reperta forsan fuerit minus justa,  acci|tus ad electionem non veniat, ut praefertur, con|cordatum est, quod custodi  Collegio, nomine poenae solvat unam marcam,  cum proxim fue|rit in Capitulo sedebit ante Superiorem Ordinis aut suum Deputatum,  totam societatem, in medio Capituli super terram, quous per Supe|riorem aut suum Deputatum  societatem fuerit reconciliatus.
XIX. Item, concordatum est, quod in casu quo aliquis Militum dictae societatis Garterii moria|tur,  in ejus locum alius eligatur, quantocius post electionem electus habebit Garterium, in sig|num quod est unus sociorum Garterii,  habebit Mantellum sibi pro suo habitu liberatum, quan|do in stallum suum inducetur,  nn ant Et in casu quo moriatur priusquam fuerit installa|tus, non nominabitur unus fundatorum ex quo nn babet plenariam possessionem sui status, ym|mo habebit medietatem Missarum praedictarum, pro eo quod habuit liberatam Garterii,  peni|tus nichil magis. Et si talis electus non veniat ad dictum locum cum omni celeritate accommod post receptionem Garterii, ut installetur,  sig|nanter infra annum post ejus electionem, si sit ha|bitans infra regnum Angliae,  nn habeat ex|cusationem Superiori aut suo Deputato  socie|tati Garterii acceptabilem, electio de eo facta sit prorsus irrita  inanis,  exinde Superior Ordinis aut suus Deputatus, un cum societate, ad novam electionem procedat. Et nec ensis nec galea alicujus electi quous veniat infra Castrum supra stallum suum figentur, sed exteris ante suum stallum; ad finem, quod si ipse electus ad Castrum non veniat, ut praefertur, csis suus  galea nn indecenter erunt depsita de sublimi, sed ut Militaris honor servet Servetur. illibatus, re|movebuntur extra chorum curialiter  honest,  remanebunt extunc ad opus publicum  usum Collegii supradicti.
XX. Item, concordatum est, quod omnes fo|ranei qui in socictatem dicti Ordinis Garterii elligentur Elegentur. per Superiorem Ordinis de su electione certificentur,  Garterium at Man|tellum Statuta Ordinis, sub communi Sigillo, cum omni celeritate accommod sumptibus tamen Superioris Ordinis, transmittantur; Et omnia Omnino. certificentur forani infra quatuor menses continuos  tempore electionis de se factae; Ad finem quod deliberare valeant ex tenore Statuto|rum, si electioni hujusmodi voluerint consentire. Et etiam quod omnes hujusmodi foranei, sie electi, cujuscum conditionis stats aut dignitatis ex|istant, infra spacium octo mensium post certifica|tam sibi electionem per Superiorem Ordinis aut suum Deputatum  receptionem Garterii, mit|tant unum Procuratorem sufficientem, secundum quod tatui electi hujusmodi videbitur convenire; proviso tamen quod Procurator hujusmodi, in|stallandus in locum suum, sit Miles, expers om|nis opprobrii, qui tempore sui advents ex causa hujusmodi secum dferet ex parte mittentis u|num Mantellum Ordinis, de serico blodio,  etiam ensem  galeam, penes Collegium ipsum remansura, Quod quidem Mantellum ponetur super brachium dextrum Procuratoris hujusmo|di, per Superiorem Ordinis aut suum Deputa|tum, tempore installationis suae supradictae, et il|lud tenebit super dictum brachium suum ad ho|ras Canonicas proximas post installationem acci|piendam, nomine Domini sive Magistri sui supra|dicti. Dictus autem Procurator installatus Mantellum hujusmodi postea non portabit, ne debet Capitulum intrare, nec ibidem vocem ha|bere, virtute cujuscum potestatis sibi attributae. Et sciendum est quod hujusmodi favor Installatio nis per Procuratorem solis foraneis exhibetur, qui quidem non poterunt hc de caus personaliter advenire, adfinem quod sint participes Missarum  devotarum Orationum Ordinis, quarum me|diate Medietate. carerent, si installati nn essent ante|quam morerentur.
XXI. Item, concordatum est, Quod si aliquis Comes, Baro, aut Miles Bacallarius dicti Ordi|nis decedat; Ipse qui successurus est in locum suum, sive sit Comes, sive Baro, aut Miles Bacal|larius, tenebit idem stallum quod tenuit suus

Praedcessor, cujuscunque suerit dignitatis, nec|ullus eligendus hanc seriem mutabit, praeter Principem Valliae, qui semper tenebit stallum ex opposito Superiori Ordiuis, postquam fuerit electus, Ita quod ex casu Comes occupare potest stallum Militis,   contr. Et istud est Ordi|natum, ut sciatur qui fuerint Primaevi Fundatores Ordinis.
XXII. Item, concordatum est, quod quilibet Sociorum Ordinis, primo tempore sui ingressus, dabit aliquid certum, secundum eminentiam sui stats, in sustentationem Canonicorum  pau|perum Veteranorum Militum, ibidem commo|rantium, ac etiam in augmentum elimosinarum, quae inibi perpetu Ordinantur; scilicet Supe|rior Ordinis xl marcas. Rex foraneus xx li|bras; Princep Walliae xx marcas; quilibet Dux x lib. quilibet Comes x marcas; quilibet Baro, centum solidos,  quilibet Miles Bacalla|rius v. marcas. Et ista donaria pia sunt ideo constituta, ut ingrediens hunc Ordinem Milita|rem per hoc dignius optineat nomen, titulum,  privilegium unius fundatorum. Dignum enim  conveniens arbitratur, ut qui aggregatur nu|mero Fundatorum Aliquid hujus rei seu nominis intuitu. aliquid hujus rei se nomi|nis in tutu largiatur. Et quousque summae hujus|modi pecuniarum per quemlibet juxta divisionem istam in primo ejus Introitu. intractatu sint solutae, nec galea nec ensis ingredientis hujusmodi supra stal|lum figentur. Et est sciendum quod Superior Ordinis tenebitur solvere pro sumptibus introitus cujuslibet Extranei qui eligetur, tempore instal|lationis suorum Procuratorum.
XXIII. Item, Concordatum est, quod quam|tocius quo aliquis societatis sive Ordinis hujus, ex primaevis Fundatoribus moriatur, Scutum niem Armorum suorum factum de Metallo,  galca sua, sint fixa retro tergum in stallo suo. Et alii Fundatores qui poste succedunt habebunt scuae sua  galeas modo conformi situata; subtus tamen aliqualiter primaevos Fundatores. Sua etiam Scuta  galeae nn erunt Precii ita magni. precie ita magno, sicut primorum Fundatorum.
XXIV. Item quod quilibet ingrediens pro|mittat  juret personaliter, vel per Procurato|rem ydoneum  sufficientem, nomine suo instal|landum, de bene  fideliter observando pro viri|bus statuta Ordinis. Et advertendum est, quod ullus, per Procuratorem installationem recipiet nisi duntaxat Foranei, qui ob hanc causam com|mod accedere non poterint in personis.
XXV. Item, concordatum est, quod in casu quo Superior Ordinis sit extra regnum suum An|gliae tempore Installationis alicujus sociorum Garterii, vel forsan peragere non poterit perso|naliter, quae tunc sibi ex officio incumbunt, com|mittere possit uni Sociorum ejusdem Ordinis suas vices Ac. ad plenariam in hac parte potestatem, ea perficiendi  exequendi, quae, si prefens esset, suo proprio ministerio pertinerent.
XXVI. Item, concordatum est, quod siat com|mune Sigillum, quod erit in custodia illius quem Superior Ordinis ad hoc voluerit assignare.
XXVII. Item quod quilibet Consociorum prae|dicti Ordinis de cetero habeant Statuta Ordinis, fub communi Sigillo supra dicto. Et quod Origi|nale Statutorum sit cum eodem consignatum, quod infra Thesaurum. thesauream dicti Collegii imperpetu|um remanebit,  post mortem cujuscun Consocii Ordinis supradicti teneantur sui executores ipsa Statuta Ordinis Collegio remittere,  Gardiano Collegii liberare.
XXVIII. Item, concordatum est, quod nullus Militum Ordinis Sancti Georgii  de societate Garterii exeat Reguum Angliae, absque Scitu. situ  licencia dicti Superioris. Et est ide concor|datum, quod si aut aliqua expeditio Militaris contingat, aut aliquid aliud quod ad honorem Militarem cedere conspicitur, Superior Ordinis, de su grati, Consocios Ordinis hujuscemodi actibus Militaribus ceteris quibuscumq, tenebi|tur anteferre.
XXIX. Item quod nullus Sociorum Ordinis contra alium Consocium levet arma, nisi in guerra Domini sui legei, vel in propri just que|rel. Et si contingat quod aliquis Sociorum Ordinis retineatur cum aliquo domino, aut ali|cujus domini partem teneat vel querelam,  pars adversa poste fort desideret aliquem alium sociorum Ordinis ad defensionem suae causae con|trariae secum retinere: nullus talis Socius se|cundari desideratus ad hoc consenciat, sed semetipsum teneatur exensare pro eo qud Con|socius suus primitus ex parte advers retentus fuerit velarmatus;  tenebitur propterea quili|libet Sociorum Ordinis, quando cum aliquo retinetur, excipere  pacisci, quod de omni ser|vicio guerrae movendae aut exercendae absolutus sit penitus  quietus si  quatenus aliquis Conso|ciorum suorum societatis Garterii sit perantea cum advers parte retentus  ibidem armatus. Et si ipse secundari retentus nn cognovit, Quod aliquis. ali|quis Sociorum suorum Garterii fuerat primitus ex parte advers retentus, vel armatus, quan|tocius hoc ad ejus noticiam devenerit, teneatur omne hujusmodi Servicium penits relinquere,  seipsum totaliter excusare.
XXX. Item, omnes licenciae Commilitonibus dictae Societatis concedendae terras circuire vo|lentibus, honoris adipiscendi grati, per exerciti|um actuum militarium,  etiam omnia alia scripta tam Certificatoria quam praeceptiva, quae Ordinem Concernere. cosernere videbuntur, per Superio|rem Ordinis emanare debent, sub communi Si|gillo, quod remanebit in custodia unius Sociorum Ordinis ad voluntatem Superioris praedicti. Et si ille qui Sigillum custodit de presenci Superi|oris ex cans rationabili se transferat, dimittet ipsum Sigillum in custodi alterius Sociorum ejusdem Ordinis, praesentis tamen cum Supe|riore, quem idem Superior ad ipsius Sigilli cu|stodiam duxerit assignandum. Ita quod Sigillum commune nullo unquam tempore sit de praesenci Superioris ablatum, quamdiu ipse Superior fu|erit infra Regnum suum Angliae. Et simili modo in absenci Superioris Ordinis cum prae|dicto Sigillo fieri faciet suus Deputatus.
XXXI. Item, concordatum est, si aliquis alius Miles dictae Societatis sive Ordinis, ductus devo|tionis

spiritu desideret apud dictum Castrum de Wyndesore continu trabere suam moram, pro necessariis vitae suae  su habitatione de pro|prio peculio faciat ordinari.
XXXII. Item, concordatum est, quod in casu quo aliquis Miles qui non est dictae societatis Gar|terii, aut persona alia quaevis donare velit ali|quod annum xl.i aut amplius, dicto Collegio, ad participandum orationum suffragia ibidem fien|darum: nomen Datoris hujusmodi intitulabitur in Kalendari Benefactorum (ut Canonici Milites veterani pro eo valeant inperpetuum) depre|cari.
XXXIII. Item, concordatum est, quod si ali|quis Canonicorum moriatur,  Superior Ordi|nis sit extra Regnum suum Angliae, Gardianus sive Custos Collegii, qui pro tempore fuerit, ex|inde mittet literas suas ad Superiorem Ordinis  Superior quem velit ad eundem Canonicatum valeat praesentare.
XXXIV. Item sit unus Registrator Ordinattus per Superiorem  societatem Ordinis, qu, inter caeteros de Collegio sit scientior,  interesse debet in quolibet Capitulo Ordinis celebrando, ad registrandum  inactitandum Electiones sin|gulas,  nomina Electorum, punitiones inflictas,  punitionum causas, ad dictum Ordinem per|tinentia, de Capitulo in Capitulum annuatim. Et sit dictus Registrator juratus in receptione sui officii de fideliter registrando, Et quae in Principio ujuslibet Capituli in Vigili Sancti Georgii annuatim celebrandi, sint omnia Re|gistrata auni proecedentis ibidem public lecta, coram Superiore  societate Ordinis; Ad fi|nem quod siquid sit mal conceptum  correcti|one dignum, valeat in formam debitam refor|mari.



An Exemplar of the Statutes of Institution remaining in the Lord Hattons Library.
AD honorem Dei, Sanctae Mariae Virgi|nis gloriosae,  Sancti Georgii; Rex Angliae, Dominus noster Edwardus tertius post conquestum anno regni sui 23. Ordi|navit, stabilivit  fundavit unam Societatem in Castr suo de Windsore sub form quae se|quitur.
Imprimis, ipsemet constituitur Superior Co|mitivae, deinde senior ejus filius princeps Walliae, Dux Lancastriae, Comes Warwici, Piers Ca|pital de la Bouch, Comes Staffordiae, Comes Sarisburiae, Dominus de Mari-mortuo, Domi|nus Johannes Lisle, Dominus Bartholomeus de Bourghier Filius, Dominus Johannes de Beu|champe, Dominus de Mahune, Dominus Hugo de Courtny, Dominus Thomas de Holande, Dominus Johannes de Gray, Dominus Ricardus Fitz Simond, Dominus Milo de Stapilton, Dominus Thomas de Wale, Dominus Hugo de Wrottesly, Dominus Neel de Loring, Dominus Johannes Chandoyse, Dominus Jacobus Audley, Domnus Otho de Holand, Dominus Henricus Eme, Dominus Sanchett D'abrigecourt, Do|minus Walterus de Pavely.

I. Imprimis, est Statutum  pro perpetuo ordinatum, quod Dominus noster Rex Angliae praedictus,  haeredes sui Reges Angliae superi|oritate perfruentur Comitivae praedictae.
II. Item, est decretum quod in praedictum Ordinem  consortium nullus admittetur, nisi qui praecinctus fuerit irreprobato cingulo mili|tiae, sanguinis generositate dotatus ex ori|gine.
III. Et xxvi. Milites proenominati, quotiens praesentes fuerint in castro praedicto, portabunt pro habitu Mantellos  Garteros ordinatos ad boc ibidem, scilicet quotiesunque contigerit eos Capellam intrare Sancti Georgii, seu domum Capituli pro Capitulo celebrando, vel quicquid alid faciendo ibidem, quod Ordini pertinebit. Et consimiliter illi induentur insigniis vigili Sancti Georgii, egrediendo cum Superiore, vel cum suo Deputato, de Magn Camer per modum processionis us ad Capellam praedictam, seu do|mum Capitularem, Et ex post facto eodem ordine revertentes continu sic induti, tam videlicet in Coen, hi qui coenare decreverunt, quam ceteri non coenantes, usque dum Superior, seu ejus De|putatus, sumptis speciebus  vino, cunctis de|creverit valefacere, consimilem modum in omni|bus observantes, de mane veniendo ad Capitulum,  revertendo ad prandium,  continu usque dum Superior, seu suus Deputatus, singula com|pleverit, quae suo sttui, pro tunc ex congruo per|tinent observari. Ac etiam iterum veniendo ad secundas vesperas,  revertendo ad coenam,  usque dum completa fuerit  le voyde finita.
IV. Item ordinati sunt ibidem tredecim Ca|nonici, qui in suis receptionibus, vel saltem in|fra annum posteris sacerdotes erunt. Tredecim, erunt etiam ibidem Vicarii, qui in introitu illo|rum Sacerdotes fore obligantur, vel ut in ordi|nibus proximis ad Sacerdotii gradum valeant promoveri, qui divina celebrabunt ibidem pro animabus omnium fidelium defunctorum. Qui quidem Canonici per praedictos fundatores erunt praesentati. Ita viz. quod unusquis eorundem suum praesentabit Canonicum Custodi Collegii, Sic quod postquam aliqua vacaverit posteris praebenda, ne ille qui prius praesentaverat, nec aliquis alius ex tunc alium ad illam presenta|bit, sed solus Superior ex post facto jus habebit quemcunque praesentandi quae ad hoc decreverit limitandum,  sic de singulis vacaturis earum|dem unanimiter est decretum.
V. Item, concordatum est, quod Canonici prae|fati habebunt Mantellos murrii coloris, cum

un figur rotund, viz. na roundletta de Ar|mis Sancti Georgii.
VI. Item, Ordinati sunt ibidem xxvi. Mi|lites adversitate fortune ad tantum vexati, quod de propriis minim valeant sustentari, qui in collegio praedicto conveniens percipient emolu|menum pro suis devotis effundendis precibus, ad Laudem Dei,  honorem Sancti Georgii,  quod ad eorum electionem eodem modo ordina|tum est per omnia, quo prius refertur de admissi|onibus Canonicorum, sic quod omnis posterior electio perpetu remanebit penes Ordinis Supe|riorem.
VII. Item, Statutum est, quod singuli Pau|peres Milites praefati suos portabunt Mantellos de colore rubro, cum uno Scuto de Armis Sancti Georgii abs aliquo Gartero in ejus circuitu.
VIII. Item, concordatum est, quod si Superior in solempnitate Sancti Georgii praesens esse non poterit, per suas Literas, suum faciat Depu|tatum, qui Capitulum hor terti teneat in vi|gili, ac in die singul studeat adimplere quae ad festunt pertinent, pro tempore, sumptibus Su|perioris; Ita quod interint nulla nova praesumat affirmare Statuta, imm potestatem plenariam habeat corrigendi  reformandi singula puncta Capituli quae sequuntur.
IX. Item, quolibet anno, in vigili Sancti Georgii, convenire habent ex Statuto, apud Castrum de Windsore omnes Milites praedicti Sancti Georgii, qui viz. infra regnum fuerint, vel alibi accedere valentes, ad effectum quod ibidem Divina insimul solempnizent, portando Mntellos durante servicio interim ordinatim singuli in suis stallis, super quae unusquis po|sita habebit suam galeam, cum Cresta,  gla|dium direct subpendentem, quae ibidem statuitur permanere ad tempus suorum possessorum, unum|quod viz. in signum  honorem ipsa deferen|tium,  etiam in signum defensionis Ecclesiae, secundum quod vota deposeunt Ordinis Militaris. Verumtamen in casu quo festum Sancti Georgii infra quindenam Paschae contingit evenire, pro|rogari debet us in illam diem dominicam quae continu dies xv. paschae fore computabitur, ut sic unusquis Ordinis consocius opportunitatem accedendi habeat ad festum praelibatum, absque hoc quod equitare arceatur aliquo dierum illo|rum trium solempnitati Paschae festivae anne|xorum.
X. Item, quod singuli  uniti simul in vigi|li praedict ac hor  loco pris deputatis con|venire minim postponant. Quod si tempus neg|lexerint veniendi  horam, poenam subibunt ex concordi Capituli inferius limitatam, super quo extat decretum, quod ill vice capitulum non intrabunt, imm expectabunt foras ad hostium, nullam habituri vocem in Capitulo, eui vali|turam, in re expediend ibidem, ill scilicet vice tantm. Et si ad initium primarum vespe|rarum quis illorum negligat accedere, de facto ad tunc Stallum suum intrare nn praesumat, sed expectabit in loco illo Chori, quo Choristae residere solebant; scilicet coram Stallo proprio, us ad finent illarum. Et idem Ordinatum est de neg|ligentibus venire, ante principium altae Missae,  vesperarum in dei Sancti Georgii. Et siquis non veniat ad festum praedictum, abs boc, quod causam suae absentiae allegaverit,  Superiore acceptandam, poenam subibit hanc, viz. Quod proximo festo celebrando stallum suum non intra|bit, sed totaliter tenebit se in imo, qu prius dictum est, de negligentibus praevenire principium vesperarum  Missae in die. Quod si ita fuerit negligens, qud ad proximum festum celebran|dum minim accesserit, nullam interim caussam suae tardationis Superiori significans accepta|bilem, poena sua erit, quod stallum suum non in|trabit in proximo festo celebrando, immo reside|bit in basso modo quo prius statuitur, , ultra hoc, in processione tunc fiend, tenebt se tota|liter ante tres Cruces ibidem deportandas. Et in regressu se reponet in loco basso priori usque ad tempus Offertorii,  offeret solus postrem per se. Ac post has sic peractas poenitentias, se convertet ad stallum Superioris, seu sui Depu|tati, ibidem de Commissis humilitr sibi petens pardonari. Quo facto, quisquis illorum inter|fuerit ipsum commendabit ad stallum, Statum pristinum sibi restituendo  gradum. Quod si ad secundum festum Sancti Georgii, minim accesserit, dummod in regno permanserit, nul|lam interim significans causam sui impedimenti,  Superiore, vel suo Deputato, merit allocan|dam, eo facto posteris stallum suum nunquam intrabit, quoad us obtulerit altari Sancti Georgii, in Capell praedict jocale aliquod va|loris xx. Marcarum seu verum valorem ejusdem. Quod si de anno in annum permanserit sic culpa|bilis, secundum lapsum temporis, multiplicabit  sumptus, us dm de commissis fuerit recon|ciliatus.
XI. Item, cadit sub Statuto, quod singuli Milites societatis praedictae Mantellos portabunt ordinis praedicti de. colore blodio, omni anno, scilicet  primis vesperis us post secundas in festo Sancti Georgii, ubicun pro tempore illo continget ipsos residere, ac si praesentes forent pro tunc cum Superiori Ordinis in loco ad boc spe|cialiter deputato, dummod sibi un occurrerint temporis opportunitas  Libertas votiva.
XII. Item, Statuitur, quod siquis de Comi|tiv praedict invenietur in aperto abs usu Garterii debito,  consueto, qum cit e hc sibi veraciter fuerit objectum, noverit se firmitr astrictum per Statuta, ad persolvendum, hc de caus, Custodi  Collegio, dimidiam marcam, modo quo consimiliter defectiv solvere consue|verunt.
XIII. Interim, est decretum, quod singuli de Comitiv in alt Miss Sancti Georgii se dispo|nant ad offerendum, unusquis viz. cum suo socio sibi direct opposito,  hoc ordinatum secundum quod in suis stallis reponi dinoscuntur, ita quod si cujuscun consors absens ab hoc actu fuerit, con|socius ex opposito offeret per se, Ita quod in omni processione fiend ibidem in Capell praedicti Ordinis, Superior postremus incedat, cunctos subsequendo per se Ordinis consocios.
XIV. Item, concordatum est, quod in Crastino solemnitatis Sancti Georgii, priusquam Societas praedicta decreverit inter se mutu valefacere,

Decantari facient unam Missam de Requie, pro animabus suorum Consodalium, qui de hoc seculo decesserunt,  omnium fidelium defunctorum, in cujus celebratione singuli qui praesentes pridi extiterint, tenen interesse, nisi forte quis cau|s ad hoc movente rationabili fuerit per Supe|riorem in speciali licentiatus, seu excusabiliter aliund turbatus.
XV. Item, decretum est, quod unusquis So|dalium Ordinis saepedicti, relinquet ibidem unum mantellum, ad effectum quod in singulis subi|taneis accessibus  insperatis, illum paratum inveniat, pro observandis statutis in hac parte, singulis Superioris Iussis  decretis.
XVI. Item concordatum est, quod si quis de societate praedict itinerando equitaverit per Castrum praedictum, ob reverentiam Loci se debet disponere ad intrandum Capellam praefatam, s|mendo sibi primits suum Mntellum, sine quo illam nusquam intrare praesumat. Cui ad obvi|andum se disponere habent Canonici residentes, ad ipsum conducendum devotis quo noverint, in capellam praedictam. Et si intraverit pro tem|pore altae Missae, expectare tenctur ad finem ejus|dem, ob honorem Dei,  Sancti Georgii. Et si post nonam ipsum contingat introire, expectabit us dum Canonici praesentes dixerint de pro|undis, pro animabus omnium fidelium defuncto|rum,  obtulerit ibidem. Quod si quis de So|ciis praedictis per medium equitaverit villae,  recusaverit capellam intrare praefatam, ad offe|rendum, mod quo praefertur per Statuta, No|verit se sub paen suae obedientiae frmiter astri|ctum, ad proficiscendum peregre  predester totieus quotiens, de Castro, unum miliare, us ad Capellam praedictam, ob honorem Sancti Georgii,  pro qulibet vice qu sic fecerit  fuerit defectivus, offerre tenetur unum denarium.
XVII. Item, diffinitum est, quod quam cit ad veram  indubiam Superioris pervenerit notiti|am, de decessu cujuscun Consortis Comitivae praedictae, ipse faciet celebrari, pro anim sic de|functi, mille missas; unus Rex extraneus cele|brari faciet octingentas Missas; Princeps septin|gentas; quilibet Dux, sexcentas; quilibet Comes trecentas, quilibet Baro, Ducentas; quilibet Mi|les, Centum. Et si istas non compleverit intra quarterium anni, seu compleri fecerit, post notiti|am mortis habitam, ut praefertur, duplicabit quar|terium integri totius. Et si per dimidium anni  retr permanserit, de eisdem tenetur ad duplum, t praefertur. Et sic de tempore in tempus us ad finem anni. Et consimilitr de anno, si ad tan|tum permanserit defectivus,  de anno in annum ipsos duplicabit.
XVIII. Item concordatum est, quod siquis de|cesserit de praefat comitiv, Superior, seu ejus Deputatus, habit de hoc ver notiti, cunctis sociis Comitivae in regno existentibus, per suas Literas eisdem super eo directas, facti veritatem significare tenetur, singulos interim accedere va|lentes praemuniendo, quatenus infra sex septi|manas post hujusmodi citationem praehabitam in loco idoneo quocun quem ad hoc duxerit limi|tandum, se disponant convenire. Qui quidem onmes  singuli sic uniti, ita viz. quod ad mi|nus ultra Superiorem, vel suum Deputatum sint ibi sex alii Ordinis Consocii, novem Mii|taris Ordinis personas nominabunt,  qilibt eorum nominabit pro se, juxta videre proprium, qui praesens pro tun fuerit, honorabilires ac sufficientiores quos noverit Milites, in suis famis minim violatos, irreprobatos undi  subjecos Superiori, seu alios, dummodo partem ejus ad|versam nascantur non favere, viz. tres Comites, seu tres alios majoris dignitatis, tres Barones,  tres Milites. Quas quidem denominationes un cum votis singulorum reportabit,  seribet Praelatus Ordinis, viz. Episcopus Wintonin existens pro tempore, seu in absenti su, Custos Collegii, seu Registrarius deputatus ad hoc, vel senior Residentiarius Collegii praedicti, in ab|sentiis corundem; Ac denominationes praedictae  vota per omnes, seu ad minus per sex illorum facta, ut praefertur, postquam reportaverit  scripserit incontinenter ostendere tenetur Supe|riori ordinis, qui ipsum eligere debet Militem, seu denunciare pro electo, quem pluribus viderit Eligentium vocibus abundare,  honorabilio|rem judicaverit, sibi ac coronae suae, ac regno ex verisimili in posterum decreverit magis pr|futurum. Et siquis de Comitiv praedict vo|luntari se subtraxerit ab electione hujusmodi, absq, hoc, quod causam habuerit justiorem, pu|niatur sub frm quae subsequitur, causam in|super suae tardationis justam, si qum allegave|rit, debit allocando. Quod si nullam valeat ostendere justam sui impedimenti, seu qud non venerit citationi parendo pris exhibitae, decre|tum est, quod tunc solvet Custodi  Collegio unam maream, ad effectium, quod ipsi orent pro anim socii defunctii,  in proximo suo advent ad Capitulum praedictum, ipse expectbii super terram in medio Capituli, coram Superiore,  tot praesente Comitiv, us dum per ipsos fue|rit recoiliatus.
XIX. Item, decretum est, quod cum contige|rit aliquem Militem praesatae Societatis in fata decedere, ac deinde alium per electionem succe|dere in locum suum, sic electo transmittetur Garterus, in signum quod ipse est unus de prae|dicto consortio Ordinis Garteri; Et qum citis decreverit possessionem recipere sui Stalli, tunc prim  nn ante recipiet Mantellum Ordinis pro suo habitu. Et in casu quo decefferit prius|qum suo habitu indui videatur, nequaquam tunc nominabitur ut unus fundatorum, e qud sibi deficiat plenitudo possessionis suae  stats, veruntamen medictatem percipiet missarum prae|nominatarum, caus liberati Garteri, sibi sic transmissi, ut statuitur, absque pluribus. Quod si sic electus post ipsius Garterii susceptionem, omnem congruam non adhibuerit diligentiam, quatenus installari valet, ita specialiter qud installetur infr annum suae electionis, si fuerit Miles expectans infra Regnum, si de hoc minime causam assigare voluerit,  Superiore,  tota Comitiv merito allocandam, eo facto cassa ju|dicabitur electio illa  vana, in tantum qud liceat eis, ex tunc, ad novam celebrandam pro|cedere electionem; Et medio tempore, sua galea cum Crest  gladio nequaquam figi debent su|per

per stallum sibi limitatum, sed ambo reponi de|bent, usque adventum cujusvis sic electi, ad Ca|stellum praedictum, ne si ipsum, ut praefertur, in|fra tempus limitatum accedere non contingat, nov fact electione ipsa insignia militaria de|vellari judicabitur merito, seu deponi, sed po|tis sic in imo posita honestis  secretis de choro exportari, deinde ad opus Collegii perpetu permansura.
XX. Item, concordatum est, qud omnes Ex|tranci in hanc electi Comitivam, de suis electio|nibus certificari debent per Superiorem, quibus interim transmitti debent, sumptibus Superioris, Garterus cum Mantello,  Statutis Ordinis, signatis Sigillo ipsius communi,  hoc omni ce|leritate congru, ita qud, ad ultimum, notitian inde habeant infra quatuor menses post electio|nem, ad finem, qud visis statutis Ordinis, se avisare valeant, antequm ipsam recipere de|creverint seu refutare. Quam si receperint Extranei praedicti, cujuscun dignitatis fuerint, conditionis, seu stats, tenentur ad transmitten|dum, infra octo menses proxim tunc sequentes, unum sufficientem Procuratorem, unusquis jux|ta statum suae dignitatis, sic ad mins qud sit Miles irreprobatus, qui nomine suo valeat in|stallari, qui secum adducere tenetur unum Man|tellum sericum de blodio colore Ordinis, ex parte ipsum transmittentis, interim galeam cum crest,  uno gladio, quae continu posteris morabun|tur in Collegio. Qui quidem Mantellus, tem|pore installationis ipsius Procuratoris, nomine Domini seu Magistri sui, per Superiorem reponi debet super brachium suum dextrum, quem retinere tenetur ibidem us finem horae divinae, ex tunc ibidem proxim celebrandae, postquam sic, nomine Domini, seu Mgistri sui, fuerit in|stallatus, ita qud posteris ipsum non portabit, neque vocem aliquam habebit in Capitulo, ne illuc intrare praesumet, in absenti transmitten|tis ipsum. Et est sciendum, qud tantus favor Extraneis sic electis ab hoc praestari jubetur, qui in suis personis minim valeant installari, quo facere valeant per suos Procuratores quatenus ipsi particepes effici mereantur Missarum  Ora|tionum integrarum Ordinis praelibati, quarum medietate privarentur, si, priusquam ipsos in|stallari contingat, viam ingrederentur universae carnis.
XXI. Item, statuitur, quod siquis Comes, Baro, seu quivis Miles in fata decesserit, ipse qui post ipsum venturus est, cujuscunque conditi|onis fuerit, seu Stats, ipse tenebit eundem Stal|lum quem tenuit suus Praedecessor, abs muta|tione aliqu, nisi solummodo ratione Principis, qui Comitivae obtinebit stallum primum ex oppo|sito Superioris, qum cit electus fuerit ipse. Et sic in casu continget, quod unus Comes suc|cedet uni Militi in stallum suum,  etiam  converso. Et hoc ide permittitur sic fieri, qua|tenus per hoc, primi Ordinis Fundatores ab aliis valeant discerni.
XXII. Interim Statutum est, quod unusquis praedictae Societatis, in introitu suo primo, ali|quid administrabit de bonis suis, unusquis viz. juxta substantiam suae dignitatis, in relevamen Canonicorum, pauperum Militum,  eleemosina|rum ibidem pro perpetuo ordinatarum, viz. Su|perior Ordinis 40. Marcas, unus Rex extraneus 20 l. Princeps 20 Marcas, quilibet Dux 10 l. quilibet Comes 10 Marcas quilibet Baro 100 solidos,  quilibet Miles, quin Marcas solvere statuitur. Et quous unusquis illorum juxta statum suum has persolverit summas, galeae suae cum gladiis nequaquam erigi permittentur su|pra stalla sua; pro quo sciendum, qud Superior Ordinis tenetur ad satisfaciendum in his; pro quolibet Extraneo sic electo, viz. tempore in|stallationis suae per Procuratorem suum; Et ista Dona pro tanto ordinantur, ut omnes hunc intrantes Ordinem, digniores reddantur ad ha|bendum sua nomina intitulata ac privilegiata, velut Fundatores Ordinis praedicti.
XXIII. Interim est statutum qud qum cit aliquis primorum Fundatorum debitum solverit naturae, fieri debet de Metallo Scutum Armo|rum suorum,  galeae cum Crest ejusdem, quae figi statuuntur in dorso sui stalli, in signum ge|stantis ipsa. Et consimilitr eorum Successores, Scuta Armorum suorum cum galeis  crestis fixa habebunt, in dorso stallorum suorum subtus prima tamen, quae etiam de Metallo erunt, verun|tamen ad differentiam primorum fundatorum, minora erunt.
XXIV. Item unusquis praefatum Ordinem ingressurus promittere habet personaliter ac ju|rare, seu per Procuratorem quem suo nomine, ut praefertur, continget installari, se observatu|rum juxta posse fidelis quo valebit, statuta om|nia  singula Ordinis praelibati, Et de caetero nullus installari permittetur per Procuratorem, nisi fuerit extraneus, qui, ut in propri person in|stalletur, accedere non valet tempore limitato.
XXV. Item, in casu quo Superior de regno fuerit absens seu alibi, ita quod commod in per|son propri accedere non valeat, ad perimplen|dum ea quae ad installationem Militis sic electi dignoscuntur ex congruo pertinere, sibi licebit vices tunc suas in hc parte committere cui|cun duxerit socio praedictae Comitivae, qui cuncta suo nomine huic actui pertinentia valebit authoritate peragere.
XXVI. Item concordatum est, quod ad hunc Ordinem pertinere debeat unum commune Si|gillum, in praesenti Superioris continue per|mansurum, vel in custodi illius quemcun ad hoc duxerit limitandum.
XXVII. Item, unusquis de caetero Ordinis praedicti habere tnetur penes se Statuta prae|sentia, signata Sigillo praefato, quorum Origi|nale pro perpetuo remanere statuitur infra The|sanrariam Collegii saepedicti, praedicto Sigillo pris debit consignatum.
XXVIII. Item, post decessum cujus Militis Ordinis Garterii Executores ejus firmiter astrin|guntur ad remittendum Collegio praedicto Sta|tuta praefata suis Dominis  Magistris tradi|ta, pris ut praefertur, Custodi tradenda Colle|gii pro tempore existenti.
XXIX. Item concordatum est, quod nullus de caetero Miles Ordinis Sancti Georgii regnum exire presunat, abs Superioris licentia spe|ciali

petit super hoc pariter  obtent, super quo communiter est decretum quod si aliquod Militare viagium seu aliud quoddam honorifi|cum, per Superiorem fieri dispanatur, quod Ordinis militarem famam possit promovere, Superior, ex su grati speciali, ad peragendum dicti Ordinis Commilitones prae caeteris subditis dignabitur anteferre.
XXX. Item, Statutum est, quod nullus Mi|litum praedictorum contra alium praesumat mili|tare, nisi solm in casu quo  suis  superiori|bus Dominis idem  ex jussu legis scere arce|atur, seu in propri caus just. Quod si sic eveniat quod aliquis eorudem cum quocunque Domino, seu cum favente suam partem stipendiis retineatur, ad Arma militaribus,  ejus pars adversa alium Ordinis Garterii militem opta|verit retinere; in isto casu ipse qui sic secund fuerit requisitus, e qud noverit sui Ordinis Commilitonem praevi praearmari cum advers parte, de requisitione hac ultimat teetur excu|sari; Ac insuper in quibuseun suis hujusodi retentionibus ad Arma obligari satis arct ad specialiter praeexcipiendum, cm ad hoc prim fuerint inclinati. Quod si quem de Ordine suo Garteri cum advers parte ipsius retinentis ip|sum praevi contingat retineri, quod tun ille se|cundo sic retentus, habit hujus rei perfect no|titi, isto non obstante, suas liber valeat habe|nas exercere, ac de hujusmodi retentione ad guerram penits absolvi eo fact Quod si in hujusmodi ut praefertur, retentione ipsum secun|dari sic retentum non constiterit, de aliquo sui Ordinis consocio cum parte retento advers, sed posteris si devenerit ad notitiam, incontinenti se noscat firmiter obligatum ad se excusandum erga dominum seu Magistrum suam Et ad querelam suam  quamlibet hujusmodi penits relinquendum.
XXXI. Item quod omnes  sing Licentiae literales consortii Militibus de caetero concedndae per Superiorem, ad finem quod mare pertranse|ant, ut fines visitent alienos,  exteras nati|ones, pro honoribus militiae quoquo mdo perqui|rendis, ac insuper  Literae mandatoriae, seu alis certificatoriae, quovis modo Ordini perti|nentes cuique transmittendae, pris debite con|signentur praedicti Ordinis communi Sigillo, quod manere statuitur penes aliquem de Ordine, quem ad hoc Superior viderit assignandum. Quem si ex rationabili caus de praesenti Superioris re|cedere contingat, tunc Sigillum post se relinquet, cum illo quem ad hoc Superior decreverit limita|re, ita quod Sigillum praedictum, extra suam prae|sentiam, dummod infra regnum expectaverit, minim relinquatu. Quod etiam omnin ob|servandum fore statuitur, ab intento pro Supe|rioris in absenti ejus Deputato, quoad Si|gillum praelibatum.
XXXII. Item statuitur, qud siquis Miles Ordinis praedicti, ob devotionem propositum re|ceperit infra Collegium praedictum continu per|manendi, qud ipse de suis propriis  nn Col|legii se disponat interim sustentari.
XXXIII. Item siqus Miles alius extraneus ab ordine ob dovotionem etiam ibidem optaverit residere, juxta decretum Superioris Ordinis  ipsius Comitiae, pro ejusdem mor poterit pro|videri.
XXXIV. Item conceditur ex decreto, quod siquis Miles, vel quaevis alia persona, ab hoc Or|dine, ex devotione tribuere decreverit x l. annui reditus, seu terrarum, vel magis, ad effectum qud particeps valeat sicri omnium precum de|votarum ibidem fundendarum, pro benefactori|bus praecipuis Collegii saepedicti, nomen suum eo facto inscribi statuitur inter nomina ibidem be|nefactorum ejusdem, quatenus pro ipso inter cae|teros ab ipsius ministris continu in speciali vale|at deprecari.
XXXV. Interim est decretum, qud si ali|quis de Canonicis praedicti Collegii in absenti Superioris decesserit in fata, custs tunc Collegii ejus decessum Superiori significare tenetur ex statuto, per suas literas, ad effectum, qud ipse alium, quem ad hoc decreverit limitandum, in locum ipsius valeat subrogare.
XXXVI. Item, deputandus est interim, per Ordinis Superiorem  ejus Comitivam, unus Registrarius, qui viz. scientior ad hoc fore ex|istimatur Canonicorum ibidem in Collegio re|sidentium, qui praesens esse poterit in omni Capi|tulo Ordinis celebrando, ad fideliter reportan|dum insuper  registrandum, electiones fiendas ac nomina electorum, poenas infligendas,  cau|sis paenarum, reconciliationes punitorum prae|vi delinquentium, cum singulis actibus aliis  causis eorundem Ordini pertinentibus,  hoc de Capitulo in Capitulum,  de anno in annum; super quo praefatus Registrarius, in sua prim receptione ad officium suum, Iurametum tene|tur praestare, ad sideliter registrandum materias ibidem ministrandas, modo quo praefertur. Quae omnia, ut inactitantur, in principio Capituli proxim sequentis, in vigili Sancti Georgii, coram Superiore  tot Comitiv integr debe|at recitare, ad effectum, qud, si quae occurrant corrigenda, pro tunc, juxta rei exigentiam, dign valeant emendari.




Another Exemplar of the said Statutes, entred in the Black Book of the Order.

I. QVisquis in Angli Regni solio poti|etur, is ipse perpetuis ab hinc tem|poribus hujus illustrissimi Ordinis Supremus  erit,  appellabitur.
II. Nullus in hanc clarissimam societatem ascri|betur nisi qui generis ac militiae nomine dignus fuerit, ut qui moribus ac fam splendidus,  E|ques ant ut minimm auratus; ignobiles autem  improbi repulsam hc omnin patientur. Impro|bitates etenim  probra haec probitatis  honori|ficae virtutis Ordo mins admittet, aut sustinebit.
III. Commilitones egregii hujus Ordinis  ornatissimi Collegae viginti sex erunt: qui Trabeas ac Subligaria apud Windesorum ha|beant, in usum  splendorem Ordinis apt para|ta, ut quoties utendum sit, his illic utantur. Vtendum autem quotiescunq, Divi sui Georgii Sacellum ingrediuntur, seu domum sue suorum Sacerdotum consultationi dedicatam, vel ad con|ventum ibi celebrandum vel quid aliud agitan|dum, vel constituendum, quod Societatis hujus interesse poterit; eodem habitu celebri orn|tu, sub vesperi vigiliae Divi Georgii, ante meridiano Crastinae diei solemni,  secundis deinde vesperis, cum Supremo, vel in locum ejus assignato de magno Regis Cubiculo, ad Sa|cellum  domum, quam de rebus consulturi sub|intrat, ibunt ac redibunt. Trabeis itidem ac subligaribus illic suis induti considebunt, tam in praudio diei Divi Georgii, qum in Caena vigiliae ejus, pariter  diei, comedentes simul ac abstemii, ne se illis exuent, donec ipse Su|premus ejusve loco constitutus exuerit, exuendive tempus esse decreverit.
IV. Et quia Militiae decus honore Divino ni|titur,  quae geruntur, oratione pia fulciuntur: illis viginti sex Equitibus, totidem infra Deo dedicandi respondebunt Canonici seculares tre|decim, Vicarii totidem; jam jam Sacerdotes, vel brevi st futuri. Canonici nimirum intra annum subsequentem, Vicarii vero proxim de|inceps Ordinationis tempore. Horum intererit pro Regis ac Regni ac singulorum in eo convi|ventium, presertm hujus Ordinis foelici Statu, pro defunctorum animabus jugiter ac supplici|ter exorare. Praesetabuntur autem Canonici, per Fundatores Ordinis, ut suum quisque Ca|nonicum Custodi jam Collegii praesentet. Quod siquis eorum moriatur, nec ipse qui proxim praesentavit, nec alius quisquam Sociorum Ordinis ultr praesentabit: sed convenit omnibus una|nimitr, ut imposterum omnium praesentatio Ca|nonicatuum uni Supremo reservetur.
V. Omnes Canonici suum purpurei subru|brive coloris pallium habere debent, insignium Divi Georgii, hoc est Sanguineae Crucis circulo, dexteris subind brachiis superinducto.
VI. Si forte Supremus non potuerit interesse solemnitati Divi Georgii, Deputatus ab eo lo|cum ejus supplebit,  consilium nihilo mins hor tertiarum inibitur, Crastina festivitas de more servabitur, id sumptibus ipsius Supremi. Verum ab eo designatus ille, novas interm ob|servationes aut institutiones hand faciet. Sta|tutorum autem transgressores corrigere,  mal sarcta resarcire licebit.
VII. Annis singulis vigili Divi Georgii fiet una congregatio Sociorum omnium hujus Ordinis in Castro Windesoriensi, siv tum sint in Anglia ipsi, siv foris: mod commod vale|ant advenire; ubi tum divinis intererunt, se|riatm coassidentes, in Sedili quis suo, Trabeis  caeteris insignibus ornati. Supra unuscujus Sedile, Galea at Ensis cum appendicibus, ad ornatum Ecclesiae, nobilis viri condignam me|moriam, quoad Superstes erit, propendebunt; prout Ordo Militaris efflagitat. Si ver festi|vitas illa Divi Georgii intra quindecim  Paschate dies obtigerit, deferetur ad quintam decimam pst diem  quae circiter erit Domini|cam; Vt nullus Sociorum just causam absen|tiae praetendere debeat, nec equitare cogatur sub aliquo trium dierum, solemne Pascha pro|xim subsequentium.
VIII. Prefatae vigiliae hor tertiarum simul ibidem aderunt, si qui ver designato tempore non venerint, nec, quod Supremo vel ejus Vicem|gerenti just ac probabilitr excusent, habeant, pro tempore illo prohibebuntur ab introitu Con|silii, ne suffragii conferendi facultatem habe|bunt in ullis rebus, quae tum fient, aut statu|entur in Consilio. Sn ad utrarum vespera|rum  solemnis Missae principium non accesse|rint,  suis exclusi sedibus, infra stabunt, ubi Ceroferarii solent: donec illa sacra de more fi|nita fuerint. Quisquis autem ad eam celebri|tatem non veniet, nec habet quod jure causari possit, quod  Supremus approbabit, edem anni sequentis festivitate Sedili suo deprivatus tempore primarum vesperarum ut supr, ante id Sedile substabit, dum solemnitr in Crastino Chorus procedet, tres processionarias Cruces an|tecedet:  reversus in eodem infimo loco per|stabit, usq, ad eam, Missae partem, qu rit offe|runt, tum ipse novissimus offerre debet. Post bumilem istiusmodi pene tolerantiam  vestigio veniet ad clarum Sedile Supremi sui, vel in ejus loco constituti, veniam oraturus. A quius Statui priori restitutus, remittetur ad Sedile proprium. Si ver remanens intra Regnum, al|tero nibilomins anno supra memorate celebri|tati citra excusationem hujuscemodi laudabilem, abesse non formidrit,  Sedili proprio eousque prohibebitur, donec intra Sacellum ante Altare Divi Georgii unum Donarium viginti Marcis probatae in Angli Monetae, valens obtulerit. Et singulis deinceps annis quoadus reconcilia|tus ipse fuerit ea mulcta geminabitur.
IX. Omnes Socii, ubicun locorum extite|rint, quotannis in illa Divi Georgii festivitate

caeruleas suas trabeas ab exordio primarum vi|giliae vesperarum us ad secundarum dici termi|num cum res poscat induentur, perinde ac si cum ipso Supremo vel ejus Vicemgerente, quoad ea festivitas agitur, praesentes esse i nisi fursitan libertate tunc su destituti fuerint.
X. Si quis Socius abs nobilitato Subligacu|lo publicits incedat, inde notam incurret,  ammonitus Custodi ac Collegio dimidium Mar|cae persolvet, sicut persolvendi mos semper ante fuit.
XI. In supremo Sacrificio, quum sit solemni|ter offerendum, Socii, quemadmodum in sedibus suis  regione consistunt, ita bini procedent ad of|ferendum, si vero quenquam abesse contigerit, So|cius ejus qui sedet ex opposito, solus ad offerendum ibit.
XII. Quando solemni more Processio fiet in Sacello, postremus omnium Supremus incedet.
XIII. Postridi Divi Georgii, priusquam So|cii vale sibi dicant invicem, una solemnis Missa celebrabitur pro defanctis:  qua nemo Sociorum aberit, nisi, necessarium impedimentum ostendens, Supremo vel ejus Vicemgerente recedendi copiam impetrrit.
XIV. Trabeam suam seu Clamidem Socius unusquisq, Windesori relinquet: ut ibi paratam semper inveniat, si repent forsan accesserit, aut aliquid ex salutari monitu praeoepto Principis adimplendum acciderit.
XV. Si quisquam  Sociis, iter ingressus, Win|desoriense Castrum fort pretervebatur, ob hono|rem loci, (nisi legitima causa praepedicrit) di|vertat illuc. Prius autem qum aedem introcat, Clamidem induat. Indutum Canonici, qui tune affuerint obvim venientes, in Chorum reverenter adducent. Si Missae celebratio tunc instet, ad honorem Dei, Sanctiq, Georgii, venerabundus illam audiat. Sin alias accesserit, tantisper immoratus, dum Canonici cm reliquis sacrificiis Psalmum De profundis, pro desunctis absolverint, ibidem offerat. Quod si quis mediam urbem transiens haud diverterit in aedem oblaturus, quo|ties id ita praetermiserit, ut obedientem se demon|stret, unum milliare pedes illuc accedet, vel unum denarium offeret.
XVI. Supremus Ordinis, ubi primum signifi|cata sibi fuerit mors alicujus  Sociis, pro salute animae ejus mille Missas celebrari faciet, Rex externus, qui de numero fuerit, Octingentas; Princeps Walliae, Septingentas; Dux unusquis sexcentas; Marchio, quadringentas quinqua|ginta; Comes, Trecentas; Vicecomes, Ducen|tas quinquaginta; Baro, Ducentas; Eques ali|us quis Centum. Quod si Supremus, aut Eques alius id, intra tres menses postquam certior fuerit factus, non perfecerit, numerum Missarum ad quas ante tenebatur conduplicabit. Sin medium annum id ipsum omiserit, rursum congeminari debet. Et pari forma de tempore in tempus us ad anni finem. Quod si intra annum integrum, quod debet, non impleverit, annos eodem modo du|plicabit.
XVII. Quoties Sociorum aliquis ab hc vita excesserit, Supremus, aut ab co designatus, cer|tior inde factus, alios omnes qui tum fuerint intra Regnum accedere valentes, literis actu|tum commonebit; ut intra sex bebdomadas post, in locum ab his sibi statuendum conveniant, ad electionem novi Socii. Quibus omnibus ita con|gregatis, vel (adminimum) sex corum, ultra Su|premum aut ab eo Deputatum, presentium quis|que novem de magis idoncis, ut quos ignomini pro|bro vacare crediderit; seu sint de Supremo sub|ditis, seu quivis exteri (dummodo non sint ipsis adversarii, vel adversariorum ejus fautores, aut ultronei defensores) nominabit, tres viz. Comi|tes, aut excelsioris Conditionis homines, tres Ba|rones, totidem Bachalaureos Equites. Ipsa haec autem nomina conscribet Ordinis Prelatus, scilicet Wintoniensis tum Episcopus, sin ab|fuerit ipse, Collegii Decanus, vel Scriba Ordinis. Quin imm si nullus horum interfueri,  residen|tibus antiquissimus id effectum ibi dabit. In hunc modum conscriptos qui scripsit ad Supre|mum, aut ab eo Designatum afferens ostendet; Is vero de nominatis cum preliget, cui plura suf|fragia consenserint,  quem sibi Regno siet aptiorem at utiliorem fore. Si quis (ut opor|tuit) praemonitus, ad electionem tamen non adve|nerit, punietur: nisi justam absentiae causam,  Supremo vel ejus locum implenti probatm pre|ostenderit. Si causam mins approbandm a|tulerit, nec vocatus tamen adesse curavit, mulcta|bitur, ut unam Collegio maream persalvat,  inito proxim Consilio super terram ante Supre|mum sen Designatum abipso, totam societatem in medio sedebit, quousq, cum is rediens in gra|tiam restitutus fuerit.
XVIII. A morte cujusvis Equitum, electus in cam societatem illic praenobilis Subibuli usu donabitur: quo fiet ut Sociorum unus habeatur. Trabe vero sibi necessari non pris ornabitur, qum in Sedile suum fuerit introducendus. Si|que is ante moriatur quam fuerit in sede propri collocatus, hand fundatorum unus appellabitur, c qud plenam status sui possessionem non habue|rit. Attamen Missarum de quibus diximus, me|dictas illi debebitur, quod ornamentum Subliga|ris obtiuerat. Siu autem Electus non celeriter accedat ut Sedile suum occupet, vel saltem intra Annum non iter arripiat ut illud ipsum adim|pleat, mod manserit in Regno, nisi Supremo, seu gerenti vicem ejus, toti societati, gratam ac sufficientem excusationem apposuerit, inanis erit illa prior electio, nec quid erit impedimento, quo minus inde Supremus aut ab co designatus, cum caeter Societate liber procedat ad novam ele|ctionem. Ensis ejus at Galca non ant supra Sedile suum affigentur qum venerit ad Arcem; sed ante sedile foris, ob id nimirum ut dedecori nulla detur occasio, quae sic uti vitari non possit. si de locis editioribus subito tollerentur. Verm ut Equestris honor servetur illibatus, extra Cho|rum, modo, quo poterunt, honestiori removebuntur, ad opus publicum  militatem Collegii reman|sura.
XIX. Socii de funibus remotis at externis eligendi de sui electione per Supremum certiores ficri debent, celerime missis ad eos sub Sigillo communi, illustri Subligaculo,  caeule Tra|b, cum Statutis Ordinis ipsius, cert Supremi

sumptibus. Intra quatuor autem menses ab ele|ctione fact, de hc sunto certiores: ut perpen|dere possint  Statutis electionem illam gratam ac ratam, necne velint habere. Tum hujusce|modi omnes, qualiscun conditionis  honoris electi, postquam cert id intellexerint,  grataen|ter acceperint, prout honor conditionis exigit, ido|neum remittant Procuratorem, qui sibi sedem occupet. Idoneum interpretamur qui vit fam sit incorruptus, nec antea notatus, sed irrepre|hensus. Is caeruleam serico Trabeam, Ensem at Galeam, Windesorum secunt afferat, ut ibidem ea permaneant. Adducta vero Trabea ponetur  Supremo vel Vicem ejus gerente, super dexterum Procuratoris humerum, quando sub nomine Domini sui in sedem introducetur; nec inde dimovebit post clari sedilis ingressum, us dum Canonicarum horarum celebratio termine|tur. Vltrvero non gestabit eam, neq, Consilium introibit, aut suffragium ullum ibi conferet, ul|lius authoritatis aut potestatis argumento. Ea san facultas per Vicarium occupandae sedis, solis est exteris concedenda: quod illuc hii commod satis baud possent advenire. Fit autem haec pote|stas illis e praesertim de caus quo Missarum ora|tionum piarum, quarum alioqui dimidio priva|rentur, jam mortuiplene participes essent.
XX. Si Comes, Baro, vel Eques Bacchalau|reus obierit; qui succedet, sive Comes, Baro, vel Eques tantum extiterit; eandem omnino sedem quam  praedecessor obtinebit. Nec eligendus quisquam seriem istam interrumpet, aut demuta|bit, praeter unum Walliae Principem, qui sedile Supremi semper  Regione situm vendicabit. Ita fieri potest ut Comitis sedem Eques,  hu|jus  diverso. Comes occupet jur teneat. Sic nimirum est institutum, ut qui fuerint primarii Fundatores Ordinis intelligamus.
XXI. Vnusquis Sociorum in ingressu Or|dinis, dabit in Eleemosynas imperpetuum illie in|stitutaes,  insustentationem Canonicorum, pau|perum Militum, Supremus scil. Quadraginta Marcas, Extraneus Rex, viginti libras, Princeps Walliae, viginti Marcas, quis Dux, decemli|bras, Comes totidem Marcas, Baro centum soli|dos,  Eques Bacchalareus quinque Marcas. Iussa sunt haec ideo donari, ut qui donat, unius  fundatoribus merit nomen accipiat. Rem dig|nam etenim  justam arbitrabantur, ut fundatio|ni huic commodi tantillum adderet, quisquis pri|vilegii nomen obtinens, numero fundatorum acce|deret. Nec alicujus Ensis aut Galea supra se|dile suum ante defigetur, qum ista pecunia fuerit rite persoluta. Externi rever quod debent ob introitum, pendetur id  Supremo.
XXII. Vt primm  primevis Fundatoribus ullus expiraret, Scutum  metallo in quo notae compingentur Armorum, cum Galea, fixunt ex|tabit, in sedili proprio, post tergum sedentis. Et qui succedent, Scuta cum Galeis at armis sumili modo collocabunt: tamen sub illis primariorum Fundatorum. Neq, etiam ipsorum haec omnino tam magna fient, quam erunt illa primorum Fundatorum.
XXIII. Ingressurus jam dignitatem hujus in|signissimi Ordinis, vel ipsemet pollicebitur, vel ejus nomine Procurator,  jurabit, qud haec Statuta fideliter at integre pro viribus obser|vare vellet. Procuratores autem loco suo statu|endi facultas, solorum (uti diximus) exterorum erit.
XXIV. Si quando Supremus Regnum peregr vel aliter exiens abfuerit, quo tempore Socius aliquis in sedem suam est solenniter introducen|dus, ut (quae suae partes sunt) perficere nonposset, unicuilibet  Sociis potestatem suam ex arbitrio committat, qui, quidvis exequi perficereq, debe|at, quod  Supremus ipse, si jamjam preseus esset.
XXV. Fiet unum Commune Sigillum Ordi|nis, quodillius, quem Supremus assignrit, cu|stodiae commendabitur.
XXVI. Ordinis Statuta sibi descripta Sigil|lo communi consignata, quis Sociorum ha|beat. Originale ver Statutorum eodem Sigillo munitum permanebit in erario Collegii, dilige|tissime reconditum. Defuncti nimirum Socii haeredes ex asse, Statuta quae vivens apud se reti|nuit, remittent ad Collegium,  Presidi seu De|cano reddenda curabunt.
XXVII. Nullus istorum Equitum Regnum exibit, nisi premonito Supremo, qui exeundi po|testatem faciet. Si qua vero Militaris expeditio contingat, vel quid ejuscemodi, sub quo gloria spe|ratur Equestris, suis hic istius Ordinis Equitibus clementissimus Rex Supremus beneficus  gratio|sus erit; ut quos in actis isitiusmodi decoris, qui|busvis aliis anteferre debeat.
XXVIII. Nullus Equitum hujus Ordinis con|tra Sociorum ullum Arma movebit, nisi vel Su|premi sui, vel propria causa juste compulerit. Si Sociorum aliquis in alicujus Domini fa|mulitium acciderit, ejus partes sibi defendendas assumpserit; Et postmodum adversarius alium ex eisdem Sociis lateri suo conjungere cupiat, qui posterior expetitur haud ullo pacto consentiet. Quisquis ita Sociorum ab ullo petitur ut sibi militet: initio pacisci debet, qud eatenus sua conventio nonstabit. Si Sociorum aliquis antea cum advers parte militare ceperit, sique jam retentus ad militiam ignoravit, qud alter So|ciorum sub advers parte pris ad arma descen|derit: Vbi primum id resciverit, servicium ab|dicans, illud excuset.
XXIX. Omnes Equites hujus Ordinis, qui ter|ras circumcursare volent, bonoris inveniendi gra|ti perfacinora Militaria, Literas in id scriptas habere curabunt: quae quidem  omnes aliae spe|ctantes ad hunc Ordinem Sigillo Communi con|signari debent, quod custodiet unus Sociorum, quem ex arbitratu Supremus assignabit. Eum quem si causa fecerit absentem  Supremo, Sigillum illud intere Sociorum alteri relictum ibit, quem viz.  Supremus ipse nominabit; it a quidem, ut Sigillum id commune nullo unquam tempore de Supremi praesenti tollatur, quamdiu Supremus intra Regnum Angliae remanserit. In ejus au|tem absenti, faciet illud ipsum cum Sigillo, de|signatus Supremo.
XXX. Si quis Equitum hujus Societatis, pie|tatis instinctu tractus, apud Arcem Windesorien|sem commorari velit, suis illic impendiis vivere debet.
XXXI. Si quis etiam alius praeter buju So|cietatis Equites aliquid annuum, decem viz. li|bras aut eo amplis, Collegio donare voluerit, ut orationum ibi dicendarum particeps esse, queat; nomen ejus numero benefactorum ascribatur, ut perpetu cum eis memoriae commendetur.
XXXII. Quando Canonicorum aliquis mo|ritur, si Supremus intra Regnum non sit, Collegii Custos ad eum Literas emittet, ut quem voluerit, ad Canonicatum illum nominet.
XXXIII. E. Canonicis, unus, moribus  sci|enti maxim conveniens, per Supremum ae So|cietatem eligetur, qui Consiliis inter eos celebran|dis interesse debet; ut electiones,  electorum no|mina, punitiones  causas earum, caetera in Consiliis illis administranda, prob, ae fidelitr annotet,  tanquam in indicem redigat. Cumq, sit admittendus, jurabit quod officium in bisce rebus suum fideliter exequetur; Principio san eujus Consilii vigili Divi Georgii quotanuns ineundi, cuncta superioris Anni gesta fidelitr an|notata coram Supremo Societate recitabuntur. Qud si quid haud ben sit conceptum,  correcti|onis egeat, revocabitur ad incudem,  suae redde|tur perfectioni.


In consummatum.
XXXIV. Et quoniam Eleemosyna Orationi conjuncta multum juvat ad salutem Anime, cla|rissimis illis Equitibus totidem veterani Milites egeni substituentur, ad orandum, habituri qui|dem illic, cum de suo nequeant, unde vivere po|tuerint. Horum autem Electio, sicut  antepo|sita Canonicorum spectabit ad Supremum. Ha|bebunt item isti Milites sua palliola rubra, Scuto Divi Georgii similiter assuto.



The Statutes established by King Henry the Fifth.
_AL'bonneur de Dieu, Sainte Marie la glorieuse Vierge,  Saint George. Si a le Roy d'Angleterre nostre Seigneur Edouard trosieme apres la Conqueste d'Angleterre, l'an de son regue vingt  trois, or|donn  estably  fond une Compagnie en son Chasteau de Windesore, en la maniere qui s'en|suit.
Premierement luy mesme Sounerain, son aisn filz le Prince de Galles, le Duc de Lancastre, le Comte de Warwyk, le Capitaine de Bouche, le Comte de Stafford, le Comte de Salesbury, le Sire de Mortimer, Monsieur Jehan Lisle, Mon|seigneur Bartholomeu de Bourghersh le filz, Monsieur Jehan de Beauchamp, le Sire de Ma|hun, Monsieur Hugh de Courtenay, Monsieur Thomas de Holand, Monsieur Jehan de Grey, Monsieur Richard le Filz Simon, Monsieur Miles Stapelton, Monsieur Thomas Wale, Monsieur Hugh de Wriottesley, Monsieur Neele Loring, Monsieur Jehan Chandos, Monsieur James d'Au|delay, Monsieur de Holland, Monsieur Henry Eme, Monsieur Sanchet de Prichecourt, Mon|sieur Walter de Pauely.

I. Il est accord, que le Roy,  ses heirs, Rois d'Angleterre seront pour tousiours Souerains de la dite Compagnie.
II. Item est accord, que nul ne soit eleu Com|pagnon du dit Ordre, s'il n'est Gentilbomme de Sang,  Chevalier sans reproche.
III. Item que les xxvi. dessus nommez porte|ront les Manteaux  les Gartiers ordonns au dit lieu, quand ils seront presens audit Chastel, c'est assavoir  toutes les fois qu'ils entreront dans la Chapelle de Saint George, ou au Chapitre, pour tenir Chapitre, ou illec faire aucun acte ap|partenant  l'Ordre. Et semblablement porte|ront leur manteaux ds la veille Saint George, auec le Souuerain ou son Deput en maniere de procession, de la grande Chambre, jusqu'a la Cha|pelle, ou au Chapitre, en retournant en semblable maniere,  aussi les porteront au souper de la dite Veille, ceux qui souper voudront,  les autres aussi jusques apres laver. Et le lendemain en venant en ladite Chapelle  retournant au disner,  apres, tant que le Souerain, ou son Deput, au|ra tenu son estat; E en venant aux secondes vespres,  en retournant,  en souper, tant que la Vuide soit faicte. Et que chacun des xxvi. Compagnons dessus-nommez, chacua  leur entrer dedans le Chaeur, ils devotement obeiront, premie|rement  l'autel, en l'bonneur  maniere des gens de Sainte Eglise;  apres au Souuerain, ou  son Estal, en son absence, devant qu'ils entreront en leur Estals,  pareillement en leur departir d'icelle.
IV. Et seront ordonnez xiii. Chanoines Secu|liers, qui seront Prestres en leur entre, ou dedans l'an prochain ensuivant; Et xiii. Vicaires, aussi Prestres  leur entre, ou aux prochains Ordres, chantant pour toutes ames Chrestiennes, lesquels Chanoines seront presentez par les Fondeurs des|sus dicts; C'est assavoir, chacun des Fondeurs, qui  present est, presentera son Chanoine au Guar|dien du College; ainsi que si aucun de Chanoines meurt, celuy qui le presenta ni nul autre presen|tera, mais le Souuerain du dit Ordre pour tous|iours apres. Et en telle maniere est accord pour tous autres Chanoines.
V. Item est accord, que les Chanoines auront leurs Mante aux de Murrey, avec un Rondelet des armes de Saint George.
VI. Et sont ordonnez xxvi. paures Cheva|liers qui n'ont dequoy viure, pour avoir en celle maison leur soustenance convenable pour leur bon|ne priere,  l'honneur de Dieu  de Saint George; Et de l'election est ordonn des presen|temens des Chanoines dessus-nommez, ainsi que l'election remaindra toujours par devers le dit Souuerain.
VII. Item est accord, que les pouvres Cheva|liers auront leurs Manteaux de Rouge,  un Escusson des armes de Saint George, sans Gartier.
VIII. Item est accord, que si le Souuerain ne peut estre  la Feste, qu'il fasse son Deput par ses Lettres, pour tenir, en la veille de Saint George, le Chapitre,  l'heure de Tierce,  le iour de Saint George, pour tenir, aux coustages du Souuerain, ladite Feste, pour le temps dessus|dict, saus autres novelles ordonnances, aiant pou|voir de corriger  radresser les points de Chapi|tre qui ensuivent; par ainsi que le Souuerain aura avis que le nombre des Compagnons de l'Or|dre avecques luy requis par les Estatuts, affin que telle election soit vaillable. Et si en celuy temps y a aucune vuidance des Compagnons, qu'adonques l'election appartiendra audit Souuerain,  d'i|celle sera le dit Deput suffisamment certifi par iceluy Souuerain. Et pareillement que le dit Deput signifie au Souuerain des vuidances si aucunes soient en Angleterre: affin que si pour le temps de la dite vuidance en la presence du Souuerain n'est trouu le nombre desdits Com|pagnons comme dessus est dit, que ledit Deput en soit certifi par le dit Souuerain,  des merites  noms des gens d'armes  d'honneur, qui selon l'advis du dit Souuerain seront aucunement dignes,  cause de leur vaillances, d'estre nommez pour estre de ladite Compagnie;  adonques l'ele|ction appartiendra audit Deput selon la forme des Estatutz.
IX. Item, que chacun an, la veille de Saint George soit faite vne assemble de tous les Com|pagnons de Saint George dessus nommez, au dit Chastel de Windesore qui sont dedans la terre, qui venir y pourront,  illec auront leur service de Saint George,  auront leurs Manteaux durant le service, estant ordonnement en leurs Estalz,  chacun aura son Heaulme  son Espe par dessus son Estal, qui  tout leur vivant demourront  la Chapelle illecque en signifiance de celuy qui les porte,  defense de Sainte Eglise, comme l'Ordre de Chevalerie le vent. Mais en cas que la Feste Saint George vienne dedans xv. iours prochains apres Pasques, soit prorogue jusques au Dimen|che, qui  toutesfois sera le quinziesine iour apres le iour de Pasques, affin que chacun Compagnon dudit Ordre puisse estre  la dite Feste sans Che|vauchier trois iours prochains ensuivant le iour de Pasques; par ainsi que le iour de la Feste des|sus dite ne soit ordonn ni assign les xxiv, xxv, xxvi^m^e ni le derrain iour d'Avril, ni sur les iiii. premiers iours de May,  cause de l'impediment du Service divin ordonn par Sainte Eglise, pour doubles Festes de Saint Marc, Philippe, Ja|cob,  de Sainte Croix nostre Seigneur Jesu Christ, ul  nuls tels iours que peuuent venir les Festes de l'Ascension ou Penthecoste, ou aucune autre Feste solenmelle ordonne par Sainte Eglise, dont les premieres ou secondes vespres par telles prorogations pourront estre destourbes.
X. Item, qa'ils viennent audit lieu, la veille de Saint George,  l'heure de Tierce;  s'ils ne viennent au temps assign, ils auront leur penance selon l'accord du Chapitre. Et aceord est, qu'ils n'entreront point au Chapitre  celle fois, mais se tiendront par dehors  l'huis,  n'auront point de voix en rien qui sera fait audit Chapitre,  celle fois tant seulement. Et s'ils ne viennent aux vespres deuement au commencement, ils n'en|treront point en leurs Estalz, mais se tiendront au bas desdits Estalz, aux lieux des Choristes du|rant les dites Vespres. Et semblable penance est accorde pour les non-venants par temps devant la haute Messe  Vespres le iour de Saint George. Et s'ils ne viennent  la dite feste, sans excusation acceptable par ledit Souuerain, ou son Deput, sa peine sera qu'il n'entrera en son Estal la pro|chaine feste apres, mais se tiendra tout en bas, comme dessus, les premieres vespres,  ira  la Procession tout devant les trois Croix,  setien|dra tout en bas, comme dessus, toute la Messe, jus|qu'  l'offrande,  offrira le derrenier. Et apres ces penances ainsi faites, il viendra incontinent devant l'Estal du Souuerain, ou son Deput,  demandera pardon. Et apres, ledit Souuerain, ou son Deput luy commandera d'aller en son Estal,  son premier estat. Et s'il ne vient  la seconde feste,  soit demeurant au Royaume, sans excusation alouable au Souuerain, ou a son De|put, il n'entrera en son dit Estal deslors en avant, jusques qu'il aura offert unjoyau  l'Autel de Saint George dedans ladite Chapelle, de la value de xx. Mares;  deslors en avant il dou|blera la peine chacun au, tant qu'il soit recon|cili.
XI. Item, que tous les Compagnons dudit Or|dre porteront leurs Manteaux du Bleu dudit Or|dre  l'heure des premieres vespres jusques apres les secondes, en la feste de Saint George chacun au, quelque part qu'ils soient, en telle maniere com|me ils feroient, s'ils estoient presens en la feste auec ledit Souuerain ou son Deput, par ainsi qu'ils soient en lieu  leur libert, non obstant la proro|gation de la feste.
XII. Item est accord, que si aucun de ladite Compagnie soit trouu en appert sans Gartier, qu'il paye, tantost apres la chalange, au Gardien  College, demy Marc; except quand il est hous pour Chevauchier, que adonques il sera tenu por|ter, soubz son houseau, en signifiance du Iartier, un fil bleu de soye;  pourveu aussi que nul Che|valier dudit Ordre doresnavant entre au Chapitre sans Iartier.
XIII. Item est accord, que les Compagnons de Saint George voisent pour offrir  la haute Messe chacun auec son Compagnon  l'opposite de luy, ordonnement comme ils sont mis en leurs Estals; Et s'il advient que l'un ne soit  la journe, son Compagnon, qui est  l'opposite de luy, ira par soy  l'offrande; Et que le Souuerain, ou son De|put voise derriere toute la Compagnie, tant que Procession soit faite en allant  ladite Chap|pelle.
XIV. Item est ordonn, que chacun an, lende|main de la feste Saint George, devant le depar|tement de la Compagnie, avant dite, vne Messe de Requiem sera l chante pour les ames des Com|pagnons, qui sont moris,  tous Chrestiens; Et que toute la Compagnie soit illecque, finon que au|cun soit destourb raisonnablement, ou qu'il ait

congi du Souuerain ou de son Deput, devant son departir. Et quand il advient qu'a cause des vnidances des Compagnons soient aucuns He|aulmes, Tymbres,  Espes qui doivent estre of|ferts, que devant l'offrande des Monnoyes, les Espes soient offertes premierement, par deux Com|pagnons, que le Souuerain ou son Deput vondra nommer;  depuis, le Heaulme, avecques le Tymbre, pareillement, par deux autres de l'Ordre, par ledit Souuerain, ou son Deput assignez.
XV. Item est accord, que chacun de ladite Compagnie laissera son Minteau illecques pour telles soudaines venes,  pour les point tenir du commandement du Souuerain.
XVI. Item est accord, que si aucun de ladite Compagnie vienne en cheminant prs le dit Cha|stel, qu'il voise dedans, pour l'bonneur de ladite place, s'il pourra bonnement,  s'il ne soit de|stourb  juste cause,  qu'il prenne son Manteau avant qu'il entre en ladite Chapelle; par ainsi qu'il n'y entre point sinon qu'il ait son Manteau sur luy. Et illecques les Chanoines, qui y sont, viendront  luy, pour l'encontrer,  le mener en ladite Chapelle devotement; Et s'il soit  l'beure de Messe, qu'il demeure l pour ouir ladite Messe, en bonneur de Dieu,  de Monsieur Saint George, Et si c'est apres Nonne, d'entrer en la maniere dessus dite,  ouir vng De profundis des Chanoines, pour les ames de tous Chrestiens,  offrir illec. Et si aucun des dits Compagnons, chevauche parmy la ville,  ne veulle offrir com|me accorde est, que sur son obedience, par cha|cunes fois qu'il fauldra, qu'il voise  ladite Cha|pelle, en l'honneur de Saint George, vne lieue  pied,  aussi chacunes fois qu'il sat donner  l'offrande,
XVII. Item est accord, que au plutost que la mort soit cognue de qui que foit de la Compagnie dessus dite, que le Souuerain fera chanter, pour l'ame de celuy qui est mort, mille Messes, vng Roy estranger, buict cens Messes; le Prince, sept cens Messes; chacun Duc, six cens; chacun Comte, trois cens; chacun Banneret, deux cens;  chacun Bachelier, cent Messes. Et s'il ne face iceulx dedans vn quartier d'an apres la mort cer|tifie, qu'il double le quartier de l'entier; Et st demy-an soit au derriere, soit doubl, comme dit est. Et ainsi de temps en temps jusques  la fin de l'an,  s'il n'est accomply en l'an durant, soient les ans doublez.
XVIII. Item est accord, que fi aucun de ladite Compagnie meure, que ledit Souuerain, ou son Deput, face, apres sa mort  luy certifie, garnir tous les Compagnons estans en Angleterre, par ses Lettres, qui pourront venir, qu'ils soient devant luy, ou que s'il luy plaira assigner lieu convena|ble dedans fix semaines apres la certification de la mort dessus dite. Lesquels tous ainsi assem|blez, ou au moins six, outre le Souuerain, ou son Deput dessus dit, chacun d'iceulx, qui sont ve|nus  l'election, nommerae neuf des plus suffisans Chevaliers sans reproche qu'il connoist, subjectz du dit Souuerain, ou aultres, pourveu qu'ils ne tiennent son adverse partie; c'est assavoir, trois Contes, ou de greigneur estat, trois Bannerets,  trois Bacheliers. Lesquelles nominations escrira le chief Prelate du dit Ordre, c'est assavoir, l'E|vesque de Winchestre pour le temps estant, ou en son absence le Dean, ou Registreur, ou le plus avant Residencier, en leur absence du dit Colli|ege; Et la nomination ainsi faite par tous, ou six au moins, sera, par luy, qui l'aura escrite, eou|stre au Souuerain, ou  son Deput, lequel estira celuy des nommez qui aura le plus de voix,  qui luy semblera le plus honourable au dit Ordre,  profitable  sa Couronne,  au Royaume. Et en cas que aucuns de ladite Compagnie ne vienne  l'election, s'ils ne sont destourbez par juste cause,  ladite cause signifie dessous leurs seaux d'ar|mes, accepte par le Souuerain, ou son Deput; siladite cause ne soit juste, ou ne vienne aux se|monces dessus dits, est accord qu'il paye an Gar|dien  Colliege, pour chanter pour celuy qui est mort, vng Marc;   sa prochaine venue au Cha|pitre, sera devant le Souuerain, ou son Deput,  la Compagnie sur la terre, au milieu du Cha|pitre, tant qu'il soit reconcili par le Souuerain, ou son Deput  la Compagnie.
XIX. Item est accord, que en cas si aucun des Chevaliers de ladite Compagnie meure,  vng aultre est eleu, il aura tantost apres l'Election le Iartier, en signifiaence qu'il est vng des Compag|nons du Iartier,  le Mnteau luy sera deliur pour son habit, quand il sera mis en son Estal,  non devant. Et en cas qu'il meure devant qu'il ait receu son habit, il ne sera mie nomm pour vng des Fondeurs, puisqu'il default avoir ple|niere possession de son estat. Mais il aura la moiti des Messes dessus nommez pour la liure de son Gartier,  rien oultre cela. Et si iceluy eleu ue vient en toute bonne haste, apres la reception du Gartier, au dit lien pour estre estall,  par espe|ciall dedans l'an de son election, s'il soit Cheva|lier demourant dedans le Royaume, s'il n'a excu|sation acceptable au Souuerain, ou  son Deput  la Compagnie, soit l'election vnide de celuy,  voise le Souuerain, ou son Deput,  la Compag|nie  nounelle election; Et ne seront l'Espe ni le Heaulme, mis sur son Estal, devant la venne de l'esleu dedans le dit Chastel, affin que s'il ne vient comme dessus, que ses dits Espe  Heaulme ne soient abatus ny devallez, mais honnestement mis bors du Chaeur,  remaindront  l'usage du dit Colliege.
XX. Item est accord, que tous Estrangiers, qui seront esleuz Compagnons du dit Ordre, seront certifiez par le Souuerain de leur election,  que leur Gartier, leur Manteau,  les Estatutz de l'Ordre, soubs le commun Seel, leur seront envoyez au constages du dit Souuerain, en toute bonne haste,  au plus tard soient ils certifiez dedans quatre mois apres l'election, affin qu'ils se peuuent par les dits Estatutz aviser, s'ils veulent recevoir le dit Iartier, ou non,  que tous tels Estrangiers de quelque dignit, estat, ou condition qu'ils so|ient, envoyent, dedans sept mois apres ladite cer|tification  culz faite par le Souuerain,  la re|ception de la Iarretiere, un Procureur suffisant, selon l'estat de son Seigneur  Maistre, pourveu qu'il soit Chevalier,  sans reproche, pour estre estall eu son lieu, qui apportera avecque luy vng Manteau de soye bleu de l'Ordre, de par celuy

qui l'envoyera,  son Heaume, son Tymbre,  son Espe, pour demourer au Colliege pour tou|jours; lequel Manteau par le Souuerain, ou son Deput, au temps que ledit Procureur sera estall, luy sera mis sur son bras dextre,  le tenir sur son dit bras,  l'heure divine prochaine, apres qu'il sera estall au nom de son dit Seigneur  Maistre, sans plus le porter en aucun temps,  sons avoir voix en Chapitre, ou y entrer, en l'absence de ce|luy qui l'envoyera. Et est asscavoir, que cette faveur est faite aux Estrangiers, qui ne peuuent bonnement venir en leurs propres personnes, qu'ils peuuent estre estallez par Procureur, affin qu'ils soient participans ez Messes  Prieres en|tieres du dit Ordre, car ilz failleroient de la moi|ti, s'ils n'estoient estallez devant la mort. Et pareillement est ordonn des gens du dit Ordre esleuz de nouueau estants en la guerre du Roy, ou ailleurs, de son commandement, de recevoir le be|nefice du dit estat en ce qui appartiendra seule|ment  leur Estallation.
XXI. Item est accord, que si aucun des Con|tes, Bannerets, ou Bacheliers, meurt, celuy qui viendra en son lieu, soit il Conte, Banneret, ou Bachelier, tiendra le mesme Estal que son Prede|cesseur tenoit,  ne changer a point, for sprins le Prince, qui tiendra le premier Estal,  l'opposite du Souuerain, si tost comme il sera esleu; ainsi que par ce cas, vng Conte tiendra l'Estal d'un Ba|chelier,  le Bachelier d'vng Conte:  c'est pour cause de seavoir qui furent les premiers Fon|deurs.
XXII. Item est accord, que tous les Compag|nons du dit Ordre,  leur premiere entre, donne|ront chascun vng certain prix selon son estat, en maintenance des Chanoines  poures Chevaliers demourants au dit lieu,  des aumosnes qui y sont perpetuellement ordonnes illec; C'est asca|voir, le Souuerain, quarante Marcs; vng Roy estranger, vingt Liures; le Prince, vingt Marcs; chascun Duc, dix Liures; chascun Conte, dix Marcs; chascun Banneret, cent Solz;  chas|cun Bachelier, cincq Marcs. Et ne seront leurs Heaulmes ny leurs Espes mises sur leurs Estalz, jusques qu'ils auront pay  leurs entres les som|mes dessus dites, selon l'estat de celuy  qui il ap|partient. Et est ascavoir, que le Souuerain sera tenu de payer pour l'entre de chascun Estrangier esleu  l'estallement de son Procureur. Et ces dons pour ce sont ordonnez, affin que chascun qui entre en cet Ordre soit le plus digne d'avoir le nom, titre,  privilege d'un des Fondeurs du mesme Ordre.
XXIII. Item est ordonn, que si tost que l'vng de la Compagnie soit mort, que son Escu fait de metal de ses Armes,  son Heaulme soient fichez au dos de son Estal;  les aultres Fondeurs qui viendront apres auront leurs Escus  leurs He|aulmes en la mesme maniere dessoubs les premiers Fondeurs. Mais leurs Escus ny leurs Heaulmes ne seront pas si grands comme ceulz des premiers Fondeurs.
XXIV. Item est accord, que chacun entrant au dit Ordre promette par luy,  jure par son suffisant Procureur, qui sera estall au nom de luy, de loyaument garder  observer les Estatutz du dit Ordre,  son loyal pouuoir; Et ne sera nul estall par Procureur s'il n'est Estrangier, qui bennement ne peut venir en sa propre personne pour estre estall.
XXV. Item est accord, qu'en cas que le Sou|uerain soit hors du pais, ou qu'il ne pourra en pro|pre personne faire ce qui appartient  l'estallati|on, qu'il pourra donner pouuoir  l'vng des Com|pagnons, pour faire la mesme chose en son nom.
XXVI. Item est accord, que vng commun Seel soit fait, lequel demourra en la garde de celuy que le Souuerain vouldra nommer  assigner.
XXVII. Item, que chascun des Compagnons du dit Ordre doresnavant ait les dessus dits Esta|tutz soubs le commun Seel avant dit;  que l'Original soit seelle auee le dit Seel,  demeure en la Tresorerie du dit Colliege  tousiours.
XXVIII. Item,  apres la mort de chascun Compagnon du dit Ordre, ses Executeurs seront tenus de renvoyer les Estatutz du dit Ordre au dit Colliege;  les delivrer au Gardien d'iceluy pour le temps estant.
XXIX. Item est accord, que nul des Cheva|liers de Saint George, de la Compagnie du Gar|tier, ne voise hors de la terre, sans le sceu  congi du Souuerain. Et pour ce est aussi accord, que si aucun voyage se fait, ou autre chose quelconque, qui appartient  l'honneur de Chevalerie, le Sou|uerain du dit Ordre, de sa grace, preferera les Compagnons du dit Ordre devant tous aultres.
XXX. Item, que nul du dit Ordre ne soit ar|m l'vng contre l'aultre, si ce n'est en la guerre de son Souuerain Seigneur, ou en son droict  juste querelle. Et s'il advient que auscun du dit Or|dre soit retenu auec son Seigneur, ou tenant sa partie  querelc,  la partie adverse desire avoir aucun aultre Compagnon du dit Ordre avecque luy; Ence cas ne sera tel Compagnon retenu, mais sera tenu de soy excuser tout oultrement,  cause de ce que son Compagnon est arm de l'autre cost,  fut retenu devant luy. Et sera chascun Com|pagnon du dit Ordre tenu d'excepter quant il fe|ra sa retenue qu'il soit descharg tout entiere|ment de son service de guerre, si aucuns des Com|pagnons sont paravant retenus ou tenants la par|tie adverse; Et si celuy qui est secondement retenu aucunement ne cognoist que aucun de ses Compag|nons soit devant luy retenu, ou arm avec sa partie adverse; soit tenu l'avant dit Compagnon  la premiere cognoissance qu'il en pourra avoir, de soy excuser envers son Maistre,  laisser celle querele.
XXXI. Item, que toutes les Licences des Che|valiers de l'Ordre qui iront hors pour acquerir honneur,  toutes Certifications, ou Mandements, a faire touchant le dit Ordre doresenavant par le Souuerain, seront faits soubs le commun Seel, le|quel remaindra en la garde d'un des Compagnons du dit Ordre,  la volont du dit Souuerain. Et si celuy qui l'aura en garde depart pour cause rai|sonnable, hors de la presence du dit Souerain, qu'adonques il laissera le dit Seel en la garde d'un aultre Compagnon du dit Ordre, estant pre|sent auec le Souuerain,  par son assignement. Ainsi que le dit Seel ne soit nulle fois bors de la presence du dit Souuerain, tant qu'il sera dedans

le Royaume: Et pareillement en son absence fera son Deput auec le dit Seel. Et si ainsi est que le dit Souuerain pourpose de soy absenter,  al|ler hors du Royaume pour cause raisonable, il est ordonn par assent de la dite Compagnie, qu'il aura vng Signet convenable a l'Ordre du Gar|tier pour mettre au dos du commun Seel de l'Or|dre, qui sera auecque luy ou qu'il soit,  sera mis en tous les Actes qui seront faits debors par le dit Souuerain, en difference de ceulx qui se|ront faits en Angleterre.
XXXII. Item est accord, qui si aucun Che|valier de la dite Compagnie par devotion veult demourrer en la dite maison continnellement, qu'il ordonne pour son viure,  pour sa demeure, du sien propre.
XXXIII. Item, si aucun aultre Cevalier qui ne soit mie dela dite Compagnie y veult demour|rer par devotion, soit ordonn pour sa demeure selon l' accord du dit Souuerain  dela dite Compagnie.
XXXIV. Item est accord, que si aucun Che|valier, ou anltre personne venlt donner aucunes terres ou rentes, pour estre participans de toutes les bonnes Oroisons  prieres qui seront faites en la dite maison, son nom sera entr,  les Cha|noines poures Chevaliers prieront pour luy perpetuellement: parainsi que le dit Gardien  les Chanoines du dit Colliege doresenavant ne prendront sur iceluy Colliege aucune charge, sans l' advisement du dit Souuerain, ou son Deput  les Compagnons de l' Ordre presens aques eu l' absence du Souuerain.
XXXV. Item est accord, qui si ancun des Chanoines meure,  le dit Souuerain soit hors du pais, que le Gardien, qui pour le temps sera, envoyera ses Lettres au dit Souuerain pour vng aultre, que le Souuerain vouldra nommer  y ordonner.
XXXVI. Item sera fait vng Registre, de par le Souuerain  la Compagnie, qui soit le plus scachant du dit Colliege, pour estre present en chacun Chapitre de l'Ordre,  en registrer loy|aument les Elections,  les noms des esleux, les peines,  causes des peines, les reconciliations des punis,  tous aultres actes  leurs causes, appurtinants audit Ordre, de Chapitre en Cha|pitre,  d' an en an. Et soit le dit Registre loyaument serment de loyaument registrer a la reception de son office,  que au commencement de chacun Chapitre la vigille de Saint George, soit le Registre de l' an precedent leu devant le Souuerain, ou son Deput,  ladite Com|pagnie, affin qu'il puisse estre corrigi, si besoin en estoit.



The Statutes established by King Henry the Eighth, recorded in the Black Book of the Order.
UBI clarissimus, invictissimus,  inter for|tunatissimos hujus Mundi Principes meri|tissim numeratus, Edoardus Tertius, Angliae Rex  Franciae, Dominus Hiberniae, c. Ad honorem Omnipotentis Dei, beatissimae virginis Mariae, praeclari Martyris Divi Georgii, nobi|lissimi Regni Anglorum insignissimi Patroni,  Sancti Edoardi Confessoris, ob stabilitatem at|que incrementum Catholicae fidei, bonorum morum augmentum,  omnigenae virtutis exercitium, intra Castrum Windesori, viginti sex nobilium ac fortium Equitum societatem at ordinem in|stituit, quem,  praelustri Subligaculo cognomi|natum, Divo quoque Georgio nuncupavit,  ad tutamen decus, at complementum ejusdem lau|dabiles Ordinationes ac Statuta condidit,  Col|legiis  coordinatis illis inviolabiliter observan|da, in quibus obscura quaedam, ambigua,  lu|cidae explanationis at interpretationis egena ex|titerunt, quaedam ver addenda at amplifican|da visa sunt; potentissimus, invictissimus, atque excellentissimus Princeps Henricus Octavus, au|spice Deo, Rex Angliae Franciae, Defensor fi|dei, Dominus Hiberniae, c. hujus Ordinis op|timo jure Supremus, per eum amorem, quem er|ga Militiae statum  nunc habet,  semper ba|bebat, cujus splendorem indies auctum iri arden|tissim desiderat,  ob frequens Sociorum ejus|dem Ordinis desiderium, consilium,  assensum; vicesimo quarto die Aprilis, Anno gratiae Mil|lesimo quingentesimo vicesimo secundo, Regni ver sui quarto decimo, obscuritates istas quorun|dam in quibusdam  Statutis illis Articulorum at ambiguitates interpretatus est,  elucidavit, quaedam insuper (ut res ferebat) adjiciens at amplificans. Que profecto statuta, Ordinatio|nes, interpretationes, declarationes, reformatio|nes,  explanationes, cum additamentis, secun|dum verum ac germanum sensum  Supremo cum Collegis omnibus ejusdem Ordinis imposte|rum observari debent, juxta modum qui subse|quitur.

I. Decretum inprimis est, quod Rex, heredes,  Successores ejus, Angliae, post eun, Reges, erunt imperpetuum praefati Ordinis  amicissime So|cietatis Supremi. Ad quos deinceps pro suo cu|jus tempore declaratio, interpretatio, decisio, correctio, solutio,  dispensatio Statutorum, si|cubi nodus extiterit, aut ambiguitas animos in|diversum traxerit, omnino spectabunt.
II. Nemo deligetur in Socium hujus Ordi|nis, nisi qui nomine, Armis, ac sanguine gene|rosus,  eques irreprebensus existat, nec aliquis collega hujus Ordinis abhinc eum (dum electio suscipitur) nominabit, quem ex animo not non vacare judicat. Generosus autem nomine, Ar|mis,  Sanguine, is intelligitur, qui, preter Pa|trent ac Matrem, avos  proavos quoque generosi sanguinis habuerit. Irreprehensus  sine not judicatur qui nullum ex tribus hiis sequentibus incurrisse probatur. Prima nempe species est, si quis Eques condemnatus heretic pravitate fuerit,

mins Catholic senserit, aut pblicam eo nomi|ne penam dederit. Altera, si lese Majestatis convictus fuerit. Tertia, si de bello fugiat, quod Supremus, vel abeo designatus,  authorita|tem ejus habens, gerit, postea qum vexilla pro|tensa sunt  pagna occepit iniri. Qui tam tur|piter illine aufugerit, merit reprehendendus ex|istimari debet, nec in presentem Ordinem eligen|dus. Et si continga (quod absit) aliquem an|tea electum rem posthc tam ignominiosam com|mittere, is, ut commeretur, ab hoc Ordine depo|netur, in proximi Consilii coelebratione, si ita Su|premo ac Societati visum fuerit.
III. Quotannis vigili divi Georgii, hoc est, vicesimo secundo Aprilis,  si juxta ritum Ec|clesiae divina tm Georgio minim celebrentur, omnes equites hujus Ordinis, ubi fuerint, modo su libertate gaudeant, Trabe, Tunic, Hume|rale  Torque, debito seilicet hujus Ordinis ha|bitu, rit induentur hor terti post meridiem, donec officia vespertina cum cen  Missa post cenam persoluta fuerint. In matutinis ita diei sequentis solenni processu, summo sacrificio, secundis vesperis, immo diemtotum usque dum Cena cum Miss post cenam finiantur, simili modo incedent.
IV. Si vero (caus'a postulante) prefata solem|nitas prorogari debeat, vel Supremus eam pro|rogandam esse censeat, ibi Commilitones omnes qui fuerint intra Regnum, vigili paritr ac die Sancti Georgii, aderunt in obsequium Supremi, quocun Regni sui loco manserit. Ubi tum in|servientes eidem Officia Sancti Georgii solemni|ter observabunt mod ritus Ecclesiae Sanctae id ita permittat. Quod si mos Ecclesiae aliud judicat nibilominus eodem tempore Supremo inservituri aderunt, biis cum eo dvinis interfuturi, quae tunc celebranda statuuntur, Ceremonias item alias ad unam impleturi, tam ut consilium in|eant praedict vigili post meridiem, ante vespe|ras, die sequente post matutinas ante Missam,  odem meridie ante secundas vesperas, quam ut habitu suo toto solemniter induti in su quis sede se componant, primas vesperas in vigili,  in die Matutinas, ac Missam cum secundis reve|renter audiuri,  postridi Missam solennem pro defunctis; ad quam venientes trabeis ex more supertegentur, sed togis subtus ut libebit, ante cujus initium si qua Electio vel res alioquin ar|dua peragenda tum instet, ad Consilium se reci|pient, illic omnia de more facturi, ac si Winde|sori forent. Quod si Supremus ad Consilium ingressus fuerit,  Commilitonum aliquis cum eo mins affuerit, ob eam negligentiam omne id temporis quo tum Supremus cum aliis intus erit, foris ipse manebit. Si ver quis eorum ad ve|speras in vigili, matutinas, Missam, aut ve|speras in die tardior accesserit, is, quoad illud divini Officii peractum fuerit; vel stabit vel ge|nna flectet in eo loco quo Choristae solent. Sin praedict vigili cum die sequente quivis eorum non advenerit, ut Supremo serviat, nec potesta|tem praeobtentam aut justam alioquin absentie causam Supremoque placentem obtendere queat, ille proximo Georgianae solennitatis observandae, sedile suum in praesenti Supremi non intrabit, nec id etiam Windesori,  decem praeterea li|bras in Ornamenta Collegii dependet.
V. Quicun Commilitonum ipsorum praedict vigili ac die potestatem adeptus, aut alioquin absuerit domi suae, vel alibi commoratus intra Ec|clesiam aut Sacellum illic ubi tunc divinis ad|erit, praecipuum unum sedile ad honorem Supre|mi faciet adornari, in quo quidem Ordinis hu|jus insignia intra praelustre subligaculum illoca|bit: Deind sedem aliam apparabit ab ill Su|premi (quoad conjectur pro modo ac form Tem|pli colligere potest) ita distantem, vt  Winde|sori cernitur, vbi propriis insignibus appensis se pro tempore constituet. Integro tum ex more con|tegetur habitu, divinis (ut prius ostensum) in|terfuturus, quae ritus Ecclesiae servanda signabit. Ingrediens at egrediens,  quoties alioqui pre|tergredietur, tm summum Altare, in honorem Dei, qum Sedile Regium, ad honorem Supre|mi, debit genuflectione reverenti consulta|bit: nisi hic Imperator, Rex, Princeps, aut Elector extiterit, quibus, ut cordi erit, sedes eri|gere ceter rit peragere licebit.
VI. Si ver annua Georgii solennitas haud prorogetur, sed ipsa vigilia dies divi Georgii, prout moris est, observata fuerit Windesori, ne Supremo liceat aut saltem collibeat illic adesse, tum ubi locorum intra Regnum suum fuerit; horum Equitum quoslibet assignare poterit ad ob|sequium sibi prestandum,  quicquid est Cere|moniarum oportun perimplendum, ac si Winde|sori presentes essent; id quod qui rit perfece|rint, ab e festivitate, quae servanda est Winde|sori, veniunt excusandi.
VII. Si Supremus Georgian solennitate haud queat interesse, loco sui deputabit alterum Literis suis ad id destinatis, qui cum sibi coas|sistentibus vigili Concilium inibit, hor ter|tiarum, hoc est, hor terti post meridiem,  re|liquam postridi solennitatem adimplebit, Regiis duntaxat impensis, pro tempore supra nominato. Novas autem Ordinationes haud instituet, sed delicta corriget,  quicquid arbitrio Concilii necessarium factu visum fuerit, ipse faciet.
VIII. Quotannis vigili Divi Georgii, hoc est, vicesimo secundo die Aprilis, convenient om|nes Equites Georgiani intra Castrum Winde|sori, five in regno seu foris extiterint, mod com|mod possint, divinis Georgianis illic interfu|turi,  pleno habitu Ordinis induentur, quam|diu divina celebrantur seriatim in locis consi|dentes. Habebit autem ipsorum quisque vexil|lum  Ensem cum Gale at appendicibus supra sedile suum confixa, que permanebunt illic quoad vixerit, ad honorem ejus,  in argumentum quod Catholicae fidei  Sanctae Ecclesiae certus propugnator ipse sit futurus, vti Equestris Ordo deposcit. Quod si festivitas illa intra quinde|cem dies  Paschate, vel die quo abstinetur  Carnibus, evenerit, quo Supremus ipse volet, pro|rogabitur, dumodo dies assignandus quartus, quintus, aut sextus  vicesimus nec vltimus A|prilis fuerit, ne ullus  primis quatuor Maii, ne fieret impedimento celebrationi Divinorum ab Ecclesi constitutae, in honore Divi Marci, Phi|lippi, Jacobi, Inventionis Sanctae Crucis:

nee talis item dies quo Festum Ascensionis, Pen|thecostes, aut alioqui solenniter institutum pri|mis aut secundis suis vesperis posset destitui vel interturbari.
IX. Quod si qui tempestiv (quomodo praesig|natum est) non advenerit, neque satis idoneam absentiae causam habeant, quam Supremus aut deputatus ab eo probabilem esse judicabit, vel nisi Supremus absentiam ejus temporis illis con|donaret, literis suis ob id ipsum eo destinatis, in quibus eorum nomina cum causis absentiae conti|neantur: penas ea de re luent arbitrio presidis  Concilii tum collecti. Formula Supplicii ta|lis erit. Non ingredietur quisquis ita dereli|querit concilii suscepti locum, sed in hostio foris expectabit, neque suffragii in vll reconferendi facultatem habebit eo tempore. Sin ad Princi|pium vesperarum non affuerint, ad sedes suas in|gredi non licebit, sed subtus ante sedes suas in locis Choristarum stabunt, donec illae vesperae sint finitae par poena manebit iis qui ad solennem diei Missam  posteriores vesperas tempore non acces|serint. Siquis autem sine probabili causa  toto festo abesse praesumpserit, is anno sequente, dum festivitas agetur,  sede su probibebitur,  sta|bit interim, vt praefatum est, dum procedens chorus supplicabit, tres cruces, quae feruntur, antecedet,  subtus deinceps, ut antea, persta|bit, vs dum ad offerendum Ordo conscendat, vbi hic postremus offeret. Qu peract penitenti, veniet  vestigio ad Supremi sedem aut ab eo de|signati, veniam rogaturus. Tum Supremus, aut ab eo Deputatus, remittet eum ad sedem suam, vt antiquum jus ibi retineat. Si ver deinceps altero festo abesse non formidrit, manens intra regnum, nec legitimam alioquin excusatio|nem babens, per Supremum aut ab eo designa|tum approbandam (vti praenotatum est) ad sedem illam suam haud introibit, donec apud Supre|mum Altare Sancto Georgio dicatum, monu|mentum vnum argenteum viginti marcarum ob|tulerit,  deinceps annuatim idem adgemina|bit, vs dum reconciliari procurrit.
X. Quisquis Equitum istorum palm foris in|cedens subligar suum tybiae non circumligarit, vbi primm deprehensus fuerit per quemvis quin|que Officialium Ordinis, aut Rectorum Collegii, duos aureos illic monitori dependet; nisi cm ad Equum ocreis indutus se accinxerit. Tunc enim sat erit si filum caerulei coloris  serico sub|ter ocream ad subligaris indicium habeat: par omnino supplicium infligetur ei qui citra subli|gar objunctum tibiae Concilii domum introibit. Quisquis autem Officialium aut Decanus deli|ctum istiusmodi compererit, ad cum ipsum pre|cium pen pertinebit.
XI. Quoties Equites isti de more trabeis in|duentur, Supremum bini precedent, eo ipso or|dine quo  regione consident. Si quis illinc ab|fuerit, Socius qui  Regione sedet, solus incedet. Id quod observari oportet tm in processu ad sup|plicandum, qum temporibus  ocis aliis. At quum sit offerendum, Supremus aut ab eo desig|natus, primus omnium ascendet,  ceteri dein|ceps, Officiales autem eundo Ordinem suum usua|lem observabunt in omni processu, tm intra Sacellum  Concilium, qum in quibusiis locis aliis. Nimirum Equites cum sit epulandum, omnes insimul ex vna parte mensae recumbent, eo Ordine quem  in Templo sedentes aut stantes habent,  no secundum natalitiae dignitatis gradum ant honoris, nisi filii Regum sint, Regum fratres, Principes, aut Duces externi, qui loca sortientur ex dignitate sui praeclari Stats. Et consurgentes codem Ordine constabunt, quo  an|t sedebant.
XII. Postridi festivitatis, ad honorem Divi Georgii, Windesori servatae, Commilitones, ante|quam in discessu valedicant, in hostio Concilii Trabeas quibus volent indumentis aliis superin|duent,  deinde Missam pro defanctis solenniter in sacello percantandam audient, pro defunctis inquam omnibus Christianis, sed praesertim illis, qui ante fuerant hujus Ordinis, simul omnes interesse debent, nisi forsan aliquis probabilem ab|sentiae causam habeat, vel  Supremo aut ejus Deputato potestatem abeundi praeobtinuerit. Et cum contingat per mortem alienjus ipsorum, ut vexillum, gladius,  Galea cum appendicibus veniant offerenda, ante pecuniam offerri debent. Ordo nimirum offerendi talis erit, vt vexillum inprimis  duobus Commilitonibus per Supre|mum, aut ab eo designatum, assignandis offera|tur, mox Ensis similiter  duobus aliis. Postre|m Galea, cum annexis similiter,  duobus. Siquis autem anno praecedente obierat, quotquot Equitum Windesori aderunt, in e Miss pro defunctis singulatim cereum unum offerent, cum Scutello, in quo pingentur insignia desuncti. Si plures uno mortui fuerint suum cui Scutellum affigetur, habens argenteam laminam quatuor denariorum prope lumen appositum. Qui qui|dem cerei cum Scutellis sumptu ipsrum Equi|tum conficientur.
XIII. Decretum est insuper ut in hoc Winde|soriensi Collegio sit inperpetuum Decanus unus, cum duodecim Canonicis Secularibus, uos Sa|cerdotes oportebit esse cum ingrediuntur, vel (ut multum) intra annum sequentem. Erunt preterea tredecim Sacerdotes alii, quorum pars una Canonici minores, altera Vicarii vocabun|tur. Qui si Sacerdotes in ingressu non fuerint, citra omnem excusationem, intra annum erum. Erunt itidem Clerici tredecim totidem Chori|stae, qui cum Canonicis minoribus Vicariis, de quibus ant diximus, quotidi in choro mini|strabunt, canentes  orantes, ut tempus  res ipsa postulabunt. Nimirum omnes tam Majo|res quam minores Canonici, Vicarii, Clerici, Choristae, precari tenebuntur, ut Supremus cum cunctis Commilitonibus hujus Ordinis vivat, valeat,  omnia aelicitr agat, utque defuncto|rum Equitum animae in pace requiescant. Prae|sentatio ver Canonicorum ubi contigerit, ad Supremum solummodo spectabit. Cm Com|militonum aliquis Windesorum veniens intra chorum ad sedem suam ex more se receperit, Ca|nonici reliqus Chorus stabunt in suis infr sedibus, ubi in festis Divi Georgii solent. Dum absint Equites, ben licebit Canonicis  ceteris  choro Sacerdotibus, superiores sedes occu|pare.
XIV. Vnisquis Socius hujus Ordinis Tra|beam unam relinquet intra Collegium Windeso|ri, ob diversas occasiones quae possent obvenire, viz. ut observare queant at adimplere si quas Ordinationes praecepta  mandata Supremus excogitrit,  excogitata proposuerit in Conci|lio: qui consensu sex Commilitonum praesentium pterit, quando  ubi libebit, concilium instituere in causas singulas quae sibi visae fuerint.
XV. Quin Ministri Officiales ad hunc Or|dinem speciatim attinentes runt; Praelatus, viz. Cancellarius, Scriba, Rex Armorum, cui est  Subligari cognomen additum,  Hostiari|us, qui  Nigella virga, quam gestabit, agnomen habebit; qui cum recipiendi sint Sacramento obvincientur, quod, velut  secretis, fideles ac ta|citurni erunt, in omnibus quae spectabunt ad hunc Ordinem negotiis. Horum Iuramenta re|quirentur expressis in Libello, qui Ordinatio|num inscribitur.
XVI. Stabilientur ibidem Pauperculi tre|decim Equites, qui minus alioquin habent und vivant, habituri victum competentem  vestitum. Qui solm ad hoc obligabuntur ut in honorem Dei, beatae Mariae, Divi Georgii, omnium Sanctorum,  pro salute animarum, quotidia|nas ibi preces fundnt. Horum impensae neces|sriae cum privilegiis eorum infr describentur, post praedictas Ordinationes. San Electio ipso|rum, ut  prefatae Canonicorum, omnin referetur ad Supremum. Haebebunt Equites ipsi pau|perculi Colobea coccinea rubrve coloris cum Scutello Divi Georgii super humerum, sed sine subligari quocun.
XVII. Si quis Sociorum hujus Ordinis intra duo paessuum Millia Castello appropinquet, illud ipsum introibit, ad honorem loci, mod possit, nec alium justum habeat impedimentum. In|troiturus autem sacellum induetur ante Tra|be sine qu non licebit ullo pacto introire. In|troeuntem Ganonici praesentes accipient,  re|verentr in Sacellum adducent. Quod si cele|brandae Missae tempus extiterit, eandem ipse au|diet, ad honorem Dei, Sancti Georgii; sin post meridiem, aut alis advenerit, chorum (ut praefatum est) introibit, ubi Canonici, cum ce|teris, Psalmum pro defunctis absolvent, dum ipse offeret  ad sedem sese suam recipit. Qud si quisquis illorum pertranseat oppidum, nec in|grediatur, ut offerat, uti praefixum est, tm sub obedientiae vinculo, quoties ita deliquerit,  Sa|cello ad em locum pedester ibit,  Statherem offeret. Distantia cert non amplior intelligi|tur qum duorum duntaxat milliarium, ut osten|sum antea.
XVIII. Vbi primm mors alicujus horum Equium cert significata fuerit, mox Supre|mus unum Missarum mille animae defuncti cele|brari efficiet. Rex externus, octies centum; Princeps, septies centum; Dux unusquis sex|centas; Marchio, quadriugentas  quinqua|ginta; Comes, trecentas; Vicecomes, Ducen|tas quinquaginta; seu Baro, seu Baronettus, Du|centas; Bacchalaureus Eques, Centum. Siquis autem, post mortem andem Regiis Literis indi|catam, ate tres menses exactos non id ipsum perfici curvit; quartam partem praedictae summae geminabit; si non ante medium anni praeteritum, missas adduplicabit; sic deinceps in finem an|ni. Quod si intra annum minus absolverit, in hanc formam annos adgeminabit.
XIX. Vbi primm Supremus, aut ab eo de|signatus, certior factus fuerit de morte istiusmo|di, illic literas emittet ad Commilitones om|nes hujus Ordinis, qui fuerint intra regnum An|gliae, ut omnin secum assint in loco congruo si|bi viso, ante sex hebdomadas post significatio|nem hanc ad se factam. Qui quidem omnes ita congregati, vel (ut minimum) sex corum, cum Supremo, aut ipsius Deputato, Ordine quisque suo, nominabunt novem  dignissimis at electissimis Equitibus, qui Supremo fuerint sub|diti, vel ei nullatenus adversarii; tres viz. primos, Duces, Marchiones, aut Comites, vel hiis Conditione Superiores; tres alios Barones aut Baneretos; tres san postremos Bachalau|reos Equites. Nomenclaturas hasce smmus Praelatus, Episcopus scilicet Wintoniensis, si Praesens fuerit: sin abfuerit, Cancellarius, De|canus, Scriba, vel maxim Senex  residentibus conscribet:  conscriptas Supremo, vel ejus Gerenti vices, qu oportet reverenti common|strabit. Is ver deinceps illum pronuntiabit electum qui pluribus suffragiis adnitatur, seu quem Supremus ipse digniorem, honorabiliorem, utiliorem, Regno suo  Coronae magis idoneum esse judicabit. Si quis autem Equitum hujus Ordinis admonitus haud affuerit, nisi justam ab|sentiae causam habeat, quam  sub Sigillo in|signium suorum significatum iverit, de justam inquam  rationabilem, ut Supremus eam, vel ab eo designatus, approbrit,  talem esse judi|rit, ut approbari debeat, poenas dabit. Nam si mins justam aut idoneam esse causam, Supre|mus aut Deputatus existimabit, Decano ac Col|legio persolvet viginti solidos legalis monetae, quos in celebrationes pro defuncto oportebit impendi. Ita cm proxim venerit ad Concilium, ibidem in medio coetu coram Supremo procumbet, donec per Supremum aut Deputatum,  reliquum omne Sodalitium reconciliatus fuerit.
XX. Quando post mortem alicujus istorum Equitum alter in defuncti locum surrogatur,  vestigio qui eligitur ornatu Subfibuli decorabi|tur, in planum argumentum qud dehinc illius Ordinis Equestris sit unus habendus. Deind cm ad id facta Commissio in Concilio Winde|sori lecta fuerit, coram Supremo, vel ipsius vi|cem gerente, caeteris e de cus congregatis, Trabea cum Humerali inferetur. Mox ipse de|ducetur medius duobus Equitibus aliis ejusdem Ordinis, quos Officiales antecedent,  alii No|biles at obsequiosi stipabunt, Trabeam autem gestabit ante eum Commilitonum unus, vel Garterus Rex Armorum, donec veniat ad locum sedis occupandae. Infra quam accepto Iuramen|to, indutus Trabe revertetur ad'Concilium, ubi de manu Supremi, vel ejus Deputati, Torque coornabitur. Sc pleno insignitus habitu cum caeteris incedet, sedebit, stabit. Ceterm magni Principes externi ben pote|runt (uti jam ante consueverunt compendii caus)

mictum integrum intra concilium indui. Quod si quis ante moritur qum habitum hunc accepe|rit, minim fundatorum  denominabitur, eo quod plenam status sui possessone hand obtinu|erat. Habebit autem Miffarum medietatem, quia Subligaris ornamentum ante susceperat,  nihil supr. Electus ver, Subligaculo dona|tus (quod in se est) festinabit ad locum, ut in se|dem sibi debitam introducatur. Si intra am mins advenerit,  in Regno muserit, nec ex|cusationem aliquam condignam,   Supremo vel ejus Deputato, probandam habuerit: ejus electio praedicta non valebit, sed irrita manebi;  Supremus aut ab eo designatus cm reliquo Commilitonum ctu novam electionem incboa|bit. Quapropter vexillum, ensis,  Galea, cum appendicibus ejus, ut pris electi, non appenden|tur Sedili suo intra Castellum, us dum e vene|rit, e propter qud si non advenerit, Ornamen|ta praedicta anquam non citra dedecus baud de|ponantur, sed extra chorum honest deponantur, ad utilitatem  emolumentum Ordinis  Colle|gii remansura.
XXI. Exteri qui, ad praeclaram hanc Societa|tem admissi, certiores inde fieri debent per Supre|mi literas, quae festinanter ad eos dirigentur, cum statutis sub Sigillo communi Ordinis, Supremi ni|mum impensis, ut multm intra quatuor menses ab electione certi fient, ut iidem Principes perlectis illisce literis deliberare queat, Ordinem illum nec ne suscipere libeat, aut expediat, nisi for|san idem Supremus, intere temporis, per res a|lioqui graves at arduas impedimentum habeat. Tunc enim pote stm electionis hujus significa|tionem in aliud pus ex sententi prorogare. At ubi significatio certa facta,  ei ad quem missa fuerit grata at accepta intelligitur; ibi Supremus, per Oratores suos, amictum integrum cum ubligari Torque destinabit ad eundem. Ips sic electi  donati, cujuscun Conditionis stats aut honoris extiterint, intra septem menses postqum praefata susceperint insignia,  illud ipsum quod agitur sibi perqum gratum fore sig|nificatum iverint, Procuratorem remittent ido|neum, Majestati ive honori sui Domini ben re|spondentem, ut debitam eidem suo Domino sedem praeoccupet, eiq dere incipiat. Praefixum est san ut Eques omin fit irreprebensus nec il|laudatus, qui Trabeam secum afferet ostream cerulei Coloris,  Domino suo cum Vexillo, Ense, Gale,  appendicibus, ut suis in locis intra Col|legium quamdiu Dominus ille suu superstes fue|rit, honorifice remaneant. Trabea vero sic alla|ta quando vice Domini sui in sedem illius est introducendus, per Supremum, aut ab eo desig|natum, in brachim illi dexterum imponetur: Inde per duos Equites ejusdem Ordinis ab hostio Concilii deducetur, ad sedile Domini, infra quod persistens, nomine praefati sui Domini, Sa|cramento vincietur  paulo mox in sedem illam introducetur, in qua sedens, stans, aut procum|bens quanto tempore divina celebrantur, Trabe|am illam super edem dexter gestabit. Quam nunquam gestare debet, nec ulln concilio suf|fragium conferet, aut absente Domino suo illc introibit. Sin autem intra septem hos menses Procuratorem sm non miserit (ut praef est) neque sufficientem excusationem Supremo illiusve Deputato, satis acceptabilem habeat: tunc illius electio praemissa evacuabitur; nist forsan Eques ille prae magnis rduis rebus ali irretitus esse comprobetur. In boc enim articu|lo, intra unum adhuc mensem post, ad Supre|mum, aut ab eo designatum, excusationem emit|tere licebit. Sin itaque talia causari posset im|pedimenta quae Supremus aut ab eo Deputatu honesta, laudabilia, necessariv judicabit, qua|tuor ultra Mensium mora concedi poterit. Intra quos si mins advenerit, ejus vici electio omnin vaabit. Caeterm hic est animadvertendum qud iste favor est Extraneis exhibendus qui non possunt ipsi adventare, sed necesse habent Procu|ratores suos mittere, ut sedes ipsorum vice possi|deant. Idque iprimis est e de caus constitu|tum, ut Missarum Orationum aliarum, quae defunctis Ordinantur, plen participes evadant. Medi nm parte privarentur, si non ant mortem suain in suas sedes introducti forent. Sed nec extranei solm eo privilegio congaudebunt, verum illi etiam qui dm eliguntur extra Reg|num sunt Regis jussu belligerantes, aliisve nego|tiis intenti: Hii quantum ad sedis sue posses|sionem captandam, fimile cum extraneis privile|gium vendicabunt.
XXII. Si qui Ducum, Marchionum, Comi|tum, Vicecomitum, Baronum, Banneretorum. Barenetorum, aut Bacchalaureorum hujus Ordinis, obierit, qui succedet ei, cujusvis harum Conditionum extite|rit, cam duntaxat sedem obtinebit, quam Prae|decessor sus ant possederat, nec demutabit illam citra peculiarem Supremi concessionem, nisi for|san Imperatorum aut Regum aliquis, vel Prin|ceps Regni fuerit, quorum unusquis juxta sub|limitatem suam, sedem Supremo proximam ac|cipiet. Quo pacto Dux aut Comes interim in sedem Bacchalaurei reponi poterit, at diverso; ad Argumentum manifestum formae per primores ibi fundatores inchoatae sinceritr observatae.
XXIII. Et si quando sedes ulla vacrit, Su|premus ben poterit ad eam quemlibet horum Equitum ex arbitrio promovere, superior autem esse debet e sede, qum ante tenuerat. Nimi|rum semel in vit su poterit Supremus genera|lem omnium sedium translationem ex sententi perficere, solis Caesarum, Regum, Principum, Ducum sedibus exceptis, quae permanebunt im|mutabiles; nisi fortass superius ulli sedile con|tingat. In e profecto translatione generali, lon|gitudo durationis in hoc Ordine, decus ac clari|udo gestorum, laus Equitum,  praestantia meri|torum perpendi ac considerari debet, ut honos virtuti respondeat. Omnes autem Equites isti quoties Trabeis ornati sedebunt, stabunt, aut si|mul incedent, ordinem illum observabut, quem per sedes suas in choro tenent, ne tamen generis aut nobilitatis rationem ullam habebunt, nifi quatenus ante monstratum est
XXIV. Equites singuli, quando ad ordinem hunc illustrem admittentur, certam pecuniae summam Collegio numerabunt, in usum Cano|nicorum Deo servientium  pauperculorum Mi|litum,

ibi commorantium; Supremus cert quadraginta Marcas legalis monetae Angliae, Rex externus, viginti Libras; Princeps, vi|ginti marcas; Dux, decem libras; Marchio, oct libras, sex solidos,  octo denarios; Comes, decem Marcas; Vicecomes, quin Libras, se|decem solidos,  octo denarios; Baro seu Bannerettus.Ba|ronettus, quin Libras; Bachalaureus Eques, quinque marcas. Eleemosinae ver hujus Statu|tum esto perpetuum. Vexilla san, Enses, Galeae, cum annexis non ant propendebunt in locis suis, qum praefixas, suam quisque pro stats honore summas persolverint. Quod ad Externos attinet, pro hiis Supremus respondere constituit. Et haec munera at Eleemosinae prop|ter id ita conceduntur, ut Eques unusquis qui deveniet in hunc Ordinem tant dignior invenia|tur, ut qui titulo, nomine, ac privilegio Fun|datorum hujus Ordinis exornetur.
XXV. Eques unusquis istius Ordinis, intra annum primum sedis acceptae, faciet post ter|gum ubi sedem habet, laminam cujus voluerit metalli, in qu cum scuto ac caeteris annexis sua compingentur insignia: Et omnes deinceps suc|cessuri similiter efficient, nisi qud sua lamina curtior  minutior esse debet, qum quae primo|rum Fundatorum; exterorum laminis cum re|bus aliis istiusmodi duntaxat exceptis, quae, qua|les ac quantae voluerint, fieri poterunt.
XXVI. Nullus horum Sodalium per Procu|ratorem est admittendus at in sedem introdu|cendus, nisi duntaxat Extraneus, qui nequit ip|se interesse, vel qui negotiis Regiis occupatus ac retentus fuerit, aut cui deni Supremus id vel perceperit vel permiserit, uti praetactum est.
XXVII. Vnusquis in ingressu suo fidelitr  sub juramento promittet se velle conservare hos Articulos qui sequuntur. Primm, jurabit qud quamdi vixerit,  istius Ordinis unus esse perduraverit, pro viribus adjuvabit Supremi  sustentabit honorem, jura tuebitur,  querelas ejus omnin defendet  prosequetur. Deind qud omni conatu hunc Ordinem, in quem ascitus est, juvare, augere, atque ornare parabit. Si aliquid contra tentatum, aut excogitatum iri senserit, pro virili resistet  defendet. Pretere singula Statuta,  Statutorum Arti|culos sidelitr adimplebit. Pro hiis inquam omnibus sinceritr explendis generale juramen|tum in admissione su praestabit, per sacrosancta Evangelia, Supremo vel ejus gerenti vicem, quod etiam tm ben sit observaturus qud si punctim at articulatim tm sibi perlegerentur,  juramento quidem tanget at exosculabitur oblatam sibi crucem. Quo facto in hunc modum electus Eques prae|nobile subligar perqum reverenter accipiet, quod in sinistram ejus Tybiam Supremus, aut ab eo designatus inducet, ista verba dicens, Do|mine, amicissimi Socii hujus Ordinis a Subli|gaculo nominati te nunc in amicum sibi fra|trem, ac collegam, admiserunt. In cujus rei fidele signaculum,Bannerettus. hoc  tibi Subligar impar|tiunt ac condonant, quod det Deus ut merit suscipiens, rit conteras, ad Dei gloriam, ad honorem praeclari hujus Ordinis  tui.
XXVIII. Quod si Supremus Regnum exie|rit, aut ali de caus nequeat interesse, quatenus hoc ipsum ipse perficiat, duos aut eo plures hujus Ordinis Equites sufficere ben poterit: quibus plenam in istiusmodi introductione sui potestatem at authoritatem committat, ut eam suo nomine exerceant.
XXIX. Commune Sigillum paritr ac signa|culum Ordinis insignibus exornata fieri debent,  in custodi Cancellarii Ordinis, vel ejus Equi|tis ac Commilitonis, quem Supremus nominare voluerit remanebunt. Si ver qui Custos est as|signatus viginti Milliaria vel eo amplis abierit  Supremo qucun de caus, Sigilla Supremo tradet, ante recessum, vel ejusmodi Commilitoni alive personae, quam Supremus ad id eodem tem|pore designabit; eam ob rem certe, quo Sigilla praedicta mins absint  Supremo, quamdi ma|net intra Regnum. Sin foris esse contigerit, sig|naculum solum sufficiet interim ad acta quae consignanda,  degerenda, quae spectabunt ad hunc Ordinem.
XXX. Commilitones hujus Ordinis semper imposterum apud se Statuta retinebunt, collata pris cum Originali per Scribam Ordinis,  Communi Sigillo signata. Si ver quis corum insignia quaevs appingi disponi voluerit in eo Libello, Regi Armorum reddetur, ut is quod su interest apt rit perficiat. Originale quo in Aerario Collegii perpetu remansurum Sigillo communi consignabitur.
XXXI. Post obitum cujus Sociorum hujus Ordinis, haeredes ex asse (quos  Executores ap|pellant) obligabuntur ad reportanda intra tres menses Statuta praesentis Ordinis, quae donata sunt ei per Supremum aut ipsius impendio. Re|portabuntur autem ad Decanum Collegii vel Scribam, aut alioqui praecipuum ejus loci Officia|lem.
XXXII. Nullus Eques hujus Ordinis Divo Georgio dedicati Supremi sui Regnum, terram, aut Dominium exibit, nisi pris exeundi im|petrat copi. Quapropter unanimi consensu decretum est, qud si gerendarum rerum illu|strium iter ullum appetat, unde Militaris honor  Equestris gloria sperari possit, Supremus, ex su grati singulari favore, quem erga Com|militones hujus Ordinis in pectore semper habe|bit, illos istiusmodi stratagemmatis, honorificis negotiis aliis viris omnibus anteponet.
XXXIII. Horum Equitum nemo contra ullum suum Commilitonem Arma induet, nisi for|tasse propugnandum Supremi jus impendeat, aut ipsius alioqui justam causam defendi oporteat. Sin autem acciderit aliquem hujus Ordinis  quoquo Principe, seu Duce, teneri,  Adversa|rius illius alium ejusdem Ordinis ad parem sui defensionem habere postea desideret: is qui po|sterior exoptatur, omnin sic retineri detrecta|bit, nec aliam excusationem obtendet, qum qud collega us ante retetus in advers par|te depugnet. Horum etiam unusquis quando incipit ab aliquo teneri, hc solummod con|ditione

se teneri velle promittet, si nullus Com|militonum ante retentus in adversari parte fuerit, alioquise in eo vinculo minim perman|surum. Sin ante retentus fuerit qum impedi|mentum hujusmodi resciverit, poste tamen ubi primm intellexerit, unum aut alterum  Sociis suis in advers parte militare,  ad militan|dum ibi pris obvinctum, proponet excusationem suam apud eum Dominum qui se conduxerat qud ultr ipsi militare non potuerit, ejsve cau|sam defendere.
XXXIV. Omnes facultates Equitibus conces|sae  Regnum exeant, ad inquirendum honorem,  gloriam procurandam, omnes Literae, man|data, caetera scripta ad hunc Ordinem attinen|tia, altero Sigillorum imperpetuum consignari debent.
XXXV. Si quis horum Commilitonum, pie|tate ac Religione permotus, sedem sibi deligere volet intra Castellum Windesori, Domus in qu poterit immorari signabitur  Supremo; victus autem illius suis sumptibus at impensis propriis providebitur.
XXXVI. Si quisquam Eques alis qum sit hujus Ordinis caus Devotionis animum habue|rit ibi commorandi, sedes ex arbitrio Supremi eidem assignabitur, consensu Commilitonum an|tecedente.
XXXVII. Si quis horum Equitum, aut alius quisquam, terras, haereditates, redditus, aut pro|ventus impartire, donarve volet, ut precum il|larum quae dicuntur ibidem particeps habeatur: ejus nomen in Registrum ascribetur,  Cano|nici caeteri Ministri cum Militibus paupercu|lis, semper in futurum pro eo deprecabuntur. De|canus autem aut Custos Canonici nunquam Collegio novum pondus aut curam imponent, ci|tra Supremi consensum, aut ab ipso designati,  ceterorum Commilitonum in suscepto tent manifesto Concilio.
XXXVIII. Deiqu, qu Discrimen Equitum hujus Ordinis,  caeteris cui non sunt jusdem, tant claris eluceat: Supremus, ex consens Commilitonum omnium, vult, Ordint,  in|stituit, ut abbinc imperpetuum, quicu fuerit Eques istius Ordinis circum cervicem utatur u|reo Torque triginta unciarum Trojani Ponderis, nihil supr. Conficietur autem ille Torques  laminis in formam Subligaris, una laminarum duas ints rosas habebit, alteram rubram, supe|riorem albm, altera inferiorem albam,  su|periorem rubram. In fine ver Torquis illius pendebit Imago Divi Georgii. Quo Supremus  omnes Ordinis hujus Equites uti tenebuntur, praesertim in maximis  praecipuis Anni solen|nitatibus. Aliis autem diebus Cathenula utan|tur Aurea, quae Divi Georgii gestabit imaginem in fine: nisi gertur bellum, aut gerendum in|gruat, aegritudo urgeat, aut longum iter ineun|dum sit. Tunc etenim sufficiat uti Fibul se|ric, quae Divi Georgii duntaxat imaginem in fine pendulm habebit. Si vero Torques resar|ciendus sit, tradi poterit rifici, ut emendetur. Nec debet ille Torques stipari gemmis aut di|tari, nisi forsan id Imagini fiat, quae ben pote|rit, ex arbitratu illius Equitis, gemmis aut ali|tr exornari. Cavendum autem ne Torques hu|jusmodi vendatur, mutu tradatur, aut alienetur ullo modo, seu donetur, ex ull caus vel necessitu|dine, sed ad cohonest amentum Ordinis Equitis Ordinati conservari debet.

Here follow the same Statutes as they were put into English shortly after their Establish|ment; wherein some of the Articles are transposed, and the 18. Article wholly changed. But in all the Copies of them given forth since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, King Henry's Title of Supream head of the Church of England in Earth under Christ, is omitted, and some few words (noted with an Asterisk) altered to those inserted at the foot of the Page, whither the Asterisk directs.


The Statutes and Ordinances of the most Noble Ordre of Saint George, named the Gartier, Reformed, explained, declared, and renewed by the moost High, moste excellent, and mooste puissant Prince Henry the viii. by the Grace of God Kyng of England and of Fraunce, Defensor of the Faith, Lorde of Irland, c.
WHereas the moost famous, moost hap|piest, and victorious Prynce, Ed|warde, the thirde of that name, his Noble Progenitour somtyme Kyng of England and of Fraunce, and Lorde of Irland c. To th' onnore of almighti God, and of the blessed and immaculate Virgyn Marie, and the blessid Martir Sainte George, Patron of the right noble Roialme of England; and of Saynt Edwarde, Kyng and Confessau; To the exaltation of the holy Faith Catholique Drdeyned, Established, created, and founded, within the Castel of Wyndesore, a company of xxvi. Noble and Worthi Knyghtes, for to be of the said moost Noble Drdre of Saynt George, named the Gartier, and for the hono|rable continuance, augmentation, and in|terteyning of the same.
The seid moost victorious Kyng did de|vyse and institute divers honorable Estatuts, and laudable Ordinances for to be observed and kept by the cobrethern and confreres Knightes and Compaynons of the said moost Noble Order; amonge the which Estatutis been certeyne doubtis and ambiguities, which to be more playnly declared, inter|preted, and extended, it is thought right necessary and expedient. And that certeyne other new Ordinances and Articles be to the said Statutes added and adjoyned. Where|fore the said moost excellent and victorious Prynce Henry the viii. Kynge of England and of France Defensor of the Faith and Lord of Irland, and Soveragne of the said moost Noble Order, and for the right singu|lar love, good zeal, ardent and intier affecti|on, that his royall Majestie hath and bearith to the said moost Noble Order, and to the estate of Chivalrie and Knyghthod: And for the honorabl contynuance and encreasing of the same: And also at the humble requeste and instante destre of the Knyghts and Com|panyons of the said Noble Order, And by their advyse, councell, and assent, the xxiii. day of April, in the year of grace M.D.XXII. and of his moost noble reigh the viii. yere, made interpretacion and declaracion of the Obscurities, doubtis, and ambiguities of the said Estatutes, Ordinances, Interpretaci|ons, declaracions, reformacions, with their additions aforesaid, after the rew intencion of them, shall be from hensforth observed, kept, and ensued, by the Soverayne and the Knyghtes Confreres and Companyons of the said Noble Order, in manner and fourme followyng.

I. Firste, It is Ordened and accorded, that the Kyng, and his Heires and Succes|sors Kyngs of England, shall be for ever|more Soveraynes of the saide moost Noble Or|der, and amiable Companye of Saynt George, named the Gartier, to the which So|verayn, and to his Heires and Successours shall apperteine the declaracion, solucion, determinacion, interpretacion, Reformacion, and disposition of all causes concernyng and towchyng any thyng of obscuritie or dowbte conteyned in the Statutes of the said moost Noble Order.
II. Item, it is accorded that none shall be elected and chosen for to be Felow or Compa|nion of the said moost Noble Order, excepte that he be a Gentilman of blood, and that he be a Knyghte, and without roproche. And that the Knyghtes of the said Noble Order from hensforth shall not name any person in their Election to be Felow or Companyon of the said Noble Order, in whome thei shall thynke or extiem in their conscience to have spotte of Reprche: And as towchyng the declaration of a Gentilman of blode, it is declared and determined, that he shall be de|cended of three decentis of Noblesse, that is to say, of name and of armes, bothe of his Father's side, and also of his Mother's side, and as towchyng or concernyng any maner of reproche, forasmoche as there be divers and many sundri pyntis of reproche, there shall be here declared but three poyntis of them oonly, as is declared in manner and fourme folowying. The first poynt of Reproche ys, that if any Knyght, (os God defende) be convayn|qued, or attaynted of errour against the Cristen Faith Catholique, or had for any suche Offence suffred any payne or punicion publique. The second poynt of Reproche is, that if any Knyght (as God defende) had bene ar|arayned, convicted, or attainted or High Trea|son. The third poynt of Reproache is, that if any Knyght departe, or flee away from ba|tayle, or journei, beyng with his Soverayne Lord, his Lieutenant or Deputie, or other Capetayne, bavyng the Kyng's power Royal and autoritie; and whereas Banners, Estandatz, or Pennons have bene displaied, and that thei preceded to fight, he that then renioufly and cowardly flieth or departith away from thens, ought to be estieme and judged to have reproche, and never worthi to be electe Knyght, or Felow of the said Company. And if it fortune, that any Knyght of the said Company (as God for|bidde) do commytte any suche reproche, that then he shall be departed and disgraded of the said Order, at the nexte Chapiter ensuyng, if it soo shall please the Soverayne and the Com|pany.
III. Item that every yere, upon the vigil of Saynt George, that is to say, the xxii. day of the moneth of April, on what day soever it fall on, and though no service of Saint George be celebrate or done, all the Knyghtis of the said Company, beyng in any place or places of their liverties, in what places soever it be, shall ve bounde for to were the bole habit of the said Order. That is to wit, Robe, Mantell, Hudde, and Coller, from the owre of the fyrst Evensonge at the owre of tierce, that is, at three of the Clocke at afternone, untill the said Evensonge and other devyne service, ouper, and voydance, be done and accomplished; And lykeyse on the morrow, on Saynt George's day at mat|tens, procession, Morning Service. mas, and the seconde Evensonge, and all the said day, untyll that souper and voydance be done, as ys aore|said.
IV. Item, that if for any causes, it shoulde please the said Soverayn to prorge the said Feast and solemnytie of Saynt George, or that the said Feast shuld be prolonged and proroged, to another day, that all the Knightis of the said Order, that shall be with|in the Realme of Englande, shall gyve their attendance the even and the day of Saynt George, on the parson of of the said Sove|rayne, and shall fynde themselffes in his company, in what place soever he be within

the said Realme of England; and they so gyveyng their attendance upon his said par|sone, the saide even and day, shall observe and kepe the servyce of Saynte George, is the Ordenance and commaundement of ho|lye Church doth suffre and permit it. And if th'ordenaunce of the Church doth not per|mitt it, in this behalffe, they be bounde to tary with the Soverayne, and heare such ser|vyce as shall be than limited and ordened bi the holy Churche to be done and celebrated the said even and day of Saynt George, in observyng and kepyng, duryng the said daies, of all other ceremonies, aswell in goyng to the Chapter upon the said even, before Even|song at afternone, and the said day of Saynt George at afternone, before the laste Even|song; As also in weryng their hole habit, and every Knyght beyng in his owne Stall, in kepyng the Devine Servyce from the tyme of the fyrst Evensonge of the said even, maten, and Divine Service. Masse, unto the last Evensong of the said day, and the morow after ensuyng, before th Divine Service. Masse of Requiem, thei shall take their Mantells, upon suche Gownes as shall please them, and shall enter into the Chapter, if there be eny election or other great affaires, before the said Divine Service. Mass of Requiem in usyng such Ceremonyes to this accustomed, as though they were present in the said Castell of Wyndesore. And in case that the said Soverayne be come and entred into the said Chapiter, and that some of the seid Felows of the said Order be not entred, or come with hym and sulde tary behynde, in case they that have not gyven and done dew atten|dancce upon hym, shall abide withoute the dores of the said Chapiter, withoute en|tryng in to it, duryng all the tyme that the said Soverayne and other Knyghtes shall be in the said Chapiter for that tyme. And if so be that eny of the abovenamed Knyghtes come to late to the first Evensong of the said even, or Mattens, Divine Service. Masse, or laste Evensong, the saide day of Saynt George, he shall have for penance, that duryng the tyme and space of suche devyne seryce, he shall knele or stande before his Stall, in the Place of the Oueresters; and if he come not to gyve at|tendance upon the parson of the said Sove|rayne, the sayd Even and day of Saynt George. as is aforesaid; And that he have no ycence or other Reasonable excuse, and that it be acceptable to the said Soverayne for his absence in this case; the said Knyght, that soo shall have done, for his penance, shall not come in his Stall at the next Feast ensuyng in the presence of the Soverayne, nor in his said Stall in the said College of Wyndesore. And farthermore shall pay x^l. for to be converted and bestowed to the use of the Ornamentes of the said Collage.
V. Item if it chaunsed that any of the Knyghtes of the said Order, by leave or licens or otherwise, were in his howse or in any orber place, at his libertie and fraunchise, the said even and day of Saynt George, be shall be bound to cause to be prepared a Capi|tall Stall, in the Church or Chappel, in the which he shall heare devine Service. In the Capitall Stall shall be sett and elevated the Order of Saint George, named the Gartier, beyng within a Garter; and his propre arms within the Garter, also shall be set at a Stall, that shall be asmoche in distance, af|ter the proportion and quantite of the said Church or Chapell, from the Stall of the said Soverayn, as is his Stall in the Castell of Wyndesore, and shall were his said habit hole, and shall heare the devyne service, suche as by the holy Church is ordened and limited for the said day, aswell the first evensong, Mattens, Divine Service. Mass, as the latter evensonge. In doyng by hym first Reverence to the Aulter in the honor of God, and after to the Stall where is fired or sett up the Armes of the said Order, as well and as often at his com|yng in as at his goyng owte of the said Church or Chapell; And also as often as he shall passe before the said Armes, allwey excepte the Emperours, Kynges, Princes, Electors, The which may in this case so or|deyne their Seates and Stalles as yt sall seme them beast, and at their pleasure.
VI. Item if yt were so that withoute any prorogacion the said Feast and Solempnyte of Saynt George were kept and celebrated the said Castell or Wyndesore, and if it were not te pleasure of the seid Soverayne for to be present, or that conveniently he may not be there in parson, the said day and Feast, at his said Castell of Wyndesore, That in this case, in what place that his pleasure shall be teyng within this his Realme of England, his Majestie may appoynte and commaunde suche Knyghtes of the seid Order, as best shall seme hym, there for to kepe Com|pany and geve attendance upon the parson, and to kepe all and lyke Ceremo|nyes as though they were at the said Castell of Wyndesore; And they doyng the thynges abovesaid shall be excused for their absence of the Feast of Saynt George holden at the said Castell of Wyndesore for that yere.
VII. Item, it is agreed, that if the Sove|raine cannot be at Seynt George's Feas, that he shall make his Deputy, by his Let|ter, for to kepe the Capter upon Saynt Georg's Even, at the owre of tierce, the which is at three of the Clocke at after none, and on Saynt George's day for to kepe the said Feast, at the costes of the said Soverayne, for the space abovesaid, withoute any new Ordenance to be made, havyng power to cor|recte and redresse all poyntes of the said Chapter, as for then shall seme necessary.
VIII. Item, that every one on Saynt Georges Even, that is to wit, the xxii. day of April, a gatheryng together shall be made of all the Knightes of Saynt George within the Castell of Wyndesore, That is to wit, of

all them that shall be within this Realme, of Englande, or withoute, that conveniently may come. And there they shall have the service of Saynt George, and also shall were their hole habit of the said Order, duryng the seid servyce, beyng ordinarily in theyre Stalls; And every of them shall have his Banner, Sworde, with his Helme, and Creste above his Stall, the whiche duryng his lyff shall abyde in the said Chappel, for his ho|nor, and in signe and knowledge, that he beres them in defence of holy Churche, as the Order of Knyghthod requireth. But in case that the seid Feast of Saynt George hap|pen to fall within xv. dayes after the Feast of Easter, or upon any Fyshe-daye, or Fast|yng day, then it shall be proroged and pro|longed at the Soverayne's pleasure, as above is seid, if so be that the day of the seid Feast be not assigned ne ordenyd to be kepte the xxiv. xxv. xxvi. nor the last day of April, nor upon the fowre firste dayes of May, for by cause of the impediment or let of devyne ser|vyce ordened by holy Churche for the double Feastes of Saynte Marke, Philipp and Ja|cob, and the Invention of the Holy Crosse of our Lord Jesu Chryste, nor at suche dayes as shall fall the Assencion, or the Feast of Pen|thecoste, or any other Feaste of Solempnite, as is ordened in holy Churche, whereby the fyrst or seconde Evensonge by suche Proro|gacions myght be letted and distorbed
IX. Item that all the Knyghtis of the said Order shall come yerely in the said place of the said Castell of Wyndesore on Saynte George's Even at th'owre of tierce, the whiche is at three of the Clocke at after|noone, as it is aboveseid. And if thei come not at the tyme assigned without havyng a juste and reasonable excuse, that may be ac|ceptable to the said Soverayne or to his De|putie, or otherwyse pardoned by the seid So|verayne of their absence by special Letters of excuse, in the whiche Letters theyr names and causes shall be wryten, or other|wyse shall have their pennance after th'or|denance and agreement of the said Chaptre. And the said Ordenaunce is suche that they shall not entre into the Chaptre for that tyme, but shall byde withoute the dore. And shall have no voyce in any thynge that is done in the said Chaptre, at that tyme alon|ly. And if they come not to Evensonge, be|fore the begynnyng of the said Evensonge, they shall not enter into their Stalles but shall byde belowe affore the said Stallis in the Queristers places duryng the said Even|songe. And like pennance is ordened for them that come not to the high Morning Service. masse be|tyme and at Evensonge on Saynt George's daye. And if there be any that come not to the Feaste, and have not a reasonable ex|cuse towarde the Soverayne or his Deputye, as it is above declared, his pennance shall bee that he shall not enter within his Stall te next Feast after, but shall byde below as it is said at the first Evensong, and shall goo in the procession before all the Queriters. three Cros|se. And shall sit below as affore is said all the Service. mass tyme untyl the Offryng. And he shall offre laste. And after his penance so done, incontinent he shall come before the Soverayne Stall or his Deputie, and there he shall aske pardon. And after that the Soverayne or his Deputie shall commaunde hym to goe unto his Stall in his fyrst estate, and if he come not at the seconde Feaste, and be dwellyng within the ealm, without hav|ing any excusation alowable to the Sove|rayne or to his Deputie, as is abovesaid, he shall not entre in his Stall from theforth, until the tyme that he have gyven and offer|ed a ewell unto Saynte George's Aultar within the said Chappell of the valew of xx markes of Sylver of Troye, and fro thens forwarde he shall double every yere the Pe|naltie, unto the tyme e be reconsciled.
X. Item it is agreed, that if any Knyght of the sayd Companye be founde in apperte withoute his Garter, That he pay anon af|ter that the chalenge hee made to hym by any of the five Officers of th'Order or of the Warden of the Seid College, a marke of Mony. Excepte he be voted for to ryde, that then it shall suffice to were under his vote a blew iande of Sylke, in signyfying of the Carter, and also provided that no Knyght of the sayd Order from hensforthe do entre into the Chaptre without his Garter upon the payne abovesaid. And whosoever of the said Officers or Warden shall make the first chalenge shall have the penaltye for his labor.
XI. Item it is agreed, that the Knyghts of the Order of St. George, alwey and as of|ten as they shall were theyr mantels, they shall goo before there Soverayne every of them with his Felow, that is for aneynst him, ordinarily as they e sett in their Stalles: And if it shoulde happen that eny of them were not there present, his felow for aneynst hym shall goo alone. The whiche Order shall be kepte and observed as well in goyng in procession as ellis where in other places. But at the Offryng the Souerayn or his Deputie shall goo before all the Com|pany, and the ordinarie Officers of the said Ordre shall goo as thei have bene accustom|ed, when any procession shall be done in the Chapter, Chappel, or ellis where. And for the ordre of the said Knightis for to sitt at the Table, for to take their reseccion by it, at Diner at or Souper, they shall sit all along on one side after ther Stalls, and not after their state, except Children and Bretherne of Kinges, Princes, and Dukes that be Strangers, the which shall kepe their places and romes ater their astate; and at their voiding and ing out shall abide and goo in order so as thei sat at the Table.
XII. Item it is agreed, that every one of them, at the Casell of Windesore on the morow after the Feast of Saynte George,

before the departyng of the Company, tht the said Knyghtes, upon suche Gownes as shall please them at the Chapter dore, shall take their Mantels and shall goo into the said Chaptre, and after that shall goo and here a Divine Service. mass of Requiem, the which shall be solempnely songe for the souls of all the Felowes of the said Order, which be de|parted and deceassed, and for all Christen sowiles, and that all the Company be there present, without eny of them be lett bi a reasonable cause, or have lysence of the So|berayne or his Deputie before the departyng. And when it happens that for any cause of the voydyng of eny of the said Felowship, there shall bee certayne Banners, Swordis, Helmets, and Crestes, the whiche ought to be offered up before the offeryng of eny Syl|ver; the sayd Hachements ought to be of|fered, fyrst the Banner, by two of the said Felowship suche as the Soverayne or his Deputie shall appoynte or name, and after that the Sworde shall be offered by two other, and likewise his Helmet and Crest by two other Knyghtes of the said Order, assigned by the Soverayne or his Deputie, and if any Knyght of the seid Order shuld decease the yere afore, then every Knyght beyng in the said Castell of Wyndesore, at the said Divine Service. mass of Requiem, shall offer a Taper arm|ed with a little Scuchion of the arms of the Knyght departed. And if there were more then one deceassed, that then be made for every of them a Scuchion of Arms and a grote sett nye to the light of the tapre, the which Scuchions and tapers wall be made at the coste and charge of the Knyghts of the said Ordre.
XIII. Item, it is agreed, that all stran|gers, that shall be electe Felows of the seid Order, shall be certifyed by Letters of the Soverayne of their election. The which let|ters of Certification, with the Statutes of the said Order, under the common Seal shall be sente unto them at the coste and charges of the said Soverayne, in all diligence, and at the fardest thei shall bee certifyed of this within foure moneths after the sayd Electi|on, to th'ende that the seid Electe may advyse them by the said Statutis, if they will re|ceyve the sayd Order, or no. But if the said Soverayne hae greate and high lettes and busynes, that then he may deferre the certification of the said Election at his good pleasure, unto tyme of opportunite and con|venient. After that the Certification have byn delivered, and that the Soverayn shall be certefied, that the said Electe will receyve the said Order; Then the Soverayne shall sende unto the said Electe, by his Ambassa|dours, his hole habit, with the Garter and Coller. And that all suche straungers, of what estate, dignytie, or condicion that thei be of, shall sende within vii. monethes after the reception of the said Gartier, Coller and Habit, and that he have certified the Sove|rayn to have reyved those thyngs, a suffici|ent Deputie or attorney after th'astate of his Lorde and Maister, so be that he be a Knyght without Reproche, to be stalled in his place, the whiche shall bryng with hym a Mantell of blew Welbett of the order of that which he shall send hym, and also his Banner, Sworde, Helme, and Crest, for to be and abide within the seid College duryng his lyff. And that the Mantell in the tyme that te seid Deputie or Attorney shall be stalled, by the said Soverayn or his Deputie, put upon his right arme for to holde the said mantyll upon his arme, and shall bee accompanyed and ledde by two of the Knyghtes of the said Order, from the dore of the Chaptre unto the stall, and there boyeng shall make hi othe, and shall bee stalled for and in the name of his said Lorde and Maister, and the said Mantell abovesaid, the sayd Attorney or De|putie shall bere it uppon his right arme du|ryng the devyne service, beyng sett in the stall of his seid Maister and Lorde, without beryng of it at any tyme after. And to have no manner of voyce in the Chaptre, or to come in it, in th'absence of hym that hath sent hym. And if he send not his said At|torney within vii. monethes abovesaid, with|out avying a reasonable excuse which shall bee acceptable to the Soverayne or his Depu|tie, the election shall be voyde of hym. Ex|cept so be that the seid Knyght be lett and destorbed bi great affaire. Then he may send his excuse to the said Soverayne, or to his Deputie, within a moneth after, and af|ter his excuse is, as the Soverayne or his Deputie will allowe it or accepte it, that then the sayd Soverayn or his Deputie may geve on to hym foure moneths more of respite, and if he came not or sent not his Attorney before that the tyme of the foure monethes he fynished, that then in this case the election shall be hle voyde from hym for that tyme. And it is to be knowen, that this favoure is done and shewed to the strangyers, the which may not well come in their proper parsons, that they myght be stalled by Attourneys. To th'ende that they may be parte takers of the Divine Service. masses, and all the prayers of the seid Ordre, for they shulde fayle of the half yf they were not stalled before their deathe. And likewise it is ordened for them that be new chosen and electe of the said Order, beyng in the Kyngs Warres by his commaundement, for to enjoye of the benefytes of the said statutes, to that that shall appertayne allonly to their stallacion.
XIV. Item there is also ordened a Dean and Warden with xii. Canons seculers, the which shall be pristz at their entryng in, or ells within a yere nexte foloshyng; and also viil. Peticanons, and xiii. Vicars, also prestes at their entryng in, or ells at the gvyng of the next Orders, or at the urdest within a yere after their presentacion. Also xiii. Clerkes, and xiii. Queristes, for to 

and pray unto God for the prosperity of the Soverayne and all the Knyghtes of the said Order lyhyng, and also for the sowles of all the Knyghts of the said Order departed, and for all Crysten sowles, and the presen|tacion of the sayd Cannons that belonge all|ey to the Soverayne of the said Order. And the sayd Canons when any Knyght of the said Order is there present, within the quyer of the seid Chappell, shall sitt in the lowermost seates, where they be wonte to sitt at the Feastes of St. George. And in th'absence of the said Knyghtes the said Canons may sitt in the high seates nexte un|to the stalles of the said Knyghtes.
XV. Item there bee ordenyd v. Officers appertaynyng to the said Order, That is to witt, Prelate, Chaunceler, Register, and Kyng of Armes, named Gartier, and an huyssher at Armes, named the Blacke Rod. The which shall hee receyved and sworne to be of the Councell of the said Order, the secretes with alsoo their chargies and privi|leges shall expressely be declared in the Booke of the Ordenaunces of the sayd Of|ficers.
XVI. Item it is also ordened, that xiii. pore Knightes, that have not wher withall to lyhe, for to have in that place their lyvyng and sustentation conveniently, for their good prayers in the honor of God and Saynt George, of the whiche the charges and pri|vileges hereafter shall be declared folowyng the Ordynances of the Officers, and of their election is ordened as of the presentacion of the Canons, so that alwey the Election shall abyde to the said Soverayne. And it is a|greed, that the pour Knyghtes shall have their Mantells of Scarlett, and a scuchion of th' armes of Saynt George withoute a Garter.
XVII. Item it is agreed, that every Knyght of the sayd Company shall leave his Mantyll within the said College, for any so|dayne chaunses that myght happen for to kepe, holde, and observe all suche Ordinan|ces, Preceptes, and commaundements, whiche may be advysed in Chaptre by the sayd Soverayne. The whiche Soverayne by the consent and agrement of vi. Knightes of the said Order may, at all tymes and pla|ces, at his pleasure, sommon and make to be kepte Chaptre, for all suche causes, as it shall please to the said Soverayne to name towching the said Order.
XVIII. Item, it is agreed, that if it for|tune, that any of the said Company shulde come within ii. myle of the Castell, that he shall goo in, if he may, for the honor o the place, if he be nott busyed or lett by some juste cause, and that he take his Man|tell before he entre within the said Chappell. And alsoo that he entre not in, but he have his Mantyll upon tym. And the Canons there beyng present for that tyme shall come to receyve hym, and devotly shall bring hym into the said Chappell; and if it be in tyme of Divine Service. Masse, he shall tary and here Divine Service. Masse in the honor of God and of St. George; and if it be at afternone, he shall come in in man|ner abovesaid: And there shall be said by the Canons De profundi, for all Cristen sowles, and there shall offer and retourne un|to his stall. And yf any of the said Compa|ny ride thorowgh the Lowne, and wyll not offre as it is agreed, that, upon his obedience for every tyme that he faileth, he shall goo one myle on fote from the said Chappel, unto the said place, in honor of Saynt George; And also for every tyme that he shall so fayle, he shall gyve a grote for his Offrynge. The whiche distaunce, for to com nygh unto the seid Castell, is two myles allonly and no more.
XIX. Item it is accorded, the xxxii. yere of our Soveraign Lorde Kyng Henry the Eight, by the grace of God Kyng of England and of Fraunce, Defensor of the Faith, Lord of Irland, c. upon Seynt George's day, the xxiii. day of Aprill, at a Chapter holden at the Paleys of Westminster, by the Sove|raign and the Companyons of the said No|ble Order then there assembled; That as sone as the deth of any of the Company of the saide Order shall be certeynly knowen, every of the rest, beyng no strangiers, shall accordyng to the rates of their Degrees here|after specified, immediately upon a de|maunde to be made for the same by the Re|gister, and the Dean, or one of them, to be by one of them employed in Aulmes deeds, as in mendyng of High wayes, or suche o|ther works of charite, as the Kyngs Maje|stie from tyme to tyme shall lymite and ap|poynte, the severall somes of Money n|yng: Furst the Souveraign viii l. vi . viii d. A Kyng of another Realme, vi l. xiii . iv d. The Prince, v l. xvi s. viii d. A Duke, v l. A Marquess, iii l. xv s. An Erie, l s. A Vis|conte, xli s. viii d. A Baron, xxxiii s. iv d. A Bacheler Knyght, xvi s. viii d. Of all which somes thus to be receyvyd, the said Dean and Regester, or eyther of them, shall yerely at the Chapiter present his accompte to the Kyngs Majestie with is true and just declaration of the dysbursyng agayne and defraying of the same. In that cause the partie, whose Porcyen shall apere to be un|payde, shall in the name of a Payne adde un|to his former dutye another thirde parte of the same, and so for every yere that he shall be behynde, to pay a thredde parte more than he shuld paye, if he shuld satisfye his ordi|nary accordyng to the rate before expressed. And if the Dean or Register or any of them shall not at every suche Chapiter present the Certificate of the Receipts and Payments in fourme aforesid, whereby the same may apere to the Souverayn and Companyons of the Order then preent, or at the leest he in whome the defawlt shall rest, shall in the name of a payne contente and paye imme|mediatl, to bee employed abowte like pur|pose

as afore the some of x. for every suche defaulte.
XX. Item it is agreed, that if eny of the said Companye die, that the Soverayne or his Deputie after that they shall have certifi|cation of his deth, shall be bounde for to send and gyve knowledge by ther Letters to all the Felowship of the said Ordre beyng with|in England, for to come and be with the said Soverayne or his Deputie in what place so|ever it be, where it shall please hym to assigne convenyently within vi. wekys after the cer|tification of the death or decease of the said Knyght. The which allsoo assembled or at the lest vi. with the Soverayne or his Depu|tie abovesaid, every of them that there shall be present come to the election shall name ix. of the worthiest and sufficient Knyghtes withoute Reprosse that he shall knowe sub|jectes to the said Soverayne or others, so be that they holde no contrary partie or be a|gaynst hym. That is to witt, three Dukes iii. Marquess, Erles, or of greater astate, iii. Barons, or banerettis, and iii. Bachelers. The whiche denominations the chief pre|late of the said Order shall wryte, Chat is to witt the Byshop of Wynchester for the tyme beyng; or in his absence the Chaunce|ler, or the Dean or Register or the mooste auncient Recidencer of the said College in their absence; and the denomination soo done by all, or vi. at the leest, by hym that have written shall bee shewed to the seid So|verayne, or to his Deputie, that then shall chose of them that be named, be that shall have the moost voyces, and also he that the Soverayne shall exteme to be moost honora|ble to the sayde Order, and moost profita|ble to his Crowne and to his Realme. And if there be any Knyght of the said Order that doth fayle for to come to the said Ele|ction, if he be not lett by a juste cause; and that the said cause of his excuse shewed under his seal of armes be founde by the Soverayne or his Deputie to be juste and reasonable, then his excuse to be accepted and allowed, and that if his cause be not juste, and that he come not to the seremo|nies above-named, it is agreed that he shall pay to the Warden of the College for to synge for hym that is departed xx s. sterling, and at his nexte comyng to the Chaptre, he shall be before the Soverayne or his Deputie and the company, and shall knele upon the grounde in the myddes of the Chaptre, un|tyll the tyme that he be reconsiled by the So|verayne or his Deputie, and the said Com|panye.
XXI. Item it is agreed, that if any Knyght of the said Company shulde departe, and another is chosen and electe, he shall have sone after his election the Garter, in signyfyeng that he ys one of the Knyghtes and Felowes of th' Ordre of the Garter, and his Robe and Node shall be delivered hym in the Chapter-howse incontinently, af|ter that his Commission hath bene red be|fore the Soverayne or his Deputie and the Company; and after that shall be led by two Knyghtes of the said Order accompaned with the other noble-men, And the Officers of the Order shall also be present, and his Mantell shall be borne before hym by one of the Knyghtis of the said Order, or by the Kyng at Armes of the Order. The which Mantell shall be delyvered to hym for his ha|bit, after that he shall have made his othe before his Stall and not before. And this done he shall retorne unto the Chapter howse, where he shall reseyve by the Soverayne or his Deputie, The coler, and soo he shall have the full possession of his habit holely, ex|cept great Prynces straungers, the which may receyve their habit holely within the Chapter howse, as it hath been used and ac|customed in tymes past, for the shortenyng of tyme. And if he die before he have Re|ceyved hys habit, he shall not be named one of the Founders, seyng that he lacketh to have full possession of his astate. But he shall have the one halfe of the Divine Service. Masses above-named, for the delyverance of the Garter, and none other thynge above it. And if he soo chosen come not in all good diligence af|ter the recepcion of the said Garter in the said place for to be stalled, and in specyally within the yere of his Election, if he be a Knyght dwellyng within the Realme, and hathe none excuse reasonable, allowable, and acceptable to the said Soverayn or to his Deputie, and the Company, Then the Ele|ction shall bee voyde of hym, and the Sove|rayne or his Deputie and the Company shall goo and make another new election, and neyther the Banner, the Sworde, nor the Helmet, nor Crest of hym so chosen be put upon his Stall within the Castell before his commyng. To th'ende that if he come not, his said Hachementis, as Banner, Sworde, Helmet, be not taken down nor abaled, but honestly put oute of the Qyer, and the reast of other thyngs shall abyde to the profitt and use of the saide Order.
XXII. Item it is agreed, that if any of the Dukes, Marques, Erles, Vizcontes, Ba|rons, Banerettis, or Bachelers die, That he that shall come after, and succede in his place and rome, be he Duke, Merques, Erle, Vizcounte, Baron, Baneret, Bacheler, or any of the astates above-named, he shall have the selffe same stalle that his Predeces|sor had, and shall not chaunge it without he have especiall lycense or Warrant of the said Soverayne, allweyes all Emperours, Kyngs, and Prynces be excepted, the which shall kepe and holde theyr Stalles after theyr astate, and very nexte unto the Soverayne. And then by thys meane a Duke shall take the stall of a Bacheler, and a Bacheler the stall of a Duke, in signe and knowlege of the fyrst Founders.
XXIII. Item, if there be eny place or stall voyde, the Soverayn at his pleasure may

avance and translate, by his speciall license, any Knyght of the said Company, in the said stall, so be it that it be more hyer then the stall that he was in afore. Alsoe the So|verayne ouys in his lyffe may, if it please hym, make a general translation of all the states at his pleasure, excepte of Emperours, Kyngs, Prynces, and Dkes. The which allwey shall kepe ther places and stalles, if not that they be translated in more hyer rome and stall, in the whiche translacion the long contynuance in th' Ordre, and the prayses, worthynes, and merites of the Knyghtes ought to be considered and re|membred. The which Knyghtes from hens|forth in goyng and syttyng at all tymes, that they shall were their Mantels, shall kepe their places after the Order of their stallis, and not after their astatis, as is aforesaid.
XXIV. Item it is agreed, that all the Felowis abovesaid at their first commyng in shall gyve every of them a certayne somme, after their astate, for the entertaynyng and mayntenance of the Canons and Poor Knyghtes dwellyng in the seid place, and for the almes dedes that is there perpetualli ordenyd. That is to wytt, the Soverayne xl. markes, a straunger Kyng xxl. The Prince xx markes, every Duke xl. every Marques viii l. vi s. viii d. every Erle x. markes, every Vizcounte exvi s. viii d. eve|ry Baron and Baneret c s. every Bacheler v. markes, and their Baners, Helmetts, Crestis, and Swordis shalle not be sett over their stalles, untyll the tyme that they have payed at their entryng the foresaid sommes, every one after his astate and degree where|of he is. And it ys to witt that the Sove|rayne is bounde to pay for every straunger that shall be chosen and electe, whan he shall be stalled in his propre parson, or by procure|ment, or attornay, and these gyftes be gieven to th'entent that every one of them that shall entre into th' Ordre be more worthy to have the name, title, and privilege, of one of the Founders of the said Order.
XXV. Item it ys agreed, that every Knyght within the yere of his stallation shall cause to be made a Scouchon of his armes, and hachementis in a plate of me|tall suche as shall please hym, and that it be merly sett upon the backe of his stall. And the other that shall come after shall have their Scochons and Hachements in like maner; but their Plats of metall nor there hache|ments shall not be soo large nor soo greatte as they of the first Founders were, excepte strangers, which may use their plates and fa|shions at their pleasure.
XXVI. Item it ys aggreed, that no Knyght chosen and electe for to be Felow of of the said Noble Order shall nott be stalled by procurement or attorney, excepte he be a straunger, and may not well come hyther in his propre parson for to be stalled, or other that is busied withoute the Realme for the affaires of the Soverayn, or by his commaundement and lycence as it is above declared.
XXVII. Item that every Knyght, en|tryng in the said Order, shall promes and swere faithfully to observe and kepe the poyntis and articles that here followeth, That is to witt, that to his trew powre he shall helpe, duryng his lyffe, and duryng the tyme that he shall be Felow of the said Or|der, for to kepe, defende, and sustayne the ho|nor, quarrelles, rightes, and lordshippes of the Soverayne of the said Order. Item that with all his powre he shall en|force hymselffe, and take payne honorably to entertayne and augment the said Order. And if it happen hym for to knowe any thynge that were ymagyned or procured to the con|trarye of the defence and resistence of this, with all his trew power he shall put hymself in more gretter endevorment. Item that well and trewly he shall accom|plishe and entertayne all the Statuts, poyntis, and ordynances of the said Ordre, and of all this shall make a generall othe, all and so as though it were redde unto hym fro poynt to poynt, and article to article, and shall make the said othe to the Soverayne of the said Order or his Deputie, in sweryng and promisyng upon the holy Gospellis for to kepe them and entertayne them, with|owte any fraude or delacion. And upon this he shall towche the Boke and kysse the Crosse. Item this done the said Knyght soo chosen with dew reverence shall receyve the Garter, the whiche the Soverayne or his Deputie shall put it aboute his lyfte leg in saying these words, Sir, the lovyng Company of th' order of the Garter hathe receyved you theyr Brother, lover, and Felow, and in token and knowledge of this they gyve you and present you this present Garter. The whiche God wyll that you receyve and were from hensforth to his praise and plea|sure, and to th'exaltacion and honour of the said Noble Order and of your self.
XXVIII. Item it is agreed, that in case that the Soverayne be out of the Contre, to the whiche he can not in propre parson do that shall appertayne to the stallation, he may gyve power and auctorite, by his Let|ters of Commission, to two of the Felows, or to dyverse for to exercise it in his name.
XXIX. Item it is agreed that a common Seal, a signet of the armes of the Order, be made, the which shall rest in the custodi and kepyng of the Chanceler of th' order, or of suche a Knyght and Felow of the said Or|der, as shall please the Soverayne to name and assigne; and if he that shall have the Seales in kepyng or custodi shulde departe or goo forth for any cause, xx miles farre from the Soverayne, then he shall deliver the said Seals to the Soverayne, or to suche Knyght of th' Ordre, or to any other parsone, that it shall please the said Soverayne for to or|deyne and appoynte. To th' entent that at

no tyme the said Seals be oute of the pre|sence of the seid Soverayne, he beyng with|in his Realme. And if he be owte of his Realme, The signet shall suffice for to seal all suche actes and wrytynges, touchyng the said Order, that there may be concluded and made.
XXX. Item it is agreed, that every Fe|low of the said Order from hensforth shall have the Statutes of the said Order, first col|lected and oversene by the Register, and af|ter that sealed with the common Seal affore|said. And if the Knyght will have any armes devysed, or cognysance made within the Boke of the said Statuts, then the said Boke shall be delyvered to the Kyng at Armes of th' Ordre, for trewly to ordayne of it as it shall appertayne. And the originall to be lykewyse signed and sealed, the whiche shall shall abyde in the Treasory of the said Col|lege for evermore.
XXXI. Item it is agreed, that after the death of eny of the Knyghtes of the said Company, his Executours shall be bounde for to sende agayne, and to delyver the Sta|tutes of the said Order, within three monethes after, if so be that the Statutes hath ben delivered unto hym by the Sove|rayne, or to his charge. The which Sta|tutes shall be delivered agayn to the War|den or Register of the said College, or to one of the principall Officers for the tyme beyng.
XXXII. Item it is agreed, that none of the Knyghtes of Saynt George, of the said Companye of the Garter, shall not goo oute of the Contrey nor Dominion of the Sove|rayne, without havyng leave and lisence of the Soverayne: And therefore it is agreed, that if eny viage be made, or any other no|ble acte appertaynyng to the honor of Knyghthod, The said Soverayne, of his grace, for the great love, favor, and confi|dence that he heares towarde the Knyghtes of the said Order, will prefarre, advance, and present the said Felowes and Knyghtes of th' Order of Saynt George before all other.
XXXIII. Item that none of the Knyghtes of the said Order shall not arme themselves the one against the other, but in the Warres of his Soverayne Lorde, in his right and juste quarell, and if it shulde happen, that any of the said Order were retayned with any Lorde, and holdyng his partie and quarell, and th' adversari partie destreth al|soo to have another Felowe of the said Or|der with hym: In this case, suche a Knyght and Felow shall not be retayned, but may excuse hym from all suche thynges, bycause his Felowe is armed agaynst hym on the other syde, and was retayned before hym, and every Knyght of the said Order shall be bounde to excepte when he shall be retained, that he may be holely dyschargyd from his servyce of Warre, yf any of the Felow|shipp before hym retayned or holdyng the con|trary and adversari partye. And if he that is the second retayned know that any of his Felowes he retayned before hym, and arm|ed with his adversari partye, Then be that is seconde retayned, at the fyrste knowledge that be shall have thereof, shall be bounde to excuse hym toward his Maister, and leave that quarell.
XXXIV. Item that all the lycencis gyven to the Knyghtes of the said Ordre, that goo oute of the Realme for to seke and obtayne honor, and all certifications, or sendynge letters and writynges concernyng the said Order, rom hensforth, shall be sealled with one of the Seales of the said Ordre.
XXXV. Item it is agreed that if eny Knyght of the said Order, for his devocion, wyll dwell within the said Castell contynu|ally, There shall be ordend for hym a dwel|lyng place convenient, by th' assignment of the Soverayne, and he of his propre goods and at his costes and chargies shall provyde for hys lyveyng.
XXXVI. Item if any other Knyght, not beyng of the said Order, hathe any wyll to dwelle there for his devocion, there shall be ordened for hym a dwellyng place, after the wyll and pleasure of the said Soverayne, and with the consentement of the said Com|pany.
XXXVII. Item it is ordened, that yf any Knyght, or other parson, wylle gyve any Landes, heritage, or rentes, for to be parti|cipant of all the good oraysons and prayers that shall be said in the sayde place, also his name shall be Registred, and the Canons and pore Knyghts shall pray perpetually un|to God for hym, and also the said Deane, Warden, and Canons of the said College from hensforth shall not take any maner of charge upon the said College, withoute the advyse and consentment of the sayd Sove|rayne, or his Deputie, and the Felowship of the sayd Order, in presence, and by them concented and agreed in playne Chapter.
XXXVIII. Item for to have better know|ledge of the Knyghts that shall be of the said Order, the Soverayne of it willyth and ordeneth by the Willes and consentment of all the hole Company, that from hensforth, that every Knyght of the said Order shall have and were apertly and openly a Coller of golde about his necke, wayng thyrty oun|ces of Troy weyght and not above, the whiche Coller shall be made by pieces in fas|shion of Garters, in the myddes of which Garters shall be a double Rose, the one Rose of Red, and the other within White, and the other Rose White, and the other Rose within rede, and at the ende of the said Col|ler shall be put and fastned the Ymage of Saynt George. The whiche Coller the said Soverayn, his Successours, and amia|ble Companye of the said Order shall be bounde to were, and in especiall, in princi|pall and solemyne Feastes of the yere, and in other dayes of the yere shall be holden to were a small Chayne of Gold with the

Ymage of Saynt George dependyng at the ende of the said Chayne, excepte in tyme of Warre, sickenes, longe viage; Then it shall suffice hym to were alonely a lase of sylke with the said Image of Saynt George. And if the said Coller have any need of reparaci|on, it may be put in the handes of the Golde|smyth and workeman unto the tyme that it be repared, the whiche Coller allso may not be made more richer with stones or other thynges, reserving the said Ymage: The which may be garnished and enryched at the pleasure of the saide Knyghte: Also the said Coller may not be solde, engaged, alien|ed, nor gyven, for any nede, cause, or neces|sity whatsoever it be.



The Constitutions relating to the Officers of the Order. Lib. N. p. 232.

CAP. I.
HOrum primus erat Praelatus Ordines. Quisquis autem Praesul Wintoniensis, ac Southamptoniae Comes c. eo tempore fuerit, is  Praelatus esse debet. Qui cum praesens sit, de|nominationes electionum Equestrium apposit con|scribet, Et quod reliquum fuerit, ibi defungetur Officio. Id quod illo absente Cancellarius, De|canus, aut Scriba (quemadmodum est praeosten|sum) xplebit.
Quoties Supremo ipsi visum fuerit solennita|tom Divi Georgii servare Windesori, tenebi|tur  Praelatus simul adesse, ut Divina celebret. Quod si volens praetermiserit, viginti marcas e de caus Collegio persolvet, nisi rationabilem  justam absentiam,  Supremo ac Sodalitio be|n probabilem causari posset, quae conferentur ad reparationes inibi faciendas.
Item Praelatus habitum superinduet, cujus ex|terior facies subrubri coloris  serico villoso, in|terior autem albi serici, quod Taffeta vocant, circumpositis (ut Supremo videbitur) sumptuo|sis insignibus  scuto super humerum, quod Or|dinis intra praelustre subligar habebit insignia. Fibula vestimenti, quae de pectore propendebit, partim aurei fili, partim cerulei serici debet esse.
Eodem habitu tenebitur uti singulis vigiliis festivisque diebus Divi Georgii, ubi mod liber extiterit. Alis item, ut dum celebre concilium, quod  Parliamentum, agitatur maxime, vel in aliis festivitatibus, ad libitum uti poterit. Qui propter honorem  Praelationem hujus Or|dinis summum inter Episcopos nostros ubiqu lo|cum vendicabit, Archiepiscopis duntaxa conce|dens, quibus sedium suarum praeeminentia con|stabit, ut tant magis honoretur, poterit idem Praelatus illustre Subligaculum suis semper in|signibus circumponere. Et quotis proceditur, poterit habitu praedicto tectus Supremum ante|cedere, Cancellarium Ordinis sibi sinistrum ha|bens. Habebit etiam intra Castrum nostrum Windesori sibi locum designatum ad manendum, quoties illuc accesserit. Cumque illuc advene|rit vel ad alium quemcun locum ex jussu Su|premi, ut Divi Georgii festivitatem observet, vel ut acta conscribat, aliav quaecun peragat, quae spectabunt ad hunc Ordinem, intra Atrium nostrum pro se sibi ministrantibus habebit ad victum, quae per nostrum praeceptum Comites in Aula residentes habere solent.


CAP. II.
Officium Cancellarii, quoniam praenobile est, ac permagnae Curae, exigitur in id administran|dum vir praeclari nominis, tanto dignus honore. Quamobrem Supremus vult  instituit, quod nemo provehatur ad id Officium, nisi vel Prae|latus Ecclesiae fuerit, velut Archiepiscopus, An|tistes, aut notabilis alioqui dignitatis: vel si vir laicus, Eques omnin non ignoti sanguinis, exper|tus, doctus,  bon fam notus. Ad hunc spe|ctabit Concilii suscipiendi manifestatio, ac de|claratio, sub e form quam Supremus So|dales Ordinis praeconceperint, omni tempore quo conveniet aut oportebit, ad honorem, utilitatem, at incrementum ejusdem Ordinis. Idem quo|tannis solennitate Divi Georgii in Concilio pro|ponet, at enarrabit acta egregia laud digna ipsorum Equitum hujus Ordinis, quotquot ita me|riti sunt: qui ver contr commeruerunt  illo|rum quo probra, siqua fuerint, recensebit, t Scriba tant facilis ea sub scriptis redigat in memoriam nunquam desituram. Habebit hic ita, scilicet cum Praelato intra Castrum nostrum Windesori mansionem, scilicet habitum,  om|nin similem victs assignationem. Cancella|rius apud se commune Sigillum Ordinis, cum Signaculo, servabit, ad Statuta, Commissiones, facultates, certificationes, mandata, suffragio|rum literas, alias causas ad praedictum Ordi|nem attinentes, suo quasque tempore consignandas. Si ver, legitimam ac rationabilem causam ba|bens, ultra decem milliaria recesserit  Supremo, relinquet interim ea Sigilla, prout Supremus assignabit in custodi unius  Sodalibus, qui com|morabitur in Aul cum Supremo. Habebit hic ipse Cancellarius annuum stipendium, Officii sui nomine, Centum libras Legalis Monetae Angliae, vel in feodis, Officiis, aliisv promotionibus tan|tundem, hiis de quibus ante diximus nihil hic ob|stantibus.


CAP. III.
Erit insupr hujus Ordinis unus Scriba, qui si vir Ecclesiasticus extiterit, Literatus erit, 

Theologiae vel alterius Iuris, Cannici aut Ci|vilis Professor, habens itaqu dignitatem ali|quam in Ecclesia Cathedrali, quem Supremus etiam ad Prebendam intra Sacellum suum Windesori curabit sublimandum,  veluti de|cebit eo nomine promovebit. Si ver Secularis aut Laicus ipse fuerit, vir honestus atque insig|nis erit,  Eques, experientiae doctrinae nomi|ne commendatus. Qui stipendium habebit annu|um quinquaginta libras monetae legalis Angliae, el in feodis, Officiis, aut emolumentis aliis tan|tundem. Quoties item Eques aliquis in hunc Ordinem ascitus ad sedem suam introducatur, ab edem Equite, Scriba recipiet tredecem solidos cum quatuor denariis  habitumOpor|tebit autem hunc Scribam duos conficere Libel|los, sive Indices, aut potis Annales,  Parga|meno, in quibus Ordinationes  Statuta caete|rae caus spectantes ad Ordinem conscribentur. Quorum alter Windesori recondetur in Aerario, ubi perpetu manebit: alter ver in custodi Scribe, quem ubilibet Supremo, si quando poscat, sit ostensurus. Prior appellabitur Index Windesoriensis, psterior Aulae Registrum. Hu|jus intererit Electiones factas,  Electrum nomina, stratagemmata, res gestas,  acta no|tatu fid digna tm Supremi, qum Commi|litonum Ordinis, prout per seipsum su scru|tandi diligenti, vel per industriam Regis Ar|morum intelligere poterit,  habere comperta describere  redigere in memorim. Primits, ut singulis anuis accident, annotabit,  scriptis commendabit, q in eo quod proxim suscipietur concilio legentur Equitibus ibi congregatis, ut si quicquam correctionis aut emendationis indi|geat, ibi corrigatur, similitr iterum in altero concilio,  deind venust conscribenda curabit in praedictis libris aut annalibus ad perpetuam sui memoriam.


CAP. IV.
Hiis accedet Rex Armorum unus, qui Gar|terus Rex Armorum Angliae vocitabitur, quem Supremus Commilitones, ob dignitatem Or|dinis, virum generosi sanguinis, honesti nomi|nis insignia gerentem, intra regnum Angliae na|tum,  caeteris Armorum Officialibus, qui nobili Coronae Angliae subjecti sunt, superiorem esse vo|lunt. Habebit hic  Supremo stipendium an|nuum quadraginta libras monetae legalis An|gliae; praetere unusquis Sociorum pro sui sta|ts honore singulis annis donabit eidem, Dux, quatuor libras; Marchio quinque marcas; Co|mes, quatuor marcas; Baro, quadraginta soli|dos;  Eques Bachalaureus, viginti sex soli|dos atque octo denarios, ut tant honorificen|tis ad decus Ordinis vitam agat,  Officium administret. Quotis autem Creatio Principis, Ducis, Marchionis, Comitis, Vicecomitis, aut Baronis obtinget, idem Garterus vestes ejus vendicabit quibus utetur priusqum togam illius dignitatis  praeclari stats accipiat.
Ad eundem spectabit correctio Armorum atque insignium quorumcunque, quae usurpantur  ge|stantus injust authoritas insuper  potestas Arma bujusmodi atqu insignia concedendi tali|bus qui per Acta sortia ac laudabilia, virtu|tes  status, honores merebuntur juxta anti|quam consuetudinem, Literas Patentes super e re faciendi. Is ubique quando Supremus solenniter incedet, Esem ejus proximus antece|det, nemine intercedente; nisi forsan Constabu|larius Mareschallus, qui virgas illas ad Of|ficium suum attinentes ipsi gestabunt. Per eum quoque vel ab eo designatum juramentum mini|strabitur omnibus Armorum Officialibus, Supre|mo Subjectis, recepturum ob id quod consue|tum est.
Habebit itidem habitum Scribae similem,  Baronis Ferculum in Aul, cui post Decanum Sacelli nostri mensa ponetur,  ferculum ife|retur, caetera sui victius, ut mos fuit,  do|mum cubandi Windesori intra Castrum nostrum accepturus. Cumque solennitas Divi Georgii celebretur,  Supremus assit, idem Garterus portabit albam virgam, cujus ambo fines dean|rabuntur,  vexillum modicum insignium Or|dinis supra.
Quando Dominus etiam ingredietur Cubicu|lum nostri Parliamenti, ipse locum ei designabit juxt a dignitatis  clari stats honorem ex an|tiquo more recepturus, ob id uti Domino illi vi|sum fuerit. Et quotienscun, mittetur aut lega|bitur in Supremi negotiis, quinque Equs ha|bens recipiet pro laboribus accipiendis, singulis quibusque diebus decem solidos.
Idem Garterus, Rex Armorum, diligentr ac sedul perquiret acta fortia ac fortunata prae|clar gesta tm Supremi, qum Commilito|num hujus Ordinis, quae fidelitr ac ver ref|ret Scribae, quatinus in seripta per um aeter|nm memoriam opportun redigi possent.
Hic Garterus etim perferet, aut curabit per|ferendas omnes Literas, quae spectabunt ad Con|fratres Sodales hujus Ordinis:  significa|tum ibit Supremo vel Scribae mortem cujuslt Equitis ijtius Ordinis, ut literae suffragiorum conficiantur ac deportentur, quemadmodum opor|tet, deferet  deferri faciet Electiones eorum qui nominati fuerint,  ipsorum responsa repor|tabit. Deniqu faciet, aut sieri procurabit, quicquid spectans ad hunc Ordinem Supremus vel Praelatus, aut Cancellarius (qui praecipui sunt Officiales) faciendum injunxerit.


CAP. V.
Postrem debet esse unus Hostiarius, quem Supremus ac Commilitones volunt esse genero|sum, Armis ac Sanguine clarum,  in ditione ipsius Supremi progenitum, is qui pro dignitate Ordinis atque honre omnium Hostiariorum ip|sius Regni summus erit. Habebit ita curam  custodiam  custodiae praeheminentiam pene|tralium nostrorum, Domus ubi Concilium agi|tatur,  omnium hostiorum ubi concilium ini|bitur, tm in sublimi Curi quae Parliamentum appellitatur, qum in quibusque locis aliis, Cu|jus Annuum stipendium erit Triginta Librarum. Qud si jussu Supremi ac Commilitonum, quem bujus Ordinis Equitem nigr virg

tetegerit,  reum egerit sceleris admiss, propter quod sit abdieandus ab ho Ordine, quinque li|bras eo facto percipiet: si levioris offensae caus quem admonuerit, ex praecepto Regis  Concilii, vendicabit ab eodem c de caus viginti solidos. Et quandocunque quis Electus in sedem introdu|citur, decem solidos accipiet; intra Castrum no|strum Windesori cubandi lcum sibi selectum, ejusdem Castri  duorum saltuum coadjacentium custodiam habebit. Habebit etiam habitum Sribae Garteri Regis Armorum, scilicet, fer|cula Baronum  reliquum victum attinentem in Aul. Qui si nn fuerit Eques in ingressu, tum fieri debet. Vbicunque ver singulis annis Su|premus extiterit in Festo Divi Georgii, die vel festivitate sequente, ante eundem Supremum aut Deputatum, virgam nigellam aut ipse deferet, vel alius ab eo sufficientr assignatus. Et supra virgam Leo stabit, Anglorum insigne. Virga nimirum loco clavae gestabitur, cujus  autho|ritatem habebit, hiis mod deserviens qui deli|querint  in Ordinationes ac Statuta pecc|rint.
Hii tres hujus Ordinis Officiales, Scriba vi|delicet, Garterus Rex Armorum, Hostiari|us ab atr virg nuncupatus, ipsi cum suis ta|rebus qum ministris in suis Officiis permanentes, sub perpetu Supremi protectione ac propugna|culo secur durabunt. Vnde si quaevis injuria seu violentia ipsis inferatur, vel ab eis qui Su|premo subjecti sunt, vel exteris, quotis cau|sas suas arbitrio Supremi submittent, ipse cum Sodalibus exhibebit eis justitiam, aut exhiben|dam ex aequo  congruo procurabit. Si ver pars adversae causam suam Supremo submittere detrectabit, ipse cum Commilitonibus eum er|ga Officiales hos animum habebit, ut ipsorum causam quoad justum at aequum erit cum debito favore tueri velit.
Intra Chorum praedicti Sacelli, dum solen|nia peraguntur, ante Sedem Regiam praetere statuentur Sedilia duo, unum ante alterum, in quorum altero sedebunt Praelatus  Cancellari|us Ordinis; in altero, Scriba, Rex Armorum Hostiarius.



The Names of the first Founders, and other Knights-Companions, who succeeded in their Stalls, after the ancient manner; as they are exemplified in two TABLES remaining in the Chapter-house at Windesor.

TAB. I.

1. Le tres noble Roy Edward tiers,  premier Fondeur.
APres luy vint le Roy Richard, filz, Ed|warde le Prince de Galles. Apres luy int le tres-noble Roy Henry, filz de Johan Duc de Lancastre. Apres luy vint le noble Prince  vaillant, le Roy Henry 5. Heritier  Regent de France,  Conquereur de Normandie. Apres luy vint son filz Henry de Windesore le 6. cour|ronn  Paris Roy de France. Apres luy  en son temps, entra en son droit tiltre, le tres noble Roy Edward 4. la fleur de Chivallerie. [Note that all put within Vneus's at the end of each Stall, is added in the Ta|bles by a later hand. Apres luy vint le Roy Richard le 3. Apres luy vint le tres-noble Roy Henry le 7.]


2. Le Duc de Lancastre, Henry,  Premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Seigneur Despenser, Ed|ward; Apres luy vint le Conte de Stafford, Hugh; Apres luy vint Monseur Nichol Sarnes|feld; Apres luy vint Monsieur William D'arun|dell; Apres luy vint le Roy de Portugal, Jehan; Apres luy vint le Roy de Portugall Edward, Apres luy vint le Duc de Gloucestre, Humfrey; Apres luy vint le Roy de Portugall, Alfons' [Apres luy vint son Filz le Roy de Portugall.]


3. Le Captou de Buch, Piere,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Conte de Derby, qui apres fuit Roy D'angleterre Henry le 4. Apres luy vint Messire Philipp la Vache. Apres luy vint Messire Gilbert Sire le Talbot. Apres luy vint Messire Jehan Grey. Apres luy vint le Conte Mareschalle Jehan. Apres luy vint le Duk D'York, Richard. Apres luy vint le Conte de Warwick, Richard. [Apres luy vint le Noble Prince Charlois Duc de Burgoyne. Apres luy vint le Roy Don Ferdinando le la grant Ce|cile  de Naples, par l' ordonnance du Sove|rein  la Compagnie.]


4. Le Conte de Saresbury William,  pre|mier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Conte d' Arundell, Tho|mas. Apres luy vint le Conte de Huntington, qui apres fut fait Duc D'Excestre. Apres luy vint le Duc de Norfolk, Jehan. Apres luy vint le Conte de Worcestre, Jehan, Grant Conestable D'Angleterre. Apres luy vint le Duc de Norfolk Iehan. [Apres luy vint le Marquis Dorset, Thomas, tilz de la Royne Elizabeth.]



5. Monsieur Jehan de Lise,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Messire Richard la Vache; Apres luy vint Messire Edward, Sire de Powys. Apres luy vint Her Tangke Clux. Apres luy vint Messire le Duc de Gloucesre Freire au Roy Edward quart. [Apres luy vint le Count de Ox. Jehan.]


6. Monsieur Johan Beauchampe,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Duc le Clarence, Leonel-Apres luy vint le Seire de Basset, Rauf. Apres luy vint le Duc de Gheldren Will. Apres luy vint le Conte de Stafford. Apres luy vint le Conte de Kent, Edmund. Apres luy Messire Robert Doumfravile. Apres luy vint le Conte de Sarisbury Richard. Apres luy vint Monsi|eur de Montague, Jehan, apres Conte de Nor|thumberland. [Apres luy vint le Counte D'A|rundell William.]


7. Monsieur Hugh Courtenay,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Conte de Northamton, Wil|liam. Apres luy le Duc de Eborum, Conte de Cantebrigie, Edmund. Apres luy vint Monsieur Jehan, filz du Roy Henry 4. Duc de Bethford, Regent de France. Apres luy vint Monsieur Je|han Grey, de Ruthyn. Apres luy vint le Conte de Somerset, Jehan, apres Duc de Somerset. Apres luy vint Dom. Alver Dalmadaa Conte D'everence, Capitaine de Portugal. Apres luy vint le Viscount Bourschier, Henry, apres Conte D'Essex. [Apres luy vint Count de Arun|dell Thomas.]


8. Monsieur Johan Grey,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Wautier Manny. Apres luy vint Monsieur Guichard D'anguillem. Apres luy vint le Duc de Gloucestre, Counte de Buckingham, Thomas. Apres luy vint le Conte Palatyn Duc de Bavayre, Robert. Apres luy vint le Roy D'anmarch. Apres luy vint Messire Antony de Wideville, Sieur de Scales  de Neucelles, freire de la Royne Elizabeth. [Apres luy Messire Jehan Conyers Baneret. Apres luy le Conte de Surry Thomas.]


9. Monsieur Miles de Stapelton,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Conte de Hereford, Hum|frey. Apres luy vint le Conte de Warwick, le filz Thomas. Apres luy vint Monsieur Thomas Erpengham. Apres luy vint le Conte de Stafford, Humfray, apres Duc de Buckingham. Apres luy vint Monsieur de Scroup, Johan.


10. Monsieur Hugh de Wrotellegh,  pre|mier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Thomas de Felton Apres luy vint le Sire de Willoughby, Wil|liam. Apres luy vint Monsieur William Ha|rington. Apres luy vint Messire Rauf Boteller, Seigneur de Sudley. [Apres luy vint Messire Thomas Seigueur Mautravers.]


11. Monsieur Jehan Chaundos,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Guy de Briene. A|pres luy vint le Conte de Ostervant, William, qui apres fuit remu  l'autre part  lestal d Duc de Bretaigne, Jehan. Apres luy vint Mon|sieur Humfry, filz du Roy, Henry Duc de Glou|cestre, qui apres fut remu  Pestal du Roy de Portugall, Edward Jehan. Apres luy vint le Capitan de la Bouche, Conte de Longeville. A|pres luy vint Monsieur Jhan Sire a Dudley. Apres luy Seigneur William Stanley. [Apres luy le Count de Northumberland Henry. Apres luy le Conte de Shrewesbury George.]


12. Monsieur Otes Holand,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Frank van Halle. Apres luy vint Messire William Beauchamp. Apres luy vint le Seigneur de Morley, Thomas. Apres luy vint le Sire de Willoughby, Robert. [Apres luy vint Messire Walter Blount, Sire de Mount|joye. Apres luy vint le Conte de Urbyne.]


13. Monsieur Sanchete D' abrichecourt,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur William Fitz Waryn. Apres ly vint le Sire Latimer, William. Apres luy vint Monsieur Symond de Burley. Apres luy vint Monsieur Jehan Devros. Apres luy vint Monsieur de Beaumont Jehan. Apres luy vint le Conte de Somerset, Jehan. Apres luy vint Monsieur Jehan de Cornvaile. Apres luy vint Monsieur Thomas Hoo. Apres luy vint le Sire de Stanley, Thomas. Apres luy vint Mes|sire Johan Asteley.



TAB. II.

1. Le Prince Edward,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint son filz Richard, Prince de Gales. Apres luy vint Jehan Duc de Lanca|stre, par l' ordonnance du Soverain  la Com|pagnie. Apres luy vint Monsieur Philipp la Vache, qui apres fut rem  l' estal du Conte Derby, par le Soverain  la Compagnie. Apres luy vint le Prince Henry, filz du Roy Henry. Apres luy vint Messire Jehan D'abrichecourt. Apres luy vint Sigismund, Empereur. Apres luy vint le Prince Edward, filz du Roy Edward le quart. [Apres luy vint le primier filz du tres-noble Roy Henry le 7.]



2. Le Conte de Warwick, Thomas,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Conte de Pembroke, Jehan. Apres luy vint le Duc de Bretaign, Jehan. Apres luy vint le Duc de Holand. Apres luy vint Mon|sieur Johan Robessart. Apres luy vint George Duc de Clarence, freire puisn du Roy Ed|ward 4. [Apres luy le Duc de Bedford, Jasper. Apres luy le Roy de Grande Cecile, Alphons.]


3. Le Conte de Stafford Rauf,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Alain Bukeshull. A|pres luy vint Monsieur Brian de Stapelton. Apres luy vint Monsieur William Scroop. Apres luy vint le Conte de Westmerland, Rauf. Apres luy vint Monsieur Johan de Fastolf. Apres luy vint le Roy Dom de Fernando de la grante Cecile  de Naples, qui apres fit remu  l'estal du noble Prince Charlois Duc de Bourgonge. [Apres luy vint le Duc de Ferrare, Hercules.]


4. Le Conte de March Roger,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Thomas Ufford. Apres luy vint Monsieur Richard Pembruge. Apres luy vint le Conte de Suffolk, William. Apres luy vint Monsieur Richard de Burlie. A|pres luy Monsieur Edward, filz, de Duc de Yorke. Apres luy vint le Conte de Oxenford, Richard. Apres luy vint Monsieur Jehan Blount. Apres luy vint Monsieur William Philippe, Seig|neur de Bardolf. Apres luy vint Messire Jehan Beauchamp. [Apres luy vint le Duc D' Yorke Richard, filz du Roy Edward le quart. Apres luy le Duc de Bokyngham.]


5. Monsieur Bartholomew Bourgherst,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Sire de Neufville, Jehan. Apres luy vint Monsieur Pierre Courtenay. Apres luy vint le Sire Lovell Johan. Apres luy vint le Sire Fitzhugh Henry. Apres luy vint le Sire de Scalles, Thomas. Apres luy vint Monsieur de Hasting, William. [Apres luy le Conte de Derby Sire de Stanley Thomas.]


6. Monsieur de Mohun,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Conte de Kent, Thomas. A|pres luy vint le Conte de Dorset, Thomas, Duc de Excestre. Apres luy vint Dom Petre filz du Roy de Portugall, Duc de Quymbre. Apres luy vint Johan Bourscher. Sire de Berneres. [Apres luy vint Duc de Bukyngham Henry. Apres luy le Sire de Strange, George.]


7. Monsieur Thomas Hollande,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Duc de Lancastre, Jehan, qui apres fut remu  l'estal du Prince Richard, par le Soverain  la Compagnie: Et en son lien vint Messire Johan de Burle. Apres luy vint Monsieur Thomas Moubray, Conte de Notyng|ham. Apres luy vint Thomas de Lancastre filz an Roy Henry 4. Apres luy vint le Conte de Suf|folke William del Pool, apres Marquis  Duc de Suffolke. [Apres luy vint son filz Jehan Duc de Suffolke. Apres luy le Sire de Dynham, John.]


8. Monsieur Richard Fitz Symond,  pre|mier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Conte de Suffolk, Robert. Apres luy vint Monsieur Robert Namurs. Apres luy vint Monsieur Jehan Bourgscher. Apres luy vint Monsieur Thomas Rammiston. Apres luy vint Monsieur Sire Burnell. Apres luy vint Mon|sieur Lowes Robessart Sire de Bourgscher. A|pres luy vint le Conte Jehan D'arundelle. Apres luy vint le Conte de Morteigne, Edmund, qui apres fut Marquis de Dorset,  Duc de Somer|set. Apres luy vint Monsieur de Herbert, Wil|liam. [Apres luy vint Jehan de Buckyngham Conte de Wiltshire. Apres luy vint le Conte de Northumberland, Henry. Apres luy le Vis|count Lovell Frauncois. Apres luy Messire Ed|ward VVodevile. Apres luy le Viscount VVel|lis, Jehan.]


9. Monsieur Thomas Wale,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Reynard de Cobeham. Apres luy vint Monsieur Jehan Sully. Apres luy vint le Conte de Warrewyk Richard. Apres luy vint le Sire de Faucunberge, apres Conte de Kente. Apres luy vint le Conte de Douglas. [A|pres luy vint le Sire de Broke, Robert.]


10. Monsieur Neel Loringee  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Conte D'Arundell, Richard. Apres luy vint Sire de Grey. Apres luy vint Monsieur Hugh Stafford, Sire de Bourgscher. Apres luy vint le Sire de Hungerford, Wauter. Apres luy vint le Sire de Riviers, Richard, apres Conte de Riviers,  Pier de Roigne Eliz. Apres luy vint Messire Jehan le Seigneur Howard. [A|pres luy Messire Thomas de Borough. Apres luy Messire Charles Somerset Baneret.]


11. Monsieur James D'audele,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Thomas Grantson. Apres luy vint Monsieur de Roos. Apres luy vint le Sire Camus, Thomas. Apres luy vint Monsieur Jehan Sire de Clifford. Apres luy vint le Sire de Talbot, Johan, apres Conte de Che|rosbery. Apres luy vint son filz, Johan Conte de Cherovsbury. Apres luy vint le Sire de Wen|loke. Apres luy vint Messire, William Parr. [Apres luy Messire Richard Dunstall. Apres luy Messire Edw. Poynings.]



12. Monsieur Henry Em,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Thomas Ughtrede. Apres luy vint le Conte de Bethford. Apres luy vint Monsieur Lewis Clifford. Apres luy vint Mnsieur Johan Stanley. Apres luy vint le Conte de Sarisbury, Thomas. Apres luy vint Monsieur Johan de Radcliff. Apres luy vint le Viscount de Beaumont, Jehan. Apres luy vint Monsieur Robert Harecourt. [Apres luy vint Monsieur Walter Deveros Sire de Ferres. Apres luy vint Monsieur Johan Cheny Baneret.]


13. Monsieur Walter Pavely,  premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Thomas Banestre. Apres luy vin Monsieur Sandich de Trane. A|pres luy vint Monsieur Symund Felbrigger. Apres luy vint Henry filz du Roy de Portin|gall, Duc de Vison. Apres luy vint le Sire de Duras. Apres luy vint Messire Thomas Mont|gomery. [Apres luy vint Messire Gylbert Tal|bot Baneret.]





NUMBER I. King Edward the Third's Letters Patent for founding St. George's Chappel in Windesor Castle. Pat. an. 22. E. 3. par. 2. m. 6.
EDwardus,c. Vniversis praesentes Literas inspecturis, salutem. Magnificenciam decet Regiam in piis semper actibus delectari, ut cum ante tribunal steterit summi Regis, apud quem non est acceptio personarum, sed unusquisque prout gessit in corpore recipiet, sive bonum fuerit sive malum, inter bonos  dextris assistere valeat  non piger vel inutilis cum reprobis judi|cari. Nos quidem varia vitae nostrae studia  ex|ilia merita nostra cum amaritudine recolentes so|licit, divin nobis praestita beneficia, gratias  honores, quibus prae caeteris misericorditr Al|tissimus nos praevenit, merit contemplantes de bonis nobis  Deo collatis  supra modum multo|ciens inanitr dispensatis gravitr suspiramus, nec aliud nobis restat, nisi ad Christrum  ma|trem ejus Virginem gloriosam, quae nobis nun|quam patrocinari destitit, sed in variis periculis constitutos suis beatis precibus protexit hactenus,  adjuvit felicitr, convertere totalitr mentem nostram,  sibi pro gratiis, gratias reddere  pro delictis veniam postulare. Et quia bona est negotiatio per quam transitoria declinantur  aeterna faelici commercio subrogantur, Capellam quandam aptae pulchritudinis octo Canonicorum secularium in Castro nostro de Wyndesore in qu Aqu sacri Baptismatis abluti fuimus situatam, in honore Beati Edwardi Confessoris per progeni|tores nostros nobiliter inchoatam, quibus pro ip|sorum sustentatione quandam summam pecuniae pro eorum voluntate  de proprio thesauro in Elemosinam tribuerunt, in honorem Omnipotentis Dei,  suae Genitricis Mariae Virginis gloriosae, Sanctorum Georgii Martyris  Edwardi Con|fessoris, nostris Regiis sumptibus fecimus consum|mari. Summis desideriis affectantes  efficacem operam adhibentes, ut praedicti Canonici inibi Domino servituri tam reddituum incremento, quam aliorum Canonicorum  Ministrorum ac servientium numero augeantur; Et ut in Capella praedicta cultu latiori Divini Nominis gloria ex|altetur, praedictis oct Canonicis unum Custodem, praesidentem eisdem,  quindecim adhuc alios Canonicos, viginti  quatuor Milites pauperes, de se impotentes, seu vergentes ad inopiam,  de bonis dictae Capellae perpetu sustentandos,  alios dictae Capellae Ministros sub ipsius Custodis imperio Christa perpetu famulantes superaddere,  ibidem tam Canonicos  Milites quam alios dictae Capellae Ministros ut praemittitur recipi fa|ere dignum ducimus, firmitr statuimus,  inviolabitr ordinamus,  auctorite nostr Re|gi, quantum in nobis est, perpetu stabilimus. Vo|lentes quod dicti Canonici  Ministri divina Of|fiia celebrent pro nobis,  progenitoribus,  suc|cessoribus nostris, in partem satisfactionis eorum de quibus in extremo judicio rationem erimus red|dituri, celebraturi imperpetuum secundum for|mam Ordinationis nostrae ind plenis faciendae, quibus jura patronatus  advocationes Ecclesia|rum de Wyrardesbury Lincolniae, Southtanton, Exon,  Uttoxhatre Coventriae  Lichfeldiae Diocesis, quas nuper acquisivimus ex hc caus, pro nobis  haeredibus nostris dedimus  conces|simus, damus  concedimus. Habend'  tenend' ipsis  successoribus suis in liberam, puram,  perpetuam Elemosinam ab omni exactione secula|ri, liberos, penitos  quietos imperpetuum. Con|cessimus etiam eisdem, pro nobis,  haeredibus nostris,  licentiam dedimus, quod iidem Custos  Canonici dictas Ecclesias appropriare,  eas sie appropriatas in proprios usus tenere possent, sibi  successoribus suis imperpetuum. Statuto de terris  tenementis ad manum mortuam non ponendis, edito non obstante. Volumus etiam dictis Cu|stodi,  Canonicis, Militibus  aliis dictae Ca|pellae Ministris inibi servitris tantum de the|sauro nostro Annis singulis elargiri, quod, cum Emolumento de praedictis Ecclesiis proveniente, ad eorum victum  supportationem onerum sibi in|cumbentium juxta condecentiam stats sui inte|rim videbitur sufficiens,  honestum quous de bonis immobilibus, terris, beneficiis seu redditi|bus ad sufficientiam congruam  honorem no|strum, us ad summam mille librarum annua|tim per nos contigerit provideri. Quae omni promittimus  pollicemur pro nobis  haeredi|bus nostris nos efficacitr impleturos. In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Teste meipso apud Westmonasterium sexto die Augusti, Anno Regni nostri Angliae vi|cesuno secundo, Regni ver nostri Franciae nono.


N. II. A Bull impowring the Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of Winchester to Institute the Colledge of Windesor. Ex ipso Autogr. in Aerar. Colleg. Windesor.
CLemens Episcopus Servus servorum Dei, ve|nerabilibus fratribus Archiepiscopo Can|tuariensi  Episcopo Wintoniensi, salutem  Apostolicam benedictionem. Eximiae devotionis affectus, quem charissimus in Christo Filius noster Edwardus Rex Angliae illustris, ad nos  Ro|manam Ecclesiam gerit, promeretur, ut petitio|nibus ejus, quantm cum Deo possumus, in his praesertim quae Divini cults augmentum  ani|marum salutem respiciunt, favorabilitr annua|mus. Petitio siquidem pro parte dicti Regis, no|bis nuper exhibita continebat, quod ipse Rx Zelo piae devotionis accensus, cupiens terrena in coelestia,  transitoria in aeterna faelici commercio commutare, in Capell Castri. de Windesore ejusdem Regis, Sarisburiensis doiceseos, fundat

d andem Beatae Mariae Virginis  S. Georgii martyris ac Edwardi Regis  Confessoris bono|rem,  divini cults augmentum, ac pro su,  aliorum fidelium animarum salute, unum Collegium Canonicorum, Presbyterorum, Cleri|corum, nec non Militum Regni Angliae, ad inopi|am vergentium, ac Ministrorum qui in edem Capell perpetu Domino famulentur;  cer|tum numerum ipsorum ordinare  canonic fun|dare, ac de bois suis propriis sufficienter dota|re proponit. Quare pro parte ipsius Regis, fuit nobis humiliter supplicatum, ut vobis ordinandi ac statuendi, Authoritate nostr hujusmodi Colle|gium,  alia ad hoc pertinentia, ac etiam oppor|tunam facultatem de benignitate Apostolic con|cedere dignaremur. Nos ita ipsius Regis pi|um in hac parte propositum in Domino commen|dantes, ac plenam de vestr circumspectione in Domino fiduciam obtinentes, hujusmodi dicti Re|gis supplicationibus inclinati, ordinandi, ac statuendi,  deputandi, hc vice, authoritate Apostolic, in dict Capell, per dictum Regem, dote praedict pris ut praemittitur assignat, prout vobis hoc secundum Deum expedire videbi|tur, super quo vestram conscientiam, oneramus, certum numerum Canonicorum, Presbyterorum, Clericorum, Militum ac Ministrorum praedictorum inibi, ut praemittitur, Domino famulantium perpe|tu observandum; De quibus quidem Canonicis seu Presbyteris unus per vos authoritate edem deputetur qui Custos eorum perpetu nuncupetur, eisque inibi praesideat; alios etiam Canonicos, Presbyteros, ac Clericos, Milites,  Ministros ejusdem Collegii  Capellae, ac singulos ipsorum, ac bona eorundem regat pariter  gubernet; sta|tuendi  ordinandi authoritate edem Ordina|tiones congruas  honestas juxta quas Custos, Ca|nonici, Presbyteri Clerici, Milites,  Ministri Collegii praedicti  ipsorum singuli vivere debe|ant, eaque teneantur perpetu firmiter observare, Parochialis Ecclesiae  ujuslibet altrius in prae|missis omnibus, nec non patronats Cannicorum, Presbyterorum, Clericorum, Militum  Mini|strorum, ac Capellae praedictae, postquam ipsi de|putati  ordinati inibi fuerint ut praefertur, ei|dem Regi ejus haeredibus  successoribus, juri|bus semper salvis ac perpetu reservatis quibus|cun Apostolicis statutis,  consuetudinibus con|trariis nequaquam obstantibus; vobis  cuili|bet vestrm authoritate praedict, de scili grati, plenam  liberam concedimus faulta|tem. Dat. Avinionae pridie Kalendas Decem|bris Pontificats nostri anno nono.


N. III. A Bull exempting the Colledge of Winde|sor from the Jurisdiction of Arch-Bishops, c. Ex ipso Autogr. ibidem.
CLemens Episcopus servus servorum Dei ve|nerabilibus fratribus Archiepiscopo Can|tuariensi  Episcopo Wyntoniensi salutem  A|postolicam benedictionem. Ad ea libenter inten|dimus per quae personae Ecclesiasticae liberis in tranquillitate pacis valeant Domino famulari. Nuper siquidem vobis ad charissimi in Christo filii nostri Edwardi Regis Angliae illustris, suppli|cationis instantiam ordinandi  statuendi au|thoritate Apostolic in Capell Regis eusdem in Castro de Wyndesore Sarum Dioceseos fundat Collegium  certum numerum Canonicorum, Presbyterorum, Clericorum, Militum, ad inopiam vergentium  Ministrorum inibi Domino perpe|tu famulantiu, quorum unus eis praefideat, qui Custos perpetu nuncupetur, nec non ordinatio|nes congruas  honestas, juxta quas Collegium, Custos, Canonici, Presbyteri, Clerici, Milites  Ministri praedicti vivere debeant faciendi, suffici|enti dote per dictum Regem de bonis propriis cis|dem Capellae  Collegio ad vestrum seu vestrm alterius arbitrium primits assignat, plenam  liberam per nostras certi tenoris literas concessi|mus facultatem prout in ipsis Literis plenis continetur. Nos ita volentes Capellam ac Collegium hujusmodi uberiori grati prosequi  favore ipsius Regis supplicationibs inclinati, eximendi perpetu authoritate dem, juxta mo|dificationem inferis annotatam, Capellam, Col|legium, Canonicos, Presbyteros, Clericos, Milites  Ministros praedictos, postquam ipsi in edem Capell recepti  sufficienter dotati fuerint, ut praefertur, ab omni ordinaria jurisdictione, Do|minio,  superioritate qulibet Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Archiadiaconorum  aliorum quorumlibet Iudicum  Officialium ipsorum Ecclesiasticorum, illa omnia ad jus  proprie|tatem beati Petri,  sub protectione Sedis Apo|stolicae  nostr suscipiendi  nihilominus con|cedendi hac vice authoritate praedict, ut Custos dictae Capellae qui pro tempore fuerit habeat per|petuo Iurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam in Capellam Collegium, Canonicos, Presbyteros, Clericos, Mi|lites,  Ministros praedictios,  eorum Successo|res,  singlos ipsorum  curam animarum eti|am eorundem constitutionibus Apostolicis  Sta|tutis ac consuetudinibus Provincialibus  Syno|dalibus  aliis quibuscun contrariis nequa|quam obstantibus, vobis  vestrm cuilibet auctoritate eadem plenam  liberam concedimus facultatem. Volumus autem qud Custos dictae Capellae qui pro tempore fuerit curam animarum praedictarum  loci Diosesano recipere teneatur,  in hiis quae ad ipsam curam pertinent perpetuo ei subditus sit, ad judicium ver perceptarum exemptionis  libertatis praedictarum. Volu|mus qud ipsi Custos  Collegium unam Marcam sterlingorum in Festo Sancti Georgii, in cujus honore dicta Capella fundata existit, Camerae Apostolicae annis singulis solvere teneantur. Nos enim irritum  inane decernimus, siquid contra praemissa  quoquam quvis autoritate scienter vel ignoranter contigerit attemptari. Datae Avinionae ii. Idus Februarii Pontisicats nostri Anno nono.



N. IV. A Patent for Institution of the Chan|cellor's Office. Pa de an. 15. E. 4. par. 3. m. 18.
Edward per la grace de Dieu, Roy D'angli|terre  de Fraunce  Signieur Hirlande;  touts ceulx qui ces presentes verront ou orront, Salutz. Come entre le Offices de nostre Ordre de la Gartier, Il ny ait null Office de Chauncel|leir per les primer Estatuts d' icelleux Ordre, le quell Office est bien licite  necessarie ou dit Or|dre; Volons  Ordonnons, que pur l' axaltation  bien dudit Ordre en Icelleux aura ung Officer nomm Chauncelleir. Et pur tant, que l' Office est grande,  de grande charge,  requiert avoir ung notable personne, volons, que null ne soit in Icelleux Office, s'il n'est in dignite ecclesiastique, Come Evesque. Considerans en oultre que la Chappell de Saint George en nostre Castell Royall de Windesore, ou le Ordre est found  essise,  establie dedens le diocesse de Salisbury, Et nous aians regart aux vertux, prudence  dili|gence de Reverent Pere en dieu, nostre chier,  bien ame Cousyn Rychart Beauchamp,  present Evesque du dit diocese de Salisbury, qui pur l' a|mour du dit ordre s'emplere de jour en jour va|quier  attendre a l'avauncemnt  bone profe|ction de la belle ouvre per nos commences au dit Castell de Windesore, sur la largeur de la dit Chappell avons Icelleux Reverent pere in Dieu, Ordonn  establie, Ordonnons  establissous pur la terme de sa vie Chauncellier de la dit nostre Ordre de la Gartier. Et apres sa vie, volons  or|donnons que ses Successours Evesques de Salisbury  touts jours aient  occupent le dit Office de Chauncellier tant ainsi, que cest nostre concession per l'advis de Confreres Chivalers du dit Ordre sit mis in execution sans prejudice de L'evesque de Win|chester ense que touchant le dit Ordre per les pri|mers Estatuts len en doibt appertenir. Et ausi, volons  ordonnons, que le dessusdit Chauncelleir  les Successours Evesques du dit Salisbury ouront en garde le Grand Seale de la dessusdit nostre Ordre de Gartier, du quell Seale, Ils ne poure|unt Seelere nulles Lettres, se non per le forme  la maniere, Come Il est Ordonn per les esta|tuts dut dit Ordre, ou per commaundement espe|ciall de nous  nous Successours Souverains du dit Ordre. In testmoigne de quel chose cestes no|stres Lettres avons nous faictes Patentes. Test|moigne nous mesmes  Westminster, x. jour Octo|bre, L'an de nostre Reigne quinsiesme.


N. V. The Letters for Institution of the Office of Garter. Ex Autogr. in Biblioth. Hatton.
A Tous ceulx qui ces presentes Lettrez ver|ront ou orront, Nous Humfrey Duc de Glocestre, Richard de Beauchamp, Conte de Warwick, Robert Seigneur de Willuby; Hen|ry Seigneur fitz Hugh. Loys de Robessart, Seigneur de Bourchier; Johan Cornwaylle. Thomas Herpingham, Gualtier Hungerford, Jehan de Robessart, Symon Felberg, Guillime Philippe, Hartoulx Clux, Chiviliers, partie du nombre de la Compaignie des Confreres de la No|ble Ordre du Jartier, fondee en l' onneur Dieu, nostre Dame,  de Monsieur Saint George, de|dens la sointe Chapelle du glorieux Saint dessus|dit assise ou Chastell Royal de Windesore, Sa|lute. Comme ja pieca tres-excellent Prince de Noble memoyrie le Roy Henry le quint nostre So|veraigne Seigneur, qui Dieu absoille, en son vi|vant par bonne  meure deliberation contem|plant  la Noble contemplacion de la dit Noble Ordre, come Soverain d'icelle, ou plaine Chapi|tre de la dite Compaigne  confraternit, per l'advys  consentement de tous les Confreres,  present Reverend Pere en dieu Henry, Evesque de Wincestre, Prelat de la dit Noble Ordre, voulut, ordonna,  constitua en accroyssant le nom de la dit Noble Ordre,  pour estre entendant au ser|vice de ladit Compaigne les confreres dicelle  de toute gentillesse ung servant d'armes. Lequel pour la dignit de le dit Ordre voult q'uil feust Soverain dedans l'Office d'armes, sur toutes les autres Servans d'Armes du tres-noble Royaume d'Angleterre. Et en confirmant la dit Ordre fut nomm Jartier, Roy D'armes des Angloys. A|pres le quel honorable propos fait  accomply, le dit Servant d'Armes nomm Jartier, Impose ou nom de la dit Ordre  pleu a nostre createur met|tre hors de ceste mortelle vie, nostre Soveraign Seigneur, avant que ordonnance de sustenance feust ordonn ad serviteur Jartier, pour la sup|portation de son petit estate. Quelles choses consi|derees,  veu l'entente de nostre dit Soveraigne Seigneur en L'ordre tant fructieuse  glorieuse en vertu  honneur, desirans pour honneur  Re|verence de la dit Noble Ordre au dit Serviteur estre pourveu de raisonable substance parentre nous, pour meulx maintenir son petit Estate, par|quoy Il en puisse plus honorablement soy contenir  l'onneur du service de la dit Noble Ordre, Iusques au temps que nostre dit Soveraigne Seig|neur le Roy Henry le vi. qui a present est Ieune, sit a parfait aage,  que par son noble advys  Conseil  celuy temps soyt plus largement or|donne de presente d'ung commun assentement nous dessusdiz, present le dit Reverend Pere en Dieu  Prelat de la dit Ordre, l'Evesque de Win|cestre, confyans es honneurs  gentillesses des compaignons confreres absens, on dedens le Cha|pitre de ladite confraternite, luy avons assign  ordonn a avoir  percevoir de chescun de nous annuelment,  chescune Feste de Saint George, certaine pension selon la fourme  ma|niere que cy apres sensuyt. Cest assavoir, du dit Reverend Pere en Dieu  Prelat de la dit Or|dre, la somme de v. marcz par ann;  de ches|cun Duc Compaignion  Confrere vi. Nobles par ann;  de chescun Baron ou Banneret Compaig|non  Confrere quatre Nobles;  de chescun Bachellier, Chivailler, Compaignion  Confrere deux Nobles par ann; Desquells Pensions et

Sommes dessusditz au commencement pour la premier annee  la faisans de cestes l'avons con|tente,  voulons,  luy accordons annuellement us  par la fourme  maniere que dit est, jusques au temps que nostre dit Souveraign Seig|neur comme dit est, soit a parfait aage, pryant  requerant tous  chescun les Compaignons Confreres de la dit Noble Ordre, absens au faict de ceste ordannance, que benignement  pour bonneur de la dit Ordre  cese vueillent consen|tir,  Icelle Ordonnance  louer, Et pour ceste presente annee, chescune selon est at luy destribuer selon la fourme dessusdit. Et pour aprovance que selon nostre intencion ces presentes procederont selon la voye de bonneur  gentillesse les avons saites seeller du seel de la dit Noble Ordre. Donne au licu de Wyndesore au Chapitre de la dit Confraternite, en la feste de Monsieur Saint George, Lan de Grace Mille CCCC. XXII.


N. VI. The Oath taken by the Prelate and Chancellor of the Order. Iuramentum Praelati Cancellarii Ordinis, quod Scriba eisdem exhibe|bit, in praesenti Supremi, aut ab eo Deputati. Ex Libro Nigro, p. 313.
JVrabis, quod sicubi sufficienter fueris praemo|nitus, ipsemet Conciliis celebrandis intere|ris; quod nullo duceris affectu, favore, vel odio, sed nec timore; quo minus in rebus omnibus quas tibi Supremus injunget, quod ver habet, sinceriter enarres.
Quod quoties praesens aderis, nominationes Equitum creandorum veracitr accipies;  ac|cepta, Supremo praesentabis.
Iurabis ita, qud cm ad consilium voceris,   secretis ibi fueris, ben fidelis, ac tacitur|nus eris, nec ulla perflues, si quid secret tenen|dum audias.
Quodqne servabis ac sustentabis honores hu|jus Ordinis, at omnium qui in eo sunt,  si datum fuerit ut possis, pro viribus augmen|tabis.
Si ver quid excogitatum aut intentatum contra fuerit, si qu resciscere potueris aut in|telligere, pro viribus obstabis,  revelatum, ubi oporteat,  vestigio curabis, ut suppetie quanto|cius ferantur, c.
Persimile Iuramentum Decani, quando admittitur,  Scribae erit, quorum id alter exhibebit alteri Sin alter abfuerit, Caduciator Re|gius eo fungetur munere.


N. VII. The Oath taken by Garter Principal King of Arms. Iuramentum Garteri praecipui Regis Armorum, Scriba id coram Supremo Sociis praesentibus exhibente. Ex lib. N. p. 314.
IVrabis quod obedies Supremo inprimis Deind caeteris hujus eminentissimi Ordinis Equitibus,  Officia in eo gerentibus, in hiis praesertim rebus quae ad te spectabunt, nec ra|tioni pugnabunt.
Et quoniam ad Consilium admissus tnqum  Secretis eris, Iurabis quod sidelis ac taciturnus eris, nihil illinc effutiens.
Iurabis itidem, quod si quis Equitum hujus illustrissimi Ordinis ab hc luce subtractus sue|rit, Supremo significatum id illico cuis,  mox aliis superviventibus.
Quod omnia fidei tuae curae, credit,  qu|cun mandata at internuncia ben a idelitr exequeris  perimplebis.
Iurabis itm, quod diligenter inquires de praeclaris ac nobilibus Actis uniuscujus, Equitis hujus insignissimi Ordinis,  intellecta Scribae veracitr xpon, ut ipse describens non minori diligentla reponat, dignae memoriae commen|det.
Deniqu, Iurabis in summ quod officium tuum fidelitr exercebis in omnibus, quae tu intererunt, sicut  tu Dei ac Sancti hujus Evan|gelium sperabis auxilium.


N. VIII. The Oath taken by the Gentleman|Vsher, named the Black-Rod. Ex MS. 4. penes Guil. le Neve. Eq. Aur. nuper Clarenc. R. Armor.
YOu being chosen and named by the King's Majesty to be Gentleman-Usher of the Black-Rod, shall promise and swear by the holy Evangelists, by you bodily touched, truly and faithfully to observe and keep all the points of the Statutes of the said Order, and every Arti|cle in them contained, as to you belongeth and ap|pertaineth, as God help you and this holy Evangely.


N. IX. A Warrant for providing and deliver|ing the Liveries of the Prelate and Chancellor. Ex ipso Autogr.
Charles R.
OVR Will and Pleasure is, that you pro|vide and deliver to the right reverend Fa|ther in God, the Bishop of Winchester, Paelate

of our Order of the Garter, and to Sir Richard Fanshaw Knight, our deputed Chancellor of our said Order, for their Livery for the same, and to each of them one Robe of Purple Velvet, con|taining 18 yards, and 10 yards of white Taffa|ty for lining thereof; as also two Scutcheons of St. George, within two Garters wrought with Letters and Purles of Damask, Gold, and Pearls, with Laces, Buttons, and Tassels of Pur|ple Silk and Venice Gold, together with a Purse of blue Velvet richly embroidered, according to the usual form, with Strings and Tassels to the later, for carrying the Seals of our said Order. And for so doing these our Letters shall be your sufficient discharge.
Given under the Signet of our said Order at our Court at Whitehall, the 19. day of February in the 13. year of our Reign 1660.

To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Councellor Edward Earl of Sandwich, Ma|ster of our Great Wardrobe, or in his absence to his Deputy.



X. A Warrant for providing and deliver|ing the Liveries of the Register, Gar|ter, and Black Rod. Ex ipso Autogr.
Charles R.
OVR Will and Pleasure is, that you forth|with prepare and deliver to our trusty and well-beloved Doctor Bruyn Reeves, Dean of Windesor, and Register of our Noble Order of the Garter, To our trusty and well-beloved Sir Edward Walker Knight, Garter, Principal King of Arms, And to our trusty and well-beloved Servant John Eyton Esquire, Vsher of the Black Rod, for their Liveries, and to every of them eighteen yards of Scarlet Satten for one Robe, and ten yards of white Taffata for lining of the same, with an Escotcheon of St. George, placed on the left shoulder, as also Laces, But|tons, and Tassels of Scarlet Silk, and Venice Gold: and for so doing, these shall be your suf|ficient Warrant and Discharge.
Given under our Signet of our said Order, at our Court at Whitehall the 20. day of February in the 13. Year of our Raign, 1660.

To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Councellor, Edward Earl of Sandwich Ma|ster of our Great Wardrobe, or in his absence to his Deputy.



XI. Letters Patent for assigning 1200 l. per annum to the use of the Order. Pat. 12. Car. 1. pars 25.
CArolus Dei grati Angliae, Scociae, Fran|ciae, Hiberniae Rex, Fidei Defensor, c. Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, salutem. Cm juxta Praedecessorum  Progeni|torum nostrorum Regalium morem, Clarissimi  Nobilissimi Ordinis Garterii Fundatores  ad honorem ejusdem Ordinis magis augendum  ampliandum, Annuitatem sive annualem pensionem Mille  ducentarum librarum per annum, ad usum  servicium dicti Ordinis, per manus Cancellarii nostri haeredum  successo|rum nostrorum dicti Ordinis pro tempore existente recipiendam,  de tempore in tempus, ut inferi|us in hiis praesentibus mentionatur expenden|dam, stabilire  assignare decrevimus. Sciatis, quod nos de grati nostr speciali, ac ex cert sci|enti  mero motu nostris, volumus, ac per prae|sentes, pro nobis, haeredibus,  successoribus no|stris declaramus, ordinamus, appunctuamus,  assignamus, qud praedicta Annuitas, annualis pensio, vel summa Mille  ducentarum libra|rum legalis monetae Angliae, modo  form infe|ris limitatis, dilecto  fideli nostro Thomae Rowe Militi, mod Cancellario dicti Ordinis Garterii nostri, nec non Cancellario ejusdem Or|dinis pro tempore existente annuatim soluta fue|rit de Custumis  Subsidiis aut monetis in loco Custumos, Subsidia  Impositiones recipi ap|punctuato vel appunctuando, de  pro omnibus  omnimodis vinis quibusun ad Portum Civi|tatis London de tempore in tempus adducendis, per manus Firmariorum sive Collectorum nostro|rum, baeredum  successorum nostrorum eorundem Custumorum, Subsidiorum, Monetarum,  Impo|sitionum pro tempore existente ad festa Annun|ciacionis beatae Mariae Virginis,  Sancti Mi|chaelis Archangeli, per equales portiones singu|lis annis imperpetuum solvenda: Prim solu|tione inde incipiend,  fiend ad festa An|nunciacionis beatae Mariae Virginis proxim se|quentia post datum presentium. Quare volu|mus, ac pro nobis, haeredibus  successoribus no|stris, firmiter praecipimus,  mandamus praefa|tis Firmariis,  Collectoribus nostris, haeredum  successorum nostrorum pro tempore existente, praedictorum Custumorum,  Subsidiorum, aut Monetae in loco Custumos, Subsidia,  Impositio|nes recipi appunctuato vel appunctuando, de aut pro omnibus  omnimodis praedictis vinis quibus|cun ad praedictum Portum Civitatis London, de tempore in tempus ut praefertur adducendis: Quod ipsi  eorum aliquis, vel aliqui de Red|ditibus, Reventionibus, Proficuis,  denario|rum summis de eisdem Custumis  Subsidiis  caeteris praemissis infra Portum Civitatis Lon|don emergentibus  provenientibus ac in mani|bus suis de tempore in tempus remanere contin|gentibus, praedictam annuitatem, sive annualem

pensionem, vel summam Mille  ducentarum li|brarum boite  legalis Monetae Angliae per an|num praesato Thomae Rowe Militi, Cancella|rio dicti Ordinis nostri Garterii mod existenti: nec nn Cancellario ejusdem Ordinis qui pro tempore fuerit pro  durante termino quo in eo|dem Officio Cancellarii dicti Ordinis praemanse|rit, in form praedict, solvent, aut solvi faci|cut, secundum veram intentionem barum litera|rum nostrarum patentium, abs ulteriori war|ranto  nabis, baeredibus, vel successorius nostris, in e parte procurando, aut obtinendo. Et bae Literae nostrae Patentes, vel Irrotulamentum ea|rundem, erunt amuatim,  de tempore in tem|pus, tam prefatis Firmariis  Collectoribus quam omnibus aliis Officiariis,  Ministris no|stris, haeredum vel successorum nostrorum, quibus pertinebit, sufficiens Warrantum  exoneratio in hc parte. Et ulterius volumus, ac per praesen|tes, pro nobis, haeredibus  successaribus nostris, firmiter injungendo, praecipimus  mandamus t Thesaurario, Cancellario, Sub-Thesaurario  Baronibus Saccarii nostri, baeredum  suc|cessorum nostrorum qum omnibus aliis Officia|riis  Ministris nostris haeredum  successorum nostrorum ejusdem Scaccarii pro tempore exi|stente, Quod ipsi,  corum quilibet, super solam demonstrati harum literarum nostrarum pa|tentium, vel Irrotulamenti earundem, plenam, Integram, debitm allocationem,  exonera|tionem manifestam de omnibus  singulis dena|riorum summis, quae praedicti Firmarii vel Col|lectores nostri haeredum vel successorum nostrorum praedictorum Custumorum  Subsidiorum ac cae|terorum praemissorum, praefato Thomae Rowe modo Cancellario dicti Ordinis Garterii, n non Cancellario ejusdem Ordinis qui pro tempore fuerit, scundum veram intentionem praesentium aliquo tempore imposterum solvent, eisdem Fir|mariis,  Collectoribus  eorum cuilibet re|spective, pro tempore existente, super Compot sua in Scaccario nostro, haeredum, vel successorum ostrorum vel alibi reddenda facient,  de tem|pore in tempus fieri causabunt; Et hae literae n|strae patentes, vel irrotulamentum carundem erunt, tm praesato Thesaurario, Cancellario, Sub-thesaurario  Baronibus Scaccarii nostri praedicti, qum omnibus aliis Officiariis  Mi|nistris nostris, haeredum  successorum nostrorum ejusdem Scaccarii pro tempore existente, suffici|ens Warrantum  exoneratio in hc parte. Ac insuper volumus, ac per praesentes, intentiouem  beneplacitum nostrum, pro nobis, haeredibus,  successoribus nostris, declaramus: Quod prae|fatus Thomas Rowe, mod Cancellarius prae|dicti Ordinis Garterii nostri, nec nn Cancella|rius dicti Ordinis qui imposterum pro tempore fuerit, praedictam annuitatem sive annualem pen|sionem vel summam Mille  ducentarum libra|rum per annum impendet,  de tempore in tem|pus impendi faciet  causabit aed annualia  Ordinaria fod, pensiones  solutiones quibus|dam personis solubilia,  solvenda, juxta Con|stitutiones, per Supremum dicti Ordinis  Mi|lites ejusdem in eorum pleno Capituio, ordinan|das. Magno Sigillo ejusdem Ordinis firmandas. Ac in casibus extraordinariis, per Warrantum speciale Supremi Ordinis, manu sgnandum,  Sigillo dicti Ordinis sigillandum, Eaedem so|lutiones per praedictum Cancellarium Ordinis praedicti pro tempore existente faciendae sine sod aut vadiis in ea parte capiendis: Qud raefa|tus Thomas Rowe, mdo Cancellarius dicti Or|dinis,  Cancellarius sm Ordinis qui pro tempore fuerit, de praedict uitte, annuali pensione, vel summa Mle  ducemarum liba|rum de tempore in tempus sic ut paetur i|piend  expendnd festo Sancti Georgii vi|cesimo tertio die Apidis  existente, aut in die per prorogatiem pro cdem Fsto appun|ctuando verum a debitum Cmpum per dictum Cancellarium subscribendum annuatim faciet  reddet. Qui quidem Compotus annuatim sic reddendus infa quatuor dierum spacium postea, pr totum Capitulum aut per tres vel plures Mi|lites dicti Ordinis examinatus fuerit, ac post hujusmodi examinationem  approbationem ejusdem per subsriptionem nominum corum i|dem Compoto allocabitu, quarum praedio Can|cellario dicti Ordinis pro tempore existente haere|dibus, Execuoribus,  Administratoribus suis plenari surit exoneratio in hae parte. Cum tamn acciderit quod praesati Fimaii praedi|ctorum Custuum, Subsidirum, ac caeterorum praemissrum, pro tempore existente, ad occasins nostrs necessarias accommodandas, Redditus le firmarias suas pro praemissis, aut parte  solubiles, pro quodm  en|turo, prae manibus solveren:  quod praedi|cta annualis pensi Mille  ducentarum libra|rum totaliter per ipsos secundum veram intentio|nem praesentium solvi non poterit; Tune volu|mus ac per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus  successoribus nostris beneplacitum nostrum dcl|ramus per praesentes: Quod imerim, ac in hu|jusmodi casibus, Thesaurarius Angliae summes nostri, haeredum vel successorum nostrorum, pro tempore existente, dictam pensionem, de aliqui|bus aliis Custumis, Subsidiis,  Impositionibus, nobis  haeredibus  successoribus nostris, pro bnis  Merchandizis in Regnum Angliae im|portandis,  de eodem exportanis solubilius, praeto Cancellario dicti Ordinis pro tempore existente, secundum tenorem  veram intentio|nem praesntium solvi ordinabit, faciet,  cau|sabit. Et hae Literae nostrae Patentes vel Irrotu|lamentum aerundem praesato Thsaurario nostro, haeredum vel successorum nostrorum, pro tempore existente, plena exoncratio  warrantum sucrit in ea parte: Eo quod, expressa mentio de ver valore annio, aut de certitudine praemissorum, vel corum alicujus, aut de aliis donis, siue Concessio|nibus per nos seu per aliquem Progenitorum sive Praedecessorum nostrorum, praefato Thomae Rowe, ante haec tempora factis, in praesentibus minime facta existit, aut aliquo Statuto, Acu, Ordina|tione, Provisione, Proclamatione sive Restrictio|ne in constrarium inde antehc habito, facto, edita, ordinata sive provisa, aut aliqu alia re caus, vel materi qucun in aliquo nn ob|stante. In cujus rei testimonium, has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes, Teste meiso apud Westmonasterium vicesimo tertio die Januarii, Anno regni nostri tertio dcimo.



N. XII. A Commission for payment of Fees, Pensions, Salaries, c. relating to the Order. Sir Tho. Rowe's Iournal, p. 40.
Charles by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter. To our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir Thomas Rowe Knight, and Chancellor of our said most Noble Order. Whereas in augmentation of the honor of our Order, and for the expences there|unto belonging, we have of our own Royal boun|ty setled, given, and granted by our Letters Pa|tents, bearing date at Westminster, on the 23. day of January, in the 13. year of our Raign, one yearly Pension and Revenue of 1200 l. unto and upon our Order, to be received and dis|bursed by you, our present Chancellour, and your Successors in the same Office, according to such rules and limitations, as in our said Letters Patents more at large do and may appear: We do by this our Commission signifie our Will and Pleasure, and declare, and give unto you our Chancellor full power and authority to pay, or cause to be paid out of the said Revenue of 1200 l. in your receipt, all and every the annu|al and ordinary Fees, Pensions, Salaries, and other Payments, usually paid to any of our Offi|cers, Alms-Knights, or others, who do their year|ly duty and service any way unto our said Noble Order appertaining, either by Charter, Grant, or Assignation under our Privy Seal, or Signet, or by any other lawful way whatsoever, taking and receiving from them, and every one of them, an acquittance, and receipt under their hands for your discharge; which shall be good and available in Law, to be pleaded against us, our Heirs, and Successors for the same. And in particular, we do by this our Commission give you full power and order to pay, or cause to be paid unto your self, as our Chancellor for the time being, the sum of 100 l. yearly: and to the Register of our Order for the time being 50 l. yearly: and to Garter, our Principal King at Arms, for the time being 50 l. yearly; and to our Usher called the Black Rod, for the time be|ing 30 l. yearly: and to every one of our Poor or Alms-Knights, being 13. at our Castle of Winde|fore, for the time being, yearly 18 l. 5 s. in man|ner and form following. That is to say, every of the said Pensions quarterly upon the Feasts of St. John Baptist, St. Michael the Archangel, the Nativity of our Lord, and the Annuntiation of our blessed Lady the Virgin Mary, by even and equal portions and payments. The first payment whererof to begin at and upon the Feast of St. John Baptist, next and immediately ensuing af|ter the date hereof, in full discharge of any, and all the said Fees or Pensions to them formerly by us given or paid. As also to pay or cause to be paid any other annual and usual charge, to any other inferior Officer or Servant, for their service or attendance, And this our Commission shall be to you a sufficient Warrant, to pay any, and all the said annual and ordinary Fees, Pen|sions, Payments, and other Charges, whether named, or not named, having been usually due, and paid, whatsoever, upon account thereof to be made and given, and Acquittances produced as aforesaid for the Receipts, to be presented and shewn to us, or to so many of the Knights of our most Noble Order, as we have or shall depute in Chapiter to take, liquid and allow your said Dis|bursments according to the tenor hereof, under their hands in writing, and according to the directions, and limitations in our said Letters Patents, and order and provision therein made, and had for your discharge: which said allow|ances shall also be a sufficient discharge against us, our Heirs, and Successorss, to be pleaded in any of our Courts of Record within our High|ness Dominions. Given under the Seal of our said most Noble Order, the 3. of May at our Court at Whitehall, in the 14. Year of our Reign, 1638.


N. XIII. A Letter of Summons for Electing a Knight, upon the death of the Lord Fitz-Hugh. Registrum Chartaceum, f. 12. b.
De par le Roy, Souverain de l'ordre du
Iarretier.
TRescher  foiall c. Pour ce que le Sire Fitz-Hugh Henry, n'agairs un de nos Compaignons de lordre de Jarter, est, la xi. jour de Januere darreine pass a Dieu commaunde que Dieux assoile, nous vous certifions clerement se|lonc la tenure de lez estatuz pour faire vostre de|voir dex messez par la morte du quele en ycell est un place vacante, a le quel il coviente par lez ditz estatuz eslier un autre compaignon en son lieu, deius sys semaines appres la certification de la morte suisdite que nous au presente ne pur|rons bonement parformer, au cause resonable que nous destourba; Et pour taunte nous volons  vous chargeons que sur lez peines de les estatuz suisditz saunz, excusacion soies ou nous a Wyndefore en vostre propre persone la veille de Seint George procheine venante, a le Chapitre a le oure de tierce, pur accomplere ceo q'appar|tindra a lez estatuz suisditz en cez casez, si non que vous nous signifiez le jour  lieu suisdit cle|rement de soubz vostre seal de vous armez cause jouste de vostre destourbier digne destre allou, c. Don, c.



NUM. XIV. Another upon the death of Sir Robert Dumphreville. Ex eodem Registro.
De par le Roy, Souverain de l'ordre de
Iarretier.
TReschier  bien ame. Pour ce que feu Sire Robert Dumphreville, que Dieux ab|soille, en son vivant un de noz compaignons de l'ordre Jarretier a la de vie a trespas le darrain jour de Januer darrain passe,  que selon lez estatuz du dit Ordre sommes tenuz en advertir ung chescun dez Compaignons, vous certifions son dit trespas, ad fin que facies vostre devoir des messes,  prieres les quelles estes tenuz faire, dire,  celebrer, pour le salut de son ame. Par le mort du quel est un place vacant,  convient selon les ditz estatuz aultre eslier en son lieu, dedans sys sepmaines apres la certification du dit trespas, si bonnement faire se peut, vel que bonnement au present faire ne pourrons: Si vou|lons  vous mandons sur lez peines contenues es diz estatuz, qe soies ovec nous la vaigle Seint George,  l'eure de tierce prochein, venant pour faire  accomplir en ce que dit est come per les ditz estatuz appertendra. Et si estre ny poves, nous signifies soubz vostre seell la cause de vostre empechement, par quoy vostre excusation puissions congnoistre  l'avoir agreable, s'ainsi est quelle soit digne destre accept,  ny faites faulte. Treschier  bien ame, c.


NUM. XV. A Dispensation for Installation of the Duke of York and Prince Rupert; till Windesor Castle should return to the Soveraign's possession. Ex ipso Autogr. penes praef. Ia. Palmer.
Charles R.
CHARLES by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, Fancee, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, c. and Soveraign of the most Noble Ordre of the Garter. To all and singular unto whom these our Letters Pa|tent shall come greeting. Whereas by the Sta|tutes of our said most Noble Order, all Knights elected to be Companions of the same are (accord|ing to usual form and Ceremony) to be installed at the Stalls of the Order, in the Chappel of our Royal Castle of Windesor, before they can be ad|mitted to have their Stalls, Places, and Votes amongst the rest of the Companions there. And whereas our dearly beloved Son James Duke of York, and our intirely beloved Nephew, Prince Rupert, Count Palatine of the Rheyne, Duke of Bavaria and Cumberland, and Earl of Holder|ness, were in a Chapter held at York, the twentieth day of April in the eighteenth year of our Reign, elected and chosen Companions of our said most Noble Order but, by reason of the succeeding distractions and Rellions in this our Kingdom, their Installations at our said Castle of Windesor, could not according to the Statutes aforesaid be celebrated and performed, by rea|son the same hath been ever sithence, and still is in the possession of the Rebels. Know ye, that we as Soveraign of the said most Noble Order (unto whom the power of dispensing with any of the said Statutes is reserved) have thought fit to dispence in regard the not performance of the Statutes hath not been by the default of these elected Knights) and by these presents do accord|ingly dispence with the Installations of our afore|said Son and Nephew, both for time and place; when and where those Installations are and ought to be made, willing and ordaining that they and either of them, shall by virtue of this our Dispensation, at all times hereafter, be held, reputed, and taken to be Companions of our said most Noble Order; And shall have, possess, and enjoy all manner of Titles, places, preheminen|cies, Votes, Ornaments, and Priviledges of the same, as if they or either of them had been for|mally and actually installed at our said Castle of Windesor; any Law, Statute, or Ordince made to the contrary in any wise notwith|standing. Provided always, and we do hrby declare, that our said most dear Son, and our en|tirely beloved Nephew, shall (notwithstanding these our Letters of Dispensation) first take the Oath usually taken by the Knights at thr In|stallation, and hereafter act and perform all such Rights and Ceremonies as are accustomed at the Installations of the Companions of our said most Noble Order of the Garter, when it shall be thought fit, and pssible for them to perform the same at our Castle of Windesor aforesaid. And that this our Dispensation made upon such most weighty and urgent necessities shall not be drawn into consequence or example in time to come. Given under the Great Seal of our Order, and our hand first superscribed thereunto, at our Palace at Ox|ford, this seventeenth of January, in the twen|tieth year of our Reign, 1644.


NUM. XVI. A Dispensation for want of a full num|ber of Knights to constitute a Chap|ter of Election; and their entring the Chapter without Mantles. Palmer's large Iournal.
Charles R.
CHARLES by the Grace of God, c. So|veraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, To all the Knights and Companions of our most Noble Order, Greeting: Whereas we have determined upon the death of divers of our Knights, and vacancy of their Stalls, to hld a Chapter of Election here in our city of

York, and because there are not now attending on our person a sufficient number of 6 Knights, and being now in our Army they have not their Mantles ready (in which case by the ancient Sta|tutes of our Order there could be no Election, nor any Knight ought to enter into the Chapter so without our Royal Dispensation) We of our supream power and authority, as Soveraign of our Order, do by these our Letters dispence with both the said Statutes of want of Number, and entring the Chapter without Mantles; and do hereby give leave to all our Knights attending our presence, to hold a Chapter of Election, by giving their Votes according to Custom in other Scrutenis. Given under the Great Seal of our Order the 12. of September in the sixteenth year of our Reign 1640.


NUM. XVII. A Dispensation for the not appearing of the Knights with their Robes at the three Chapters held before the 15. of April 1661. and want of a compe|tent and usual Number of Knights. Ex Collect. E. W. G.
Charles R.
WHereas by the ancient and evermore ob|served Statutes of the most Noble Or|der of the Garter, it is expresly provided, that no less than the Number of six Knights or Com|panions of the same, besides the Soveraign or his Lieutenant, should make up a compleat Chap|ter, and that none of the said Knights and Companions should enter into the said Chapter without having on their long Mantles, or upper Robes of the Order; We having designed the 15.16. and 17. days of April next for the In|stalment of divers Elect Knights in the place of the deceased, and for the celebration of the Feast of St. George, at our Castle of Winde|sor, upon which occasion, and for the resolving upon sundry preparatories to the same, being to deliberate with the ancient Knights of the Or|der, who are neither in number sufficient to make up a Chapter, or all of them provided with Robes by reason of the late troubles; to supply both defects both in the present and other subse|quent Chapters, which we may have occasion to assemble before the said Instalment and Festival: We as Soveraign of the said Order, have and do dispence with the Statutes of it, as to those particulars, and are graciously pleased, that, those two defects notwithstanding, the aforesaid present and ensuing Chapters shall be as legal, and of as much force and validity as if the number of the Companions required by the Sta|tutes were full and compleat, and the Compa|nions that do or are to compose them, had their Mantles or upper Robes on them. Given under our Signet of the Order, at Whitehall the 29. day of March 1661.


NUM. XVIII. A Letter signifying Election, and a Sum|mons to receive Investiture with the Garter and George. MS. penes W. le N. Cl.
RIght trusty and well beloved, we greet you well: Ascertaining you, that in conside|ration as well of your approved truth, and fide|lity, as also of your couragious and valiant acts of Knighthood, with other your probable merits experientially known in sundry parties and be|half: We with the Companions of the Noble Or|der of the Garter, assembled at Election holden this day, within this our Mannor of Greenwich, have elected and chosen you amongst others to be one of the Companions of the said Order, as your said merits condignly require. And therefore we will that with convenient diligence upon the sight thereof, ye address you unto our presence, to receive such things as to the said Order ap|pertaineth. Given under our Signet at the Man|nor of Greenwich the 24. day of April.


NUM. XIX. A Letter signifying Election, sent with the Garter and George. MS. 4. penes Arthur. Com. Anglesey, p. 131. b.
RIght trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well, giving you to understand, that in consideration as well of your approved fidelity, in the service of Us and our Realm at all times shewed, and for the increase of Honor and Vir|tue in you, We with the Companions of our No|ble Order of the Garter assembled at the Electi|on holden the 24. day of April last past, within our Palace at Westminster, have Elected and Chosen you among others to be one of the Compa|nions of our said Order, as your merits con|dignly do require; Wherefore we have sent unto you by our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir Gilbert Dethick, Knight, Garter, King of Arms, Our said Order of the Garter, the same to use as to this Election of you appertaineth: wishing that God may increase you in virtue and honour, as amply as any other that hath been Elected and placed in the same.
Yeoven under the Signet of our said Order at our Honor at Greenwich, the 5. of May in the 26. year of our Reign.

To our right Trusty and Well-beloved, the Lord Cobham, Lord Warden of the Cinque-Ports, Knight and Companion of our most Noble Order of the Garter.




NUM. XX. A Letter signifying Election, when the present Soveraign was beyond the Seas. Ex Collect. E. W. G.
Charles R.
CHARLES the Second by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, c. and Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Gar|ter. To our right trusty and entirely beloved Cousin and Councellor James Marquess of Or|mond, our Lieutenant in the Kingdom of Ire|land Greeting. Whereas our Royal Progeni|tors, the Kings of England, have in all times since the institution of the most Noble Order of St. George, called the Garter, by our most no|ble and victorious Auncester King Edward the Third, elected and chosen into the Fellowship thereof such Princes and other eminent persons, as well Strangers, as of their own Subjects, as have for nobility and greatness of their births, accompanied with heroick virtues, especially in martial actions, been thought worthy of the same, We therefore considering that since the late horrid Rebellion in that our Kingdom, many of the Companions thereof are dead, and that some others, contrary to their honor and Oaths, have deserted their allegiance, and are no more worthy to be esteemed Companions of so noble an Order, and finding how necessary it is for ou service, and the honor of the said Order, to elect others in their places vacant, who for their birth, courage, and fidelity, may be fit to be admitted thereunto. Know you therefore that we duly weighing the eminence of your birth and Family, and above all the great and most extraordinary services done by you for many years past, and still continued in the condition of our Lieutenant in that our Kingdom, toge|ther with your singular courage and fidelity, have thought it fit by our power, as Soveraign of the said Order (dispencing with the usual Ceremo|nies) to elect and chuse you our said right trusty and entirely beloved Cousin James Marquess of Ormond, to be Fellow and Companion of the said most Noble Order of the Garter, and do herewith send unto you the George and Ribband, part of the Ensigns thereof, by our trusty and well-beloved Servant Henry Seymour Esq one of our Bed-Chamber (in regard Sir Edward Walker Knight Garter, Principal King of Arms, the proper Officer, is otherways employed in our service) the which we do hereby will and authorise you to wear. And because it is not possible at present to have all other Ceremonies and Additions incident to the same fully perfect|ed, We do further will and authorize you to wear and use the Garter or Ribband on your left Leg, the Glory or Star of Silver with St. George's Cross embroidered within a Garter, upon your Cloak and upper Garments, as likewise the Great Collar of the Order upon such days as are accustomed to use the Garter about your arms, and to style your self Knight and Compani|on of the said most Noble Order of the Garter, in as ample manner as if you had been installed in our Castle of Windesor; where (when it shall please God to restore us to the possession thereof) you shall formally be invested,  receive the habit and all other the above recited Ornaments of the said most Noble Order. And We no way doubt, but as you have hitherto with singular courage, fideli|ty, and ability, served us, so you will still continue to do the same, as becomes a Knight and Com|panion of so Noble an Order. Given at the Ca|stle of St. Germans en laye, this eighteenth day of September, in the first Year of our Reign.


NUM. XXI. A Letter signifying Election, sent to Sir Iohn Falstolf. Registrum Chart. fol. 14.
De par le Roy Souverain de l'Ordre de
la Iartier.
NOstre ame  feal, nous vous saluons. Et come apres le trespassement de nostre tres|chier  feal Cousin le Conte de Westmerlande, dont dieux ait l'ame, que estoit un de noz Com|paignons de l'Ordre de la Jartier, Nous eussions ordonn que noveielle election fust fait pur avoire un autre Compaignon en son lieu, come la manere si est,  que le contenu dez estatuz du dit Ordre le porte, vons signifions que a la darrain feste de Seint George, en nostre Chapitre du dit Or|dre, tenuz a Wyndesore le xxii. jour d' Avryll, darrain pass, veille de la dite feste, nostre Com|paignie du dit Ordre esteauniz adonques au dit Chapitre; Considerant tant lez hous, leaux,  honourables services que avez de piec faiz en service de nostre tres redount Seigneur  Pier, que dieux assoille,  que faitez continuelement en nostre, come pluseurs autres desertes d'onnour, que dieux a souffert estre en vous, en tollerant tousjours, comme bon  feal subjet, lez paines  travaulx de guerre pour nostre bon droit,  juste querelle susteiner, vous a eslu un de noz Compaignons du dit Ordre en lieu de nostre dit Cosin, esperant, que dieux vous donne tousjours grace  valeur de faire toudis de bien en mulx, vostre devoire; pourquoy a la delivrance de ce|stez nouz avons chargie par noz lettres noz treschiers  feaulx Cosins lez Countez de Salis|birs, de Warwyke,  de Soulfolk, qui snt noz Compaignons du dit Ordre, ou l'un d'eulx de qui vous serrez plus pres, quil vous monstrent,  delivrent lez estatuz du dit Ordre, Et yceulx par vouz receux preugnent vostre serement en tel cas acoustume a faire, que bien  lealment ten|dres  ferez, si avaunte que Dieux vous donnera puissance, tout le contenu es diz estatuz, en vous baillant l'ordre de la Jartier. La quelle chose faite, volonz que vouz ordonnez en tout haste re|sonnablement possible vostre Heaulme  Espee,  un honourable Chivalier sanz reproche en lieu

de vous, pour prendre vostre estalle come voz veirez que les ditz estatuz du dit Ordre le re|quirent. Et en cas que le dit Ordre ne vondrez acceptier pour aucun cause a vouz semblant rai|sonable, le nous certifiez dedeinz deux mois apres la doubte de cestez,  en ceo nais point de faute. Donn a Leicestre, soubz le Seall du dit Ordre le viii. jour de May.


NUM. XXII. A Commission to take Sir Iohn Falstolfs Oath, at his Investiture with the Garter. Ibidem. De par le Roy Souveraine de l'Ordre de la Iartier.
TResbiers  feaulx Cosins, Nous vous salu|ons sovent,  pour ce que a la feste de Seinte George darraine, tenuz en nostre Cha|stell de Wyndesore, nostre Compaignie de l'Or|dre de la Jartier faisant alorsque Chapitre la veille de la dit Feste, a eslieu nostre chier  feall John Falstolt Chivalier un de nouz Compaignons du dit Ordre, en lieu de nostre treschier Cosin le Counte de Westmerland, dont dieux ait l'ame, nous vous envoions lez estatuz de cellui Ordre en|seallez du selle du dit Ordre, pour lez presenter,  bailler au dit Monsieur John Falstolf. Si vou|lons  vous mandons, que vous, ou l'un de vous, a qui primerement cez presentez serront mon|strez, ou exibecs, presentez,  bailles audit John Falstolf lez ditz estatuz pour lez voier,  visiter,  savoir que sont tnuz de faire ceux qui sont de dit Ordre. Et en cas q'il accepta le dit Ordre Ressaivez son serement en tel cas ac|custum  faire en luy baillant l'Ordre du Jar|tier, en le manere accustum. Treschiers  fealx Cosins, dieu~x soit garde de vous.
Donne a Leicestre soubz le Seel du dit Ordre, le viii. jour de May.

A nos treschiers  feaulx Cousins, lez Countez de Warwyk, de Saris|bury,  de Sulfolk, nouz Compaig|nons de la Jartier,  a un cheseun d'eulx.



NUM. XXIII. A Warrant for allowance of Garter's Charges, when sent to signifie an Election. MS. 4. penes W. le N. Cl. fol. 59.
THese shall be to require you, of such her Majesties. Treasure as remaineth in your hands, to pay or cause to be paid, to Sir Gilbert Dethick Knight, King of Arms, being sent by her Majesties Commandment, to our very good Lords the Earl of Rutland in the County of Lincolne, and to the Lord Scroop in the County of Cumberland, to signifie unto them the Electin made of them into the Order of Knights of the Garter, for his pains and charges in that voyage expended, the sum of Twenty pounds and this shall be your sufficient warrant and discharge in that behalf.
At the Court at Richmond the 10. of June 1584.

T. Bromley.
Ch. Howard.
Chr. Hatton.
W. Burghley.
James Crofts.
Fran. Walingham.
Ed. Clynton.


To our very loving Friend, Sir Tho|mas Heneage, Knight, Treasurer of of her Majesties Chamber.



NUM. XXIV. A Commission to the Soveraigns Lieu|tenant, to Install an Elect-Knight. Registr. Chartac. fol. 64.
Henry R.
HEnry the Eighth, by the Grace of God King of England, and of France, Defen|sor of the Faith, and Lord of Irland, Souve|rain of the most Noble Order of the Gartier; To our right trusty and right entirely well-beloved Cousin, the Duke of Northfolk, our Lieutenant at our Fest of the glorious Martir Saint George, Patron of the said Noble Ordre, our right trusty and right well-beloved Cosins the Marquess Dor|set, the Marquess of Exeter, Th' Erle of Nor|thumberland, and our trusty and well-beloved the Vicounte Lisle, the Vicount Fitz-water, and the Vicount Rochford, the Lord Ferrers, Lord Bergaveny, and the Lord Dakers, Companions of the said Noble Order, Greeting. For as moche as we with you, and other Companions have elected our right trusty, and right entirely beloved Son Henry, Duke of Richmont and of Somerset, and Erle of Nottingham, our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousins, th' Erle of Arundel, th' Erle of Westmerland, and th' Erle of Rutland, Companions of the said Noble Or|dre: We therefore will and auctorise you, by these presents, that ye the said Duke of Nor|folk, with the assistance of such other as our said Noble Ordre be aforenamed, shall not only ac|cept, and admit the said Duke and Erles into the said Ordre, and receve their Othes, and in|stall them, but also further do therein, as to the laudable Statutes and Ordinances of the said Ordre apperteigneth. And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant, and dis|charge in this behalf, at all times hereafter. Yeven under the Seal of our said Gartier, at our Palais of Brydewell, the xviii. day of June in the xvii. year of our Reign.



NUM. XXV. Another. Ex Collect. Iohannis Vincent, Gen.
Elizabeth R.
ELIZABETH by the Grace of God Queen of England, Fraunce, and Ireland, De|fendor of the Faith, and Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Counsellor th' Erle of Penbroke, one of the Companions and Knights of the said Order, by us assigned and deputed to be our Lieutenant at the Feast of the glorious Martyr St. George, Patron of the sad Order, to be kept within our said Castell of Windesor, the 4. of June next ensuing, and others the Companions of the said Order that then shall be present, Greeting: Whereas we with others the Companions of the said Noble Order assembled, at a Chapitre holden at our Palace of Westminster the xxiv. day of Aprill last, have elected and chosen, among others, our right trusty and right entirely beloved Cousen the Duke of Norfolk, our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousen and Councellor, the Mar|quess of Northampton, our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousen th' Erle of Rut|land, and our trusty and right well-beloved the Lord Robert Dudley, Master of our Horse, to be Knights and Companions of the said Order: We will, and by these presents au|thorise you, not only to accepte and admit them into the said Order, and receive their Oaths, and install them accordingly, but also further to do therein as to the Statutes and laudable Custom and usage of the said Noble Order ap|pertaineth. And these our Letters shall be your sufficient warrant and discharge in this behalf. Yeven under the Seal of our said Garter, the first of June, in the first year of our Reign.


NUM. XXVI. A Commission to other Knights-Com|panions, for the Installation of an Elect-Knight. Regist. Chartac. fol. 61. b.
Henry R.
HENRY the Eighth; by the Grace of God, King of England and of France, Defen|sor of the Faith, and Lord of Irland, Soverain of our Noble Ordre of the Gartier. To our right trusty, and right entirely beloved Cousin, the Marquess Dorset; And also to our right trusty, and right well-beloved Cosins, Th' Erle of De|von, and th' Erle of Kent, Companions of our said Noble Ordre, Greeting. Forasmche as we with you, and other Knights and Companions of our said Noble Ordre assembled at the Chapitre holden at our Manoir of Grenewich, the xiii. day of July last passed, have elected, and chosen Walter Devereux, Lord Ferrers, to be Knight and Companion of the said Ordre: We therefore will, and, by vertue of these presents, auctorise you not only t' accepte and admit the said Walter Devereux, Lord Ferrers, into the said Ordre, and receive his Othe, and install him, but also further to do therein as to the Statutes and laudable usages of the said Noble Order it appertaineth: And these our Letters shall be your sufficient warrant and discharge in that behalf. Yeven undre our Seale of our said Gartier, at our Castell of Windesore, the xxi. day of August, the xv. year of our Reign.


NUM. XXVII. Another. Ex Collect. I. V.
Elizabeth R.
ELIZABETH by the Grace of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, and So|veraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter. To our right trustly and right well-beloved Czen and Counsellor, Francis Earl of Bdford, and to our right trusty and right well-beloved An|thony Viscount Mountague, Companions f our Noble Order of the Garter: Forasuh as we for divers reasonable causes cannot be present at our Castell of Windesor on the 19. of June next ensuing, where we have determined to have in|stalled our right trusty and right well-beloved Cozens William Earl of Worcester, and Hen|ry Earl of Huntingdon, as Knights of ou said Order of the Garter: We therefre, by these pre|sents, name, constitute, appoint, and ordain you to be our Deputies, giving you full power and au|thority, to admit and install our said Cozens of Worcester and Huntingdon, and to do and accomplish every thing which thereunto belong|eth, and hath been accustomed, for the due ad|mittance and installing of the said Earls of Worcester and Huntingdon; willing and com|manding, by the tenor hereof, all and every the Companions and Officers of the said Order, to be to you in the executing of this our authority obeying and attending, as shall appertain. Gi|ven under the Seal of our sad Order, at our honor of Hampton-Court the 12. of June 1570. in the 12. year of our Reign.


NUM. XXVIII. Another. Ex ipso Autogr. Aerar. Coll. Wind.
Charles R.
CHARLES by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, De|fender of the Faith, and Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter. To our right trusty

and right well well-beloved Cosens and Coun|cellors, William Earl of Salisbury, and Henry Earl of Holland, Knights and Companions of our said Order, Greeting. Whereas we with you and others the Knights and Companions of our said Order assembled, in a Chapter holden at our Palace of Westminster, the 24. day of April (being the morrow after the day of St. George last past) did elect and chuse our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousen Algernon Earle of Northumberland, to be a Knight and Compa|nion of our said Order; And whereas we have appointed the 13. day of this present Month of May for the time of his Installation at Winde|sor; We do therefore let you know, that we have named and assigned you the said Earls of Salisbury and Holland, and by these presents do name, assign, and appoint you two to be Commis|sioners for the Intallation of our said Cousin the Earl of Northumberland as aforesaid, And accordingly we do hereby give unto you full pow|er and authority, not only to accept and admit him into our said Order, and to take his Oath, but also to do and accomplish whatsoever else is needful to be done for his full Installation, ac|cording to the Statutes, Rules, and Customs of our said Order. For which purpose it is our pleasure, that you make your repair to our Castle of Windesor, so as you may be there on Wednes|day at night, being the 13. of this present May, to the end that you may then proceed to the said Installation, according to this our Commission. Given under the Seal of our said Order at our Palace of Westminster, the 11. day of May 1635. and in the 11. year of our Raign.


NUM. XXIX. Another. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
PHilip and Mary, c. To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cosen the Earl of Huntington, and to our right trusty and well-beloved the Lord Clynton, Companions and Knights of the Noble Order of the Garter, Greet|ing, Forasmuch as we with other Companions of the said Noble Order assembled, at a Chapter holden at our Honour of Hampton Court, the 24. of April last past, have elected and chosen our right trusty and right well-beloved the Vis|count Mountague, to be Knight and Compani|on of the said Noble Order; We therefore will, and, by the presents, authorise and license you, not only to accept and admit the said Viscount Mountague into the said Order, and to receive his Oath and install him accordingly, but also further to do therein, as to the Statutes and lau|dable Customs of the said Noble Order apper|taineth: And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf. Yeoven under the Seal of our said Order, the 12. of October, the 2. and 3. year of our Raigns.


NUM. XXX. A Letter of Summons to the Commis|sioners appointed for Installation. Ex Collect. I. V.
By the Queen.
RIght trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well, and whereas we have appointed you, together with our right trusty and right well-beloved Cosen and Councellor the Earl of Lincoln, to be in Commission for the Installa|tion, in our Castle of Windesor, of our right trusty and right well-beloved Cosens Henry Earl of Derby, and Henry Earl of Penbroke, being lately chosen Knights of our Order of the Gar|ter: We have thought it good not only to give you knowledge hereof by these our Letters, but also to require you to make your repair to our said Castle of Windesor, so as you may be there on Wednesday the 19. day of this Moneth, to the end that upon Thursday the 20. day of this present Moneth of May, they may proceed to their Installations accordingly.
Yeven under our Signet at our Palais of Westminster,the 17. day of May in the 16. year of our Reign.

To our right trusty and well-beloved, the Viscount Moun|tague, one of the Companions of our Order.
[The like Letter (mutatis mutandis) was, under the same date, directed to the Earl of Lincoln, joined in Commission with him.]



NUM. XXXI. A Letter of Summons to an Elect-Knight for his repair to Windesor to be In|stalled. Ex ipso Autogr.
Charles R.
RIght trusty and well-beloved Cousen, We greet you well. Whereas in consideration of your approved fidelity, and extraordinary ser|vices performed by you for us, We lately elect|ed and chose you to be one of the Companions of our most Noble Order of the Garter, and in to|ken thereof did send unto you the George and Ribband, part of the Ensigns of our said Or|der, and having at a Chapter held at White-hall the 14. day of January last past, appoint|ed to celebrate the Feast of St. George at our Castle of Windesor, upon the 15.16. and 17. days of April next ensuing: We do hereby re|quire you to make your repair to our Castle of Windesor, so as you be there on Monday the 15. of April next, by Noon, that in the Afternoon of the said day you may proceed to your Instal|lation,

according to the Statutes of the said Order.
Given under our Signet of our Order at Whitehall, the 19. of February 1660. and in the thirteenth year of our Reign.

To our right trusty and entirely beloved Cousin and Councellor the Marquess of Ormond, Stew|ard of our Houshold.



NUM. XXXII. A Warrant for the Livery of the Order. Ex Lib. N. p. 317. sub finem.
Henry R.
HEnricus Dei grati Rex Angliae, ac Fran|ciae, Dominus Hiberniae, Defensor Fidei,  Supremus Ordinis Diui Georgii, fideli  benedilecto nobis  Conciliis Domino N. magni vestiarii nostri Custodi, salutem. Vbi nos cum aliis ejusdem Ordinis elegimus, benefidelem, ac praedilectum Consiliarium nostrum N. in So|cietatem hanc nostram praeclarissimam: Nos ideo volumus  praecipimus, ut huic Tabellioni vir|gas octodecim subrubri ostri de more tradas, cum tanto albo serico, quanto vestimentum inde con|ficiendum infulciri poterit, pro liverat (quam vocant) su quando in sedem suam introducen|dus Windesorum adveniet, mense ac die con|stitutis, quemadmodum  Equites ant solebant habere. Et hae nostrae Literae tibi tutelares erunt semper imposterum N. sub Sigillo nostro, mense ac die, c.


NUM. XXXIII. Another. Ex MS. in Bibl. Cotton. [sub effigie Iulii F. 11.]
By the King.
WE will and command you to deliver, or cause to be delivered to our trusty and well-beloved Councellor Sir John Wallop Knight, which is now elect one of the Compa|nions of the Noble Order of the Garter, for the Livery of the same Order 18 yards of Crimson Velvet, for one Gown, Hood, and Tippet, and 10 yards of white Sarcenet for lining the same: And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf.
Yeoven, c.

To our trusty and well-beloved Sir Ralph Sadler Knight, Master of our great Wardrobe.



NUM. XXXIV. A Warrant for providing and deliver|ing of Mantles. Ex ipso Autographo.
Charles R.
WHereas we have appointed the 15.16. and 17. days of April next ensuing hereof, for the solemnization of the noble Feast of St. George, and Instalment of Knights-Companions already elected at our Castle of Windesor, Our will and pleasure is, that you provide to be delivered for that Solemnity xvii upper Robes, and xvii under Robes of special good Velvets, That is to say, every upper Robe to contain the number of xviii yards of blew Velvet, and every under Robe the number of x yards of Crimson Velvet, and special good white Taffety, to the value of CCLXXII yards for lining of the same, allowing to every upper and under Robe xvi yards; as also xvii Garters of Velvet, wrought with Letters and Purles of Venice Gold and Pearls, to place on the left shoulder of every one of the said upper Robes, with xvii paire of large string Buttons, and Tassels of blew Silk and Venice Gold: And for so doing this shall be your Warrant, requiring you further to certifie us as son as you may what number of the premisses we may depend upon to be ready by the time prefixt.
Given, c.

To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousen, and Councellor Ed|ward Earl of Sandwich, Master of our Great Wardrobe, or in his ab|sence to his Deputy.



NUM. XXXV. A Warrant for providing and deliver|ing of Collars. Ex ipso Autographo.
Charles R.
WHereas we have appointed the 15.16. and 17. days of April next ensuing the date hereof, for the solemnization of the No|ble Feast of St. George, and Instalment of Knights, at our Castle of Windesor, Our will and pleasure is, that you provide to be delivered for that Solemnity, as we shall hereafter direct, Collars of Gold to the number of xvii. every of them containing xxvi Garters with white and red Roses enamelled in the midst of every one of them, and xxvi Knots, each Collar weighing xxx Ounces Troy weight, as also for each a rich George on horseback, with a Dragon to be fastned and pendnt thereto, and the same num|ber of Garters of the Order to a proportionable value: And for so doing this shall be your suffi|cient

Warrant, requiring you further to certifie us, as soon as you may, what number of the pre|misses we may depend upon to be ready by the time prefixt.
Given under our Signet of the Order at our Court at Whitehall the 19. of Fe|bruary in the 13. year of our Reign.

To our trusty and well-beloved Sir Gilbert Talbot Knight, Master of our Jewel-house.



NUM. XXXVI. The ancient Forms of Admonition used at the Investiture of Knights Subjects, with the Garter, Surcoat, Mantle, and Collar. MS. penes G.O.Y. p. 44.
LA Soveraigne  L'amyable Compaignie dez Chivaliers de L'ordre de la Jarretiere, vous out receu  choysi pour leur Amy, frere,  Compaignion. Et en signe  cognoissance de ce vous presentent  donnent ceste Jarretiere, la quelle Dieu le veille que vous recevez  portez d'oresenavant, a louange  plaisir,  a l'exal|tation  honneur du dit Noble Ordre  de vous.
Prenez cest habillement a l'accroissement de vostre honneur  Ensigne que vouz avez receu cest Ordre. Et par ce considerez que non seule|ment de vous valliantement  hardiment Com|batre, mais aussi sanz poeur despandre vostre sang a la defence de la foy Chrestienne, la Li|berte de la Sainte Eglise, de Iustice,  de ceulx qui sont oppresses  en necessit.
Prenez ce Manteau de ceste tres-noble Ordre, en augmentation de vostre honneur, lequel Mante|au estant garni d'ung Escu, avec une Croix rouge, vous admoneste, que estant arm de beaux vertuz vous povez passer parmy voz Enemies  les Confoundre. Si que apres avoir valiant|ment guerroy en ce monde, au regard de voz dignez  Nobles actes, vous povez parvenire a les Eternelles  Triumphantz joyes Coelestes.
Vous Porteres ce Collier avec L'image de St. George, a l'accroissement de vostre honneur,  de ce tres-noble Ordre, Ensigne de passer toutes choses prosperes ou adverses, si que les ayant val|liantment vaincuz, vous povez en ceste vie ob|tenir l'honneur  renom de Noble  preux Chi|valier; Et apres recevoir l'eternel guerdon de voz victorieulx travaulx.


NUM. XXXVII. The forms of Admonition used at the Investiture of Strangers. Lib. N. p. 310.
AD laudem at honorem Omnipotentis Dei, intemeratae Matris ejus,  Sancti Geor|gii Martyris, cinge tibiam tuam hoc insigni Sub|ligaculo, id circumferens in augmentum honoris tui,  in signum  memoriam illustrissimi Or|dinis, nusquam oblivioni daturus, aut omissurus quod eo moneris; ut valeas, inquam,  velis in justo bello, quod solum inibis, stare firmitr, a|gere fortitr,  feliciter omnino vincere.
Capito vestem hanc purpuream, ad incre|mentum honoris,  in signaculum Ordinis ac|cepti: qu munitus non vereberis pro fide Chri|sti, libertate Ecclesiae, pro jure,  oppressorum at indigentium necessari tuitione, sanguinem etia fundere, nedum fortiter ac strenu di|micare.
Accipe Clamidem hanc coelici coloris, in sig|num Clarissimi hujus Ordinis,  in augmentum etiam honoris tui, rubeo clypeo Dominicoe Cru|cis, uti cernis, insignitam: ut cujus virtute sem|per ac vigore protectus per hostes tutus abeas, eos ubi superare valeas,  pro clarissimis deni meritis, post egregiam hanc hujus temporis mi|liciam, ad aeterna ver triumphalia gandia pertingas.
Torquem hunc in Collo deferes, ad augmen|tum honoris,  in signum quo Clarissimi Or|dinis a te suscepti, cum imagine sanctissimi Mar|tyris,  Christi Militis, Georgii: Cujus praesi|dio suffultus Mundi hujus tm prospera qum adversa sic pertranseas, ut animae pariter ac cor|poris hostibus hoc strenu devictis, no tempora|riae mod militiae gloriam, sed  perennis vi|ctoriae palmam denique recipere valeas. Amen.


NUM. XXXVIII. The Oath taken by a Knight at his In|stallation, in the Reign of King Ed|ward the Fourth. Lib. N. pag. 312.
EGo N. nominatus at Electus unus egregio|rum Equitum illustrissimi Ordinis hujus Mili|taris, promitto,  per Sacro-sancta Evangelia Dei, quae tango hc manifest, juro, qud omnia Ordinis istius Statuta  Articulos in hiis contentos, qua|tenus ad me speciabunt, inviolabiliter observabo. Nec non Collegii Sanctissimae Virginis,  Divi Martyris Georgii, in quo praenobilis Ordo funda|tus est, pro virili libertates  jura propugnabo.

The same Oath we find put into English, and entred at the end of the Regist. Chartaceum, under the 2. year of Hen. 8.
IN chosen and named to be one of the honourable Company of the Order of the Garter, promise and swear by the holy Evangelists by me bodily touched, truly and faithfully to observe and keep all the points of the Statutes of the said Order, and every Article in them contained, as far as to me belongeth and appertaineth. And all the li|berties and Franchises belonging of right to this Colledge of our Lady and S. George I shall de|fend to my power, as God help me and these holy Evangelists.




NUM. XXXIX. The same Oath, as it was pronounced by the the Register.
YOV being chosen to be one of the Com|panions of the most honourable Order of the Garter, shall promise, and, by these holy E|vangelists by you manifestly touched, swear, truly and faithfully to observe and keep all the Statutes of the said Order, and every Article in the same contained, for so much as to you be|longeth and appertaineth: And further that you shall help to defend and maintain, so much as in you lieth, the rights and liberties of the Colledge of our blessed Lady and St. George the Martyr, wherein the honourable Order of the Garter is founded.


NUM. XL. The Oath formerly taken by the Prince of Wales. Ex Lib. Nig. pag. 312.
EGO, N. Princeps Gualliae, Dux Cornubiae,  Comes Cestriae, primogenitus Excelentis|simi at invictissimi Dei grati Regis Angliae Franciae, Domini Hiberniae,  hujus Ordinis merit Supremi, jam nominatus at elecius ad eundem Ordinem venerandum, Promitto  do fidem, qud ver  fidelitr pro viribus obser|vabo cuncta Ordinis illius Statuta,  Statuto|rum, Articulos, quatenus ullo modo me contin|gent, juxta vim, formam,  effectum corundem, nec non Collegii, in quo is Ordo fundatur, jura tuebor.


NUM. XLI. The Oath taken in King Henry the Eighth's Reign. Ex veteri Codici MS. penes G.O.Y. f. 70. b.
YEE shall swear, that to your power yee shall help, keep, defend, and sutain, during your lyfe, and during the tyme that you shall be Com|panion of the Order of the Garter, the honor, quarels, rights, and Dominions of the King our Soveraign Lord, Soveraign of the said Order, you shall enforce you, and do all your diligence to entertain and augment the said Noble Order, and in case you shall have knowledge of any thing to be imagined or procured to the contrary, with all your true power you shall resist thereunto, Al|so you shall well and truly accomplish, and keep, and entertain all the Statutes, points, articles, and Ordinances of the said Order, as if they were read unto you from point to point; so help you God, and Hollydome, and by these Evange|lists by you corporally touched.


NUM. XLII. The Oath used in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth. Ex Libro Nig. pag. 303.
YOV, being chosen to be one of the honoura|ble Company of the Order of the Garter, shall promise and swear by the holy Evangelists by you bodily touched, to be faithful and true to the Kings Majesty, and to observe and keep all the points of the Statutes of the said Order, and every Article in them contained, the same being agreeable, and not repugnant to the Kings High|ness,  other goodly proceedings, as far as unto you belongeth and appertaineth, as God help you and the holy Evangelists.


NUM. XLIII. The Form of the Oath setled in Queen Elizabeth's Reign.
QVum jam electus es in honoratissimam so|cietatem nobilissimi ordinis Garteri, t promittes  jurabis, per sacrosancta di Evangelia, per te nunc tacta, quod sienter  voluntari non violabis aliquod praedicti ordinis statutum, aut aliquos articulos in cis contentos, praesertim si non scientes sint,  non repugnent Dei omnipotentis  hujus regni legibus, quate|nus personam tuam concernunt, seu ad te perti|nent, sicut te deus adjuvet, per Jesum Christum, hoc sacrosancto Dei Evangelio annuntiatum.

The same in English.
YOV being chosen to be one of the honourable Company of this most Noble Order of the Garter, shall promise and swear by the holy E|vangelists, by you here touched, that wittingly or willingly you shall not break any Statute of the said Order, or any Articles in them con|tained; the same being agreeable and not repug|nant to the Laws of Almighty God, and the Laws of this Realm, as far forth as to you be|longeth and appertaineth: So God help you and his holy Word.



NUM. XLIV. Letter to obtain License for Installing a Knight-Subject by his Proxy. Ex Lib. Nigro, p. 60.
JOannes Dux Bedfordiae, cum caeteris in cele|britate Georgian jam proxim conjunctis, Regiae Majestati vestrae salutem  obedientiam. Quoniam, invictissime princeps  metuendissime Domine, vestrae Celsitudinis ea magnanimitas est in suscipiendis Bellis,  in gerendis faelicitas,

ut ipsorum jam fama per orbem undique voli|tet, nos id vestrae Majestati gratulamur, Deo gratias nunc immensas agentes, qui quicquid est boni ac faelicis events, solus concedit. Vbi ver Regia Majestas vestra, quia bella durant, strenuos quosdam Equites ex hiis qui vobiscum modo militant in socios Clarissimi vestri Ordinis assumere dcrevit, ex consensu Commilitonum aliorum qui nunc isthic assunt, id nobis sig|nificare non refugit; nos isthc ips voluntate vestr  Commilitonum assensu subnixi,  quia nolumus ut quisquam per nos aut in Curi no|str privetur co fructu qui percipi possit, saltem dum spectet ad salutem Animae, si subit con|tingeret obire, (quod fere fit hiis qui variis belli asibus agitantur) Dominum Joannem Gray, Dominum Johannem Robertsak,  Dominum Boucer virtute Literarum in quibus procuratores sibi nominrunt, in sedes suas Windesori per|misimus introduci: ne si per bellorum infortu|nia, quibus eos isthic quotidi videmus objectos, ante plenam possessionem interirent, Missarum suffragiis destituerentur, sicut quosdam nuper (id quod dolemus) nimi mor praeventos intellexi|mus. Rursum quia de tali procuratorio mi|nus cantum in Statutis esse perpendimus, in eo facto non parm haesitavimus, verm nimio fa|vore potis quam arci sever Statutorum ob|servationi condonatum iri sperantes, libenter in partem pientiorem (uti est visa) concessimus. In quo tamen vestrae nos gratiae correctioni submit|timus, si quid in hc ips re delinquimus, modo (quo possumus) humilimo supplicantes, ut pru|dentissima Majestas vestra omnem abhinc scrupu|lum  Statutis auferat  absolut pronunciet, quid hc posthc fieri oporteat. Vt Equities vi|delicet vestri cum celsitudine vestr, vel in bellis vel alibi missu vestro commorati (meritis exigen|tibus) codem privilegio, quod exteris in electio|ne reception sui per Procuratores est concessum, congaudere possent, vestro tamen in omnibus Iu|dicio semper salvo, serenitatem autem vestram cum insigni victori celebr triumpho  plen conservatae multitudinis  Commilitii glori re|ducat in Regnum;  ibi diuturnae pacis bono perfrui concedat ille Rex Regum Christus Jhesus, qui Capitales hostes nostros sub vexillo Crucis edomuit,  moriendo devicit. Windesori ab Arce vestr, Kalendis Maii.


NUM. XLV. A larger Letter to the same purpose. Registrum Chartac. fol. 6. b.
VIctoriosissime Princeps,  metuendissime Domine, Humilim Recommendatione praemiss, de magnificis vestris Regalibus, guer|rarum victoriosis eventibus gratiosis, corundem auctori, qui suo sub munimine vobis totiens con|tulit felicis triumphare, obsequios mente, gra|tiarum referimus actiones vestrae Regiaae celsitu|dini; insuper omnimodas reddentes odas debitas,  e magis, qu valemus, qud nostro minimo bumilimo motivo de Militibus per vestram Re|giam pietatem durantibus, vestris bellicis exer|citiis creandis interim in Milites Societatis Or|dinis Garterii,  per Procuratores more extero|rum installandis Aures vestrae magnificentiae Re|galis dirigere voluistis, ad tantam exauditionis gratiam, ut Regiam vestram benevolentiam ad hoc  unanimum assensum Commilitonum Ordi|nis vestro lateri Regio qum strenu assistentium, nobis, lict indignis, significare decrevistis, Ad effectum qud concors assensus ille nostro motivo mediante vim futuris temporibus statuti conti|neret, super cujus significationis grati,  vir|tute assenss, Dominum Willielmum Philipp, per procuratorem suum sufficientr constitutum installavimus, Dominos ver Johannem Grey, Johannem Robofarde, virtute Literarum sua|rum missivarum, in quibus suos solummodo nomi|narunt Procuratores, Dominum de Boucer, vir|tute Literae cujusdam deprecatoriae per Dominam Comitissam de Stafforde, Deputato transmisso, promisimus installari, e potis quod de sufficien|ti procuratorii hujusmodi in Statutis express non cavetur, ac praecavere volentes, ne per du|biosa infortunia guerrarum, quibus ipsos in ve|str Regali praesenti indies exponi perpendimus, de tam meritoriis suffragiis huic annexis, prae defectu plenitudinis sui juris, relicti, prae nostr vacillatione sub dubio, privari possent, seu veri|s eisdem carere, quod absit, prout jam tard contigit, quod dolentr referimus, prae nimi mo|r praepotentis viri ante plenitudinem morte praeventi. Pi sperantes nobis potis de vestro favore nimio pardonari, qum de sever,  stri|ct observatione Statutorum in hc parte lau|dari ex condigno, pensatis circumstantiis ac ani|mis praesumentium super quo tamen humilis in|clinati quo mins perit egimus, veniam peti|mus, omnimod vestrae Regiae correctioni nos pe|nits submittentes, supplicantes devotis qu va|lemus quatenus omnimodum incertitudinis scrupulum in praemissis Regia celsitudo dignetur de cetero cautis abolere, ac nostri praetextu mo|tivi statuere, ut finguli subditi vestri Milites, activis suis meritis exigentibus, in hanc eli|gendi commitivam, qui vel in vestr praesenti Regali seu alibi extra Regnum, dummodo ex mandato inibi militaverint Regali, pro perpetuo gaudere valeant privilegio nobili exterorum, Regali vestro judicio meliori in omnibus semper salvo. Et serenitatem Regiae celsitudinis cum Coron victoriae, servat strenu procerum multi|tudine, cum bono pacis faelicitr, reducat ad Regnum invictissimus Rex ille, qui in suo san|guine nostros dignatus est inimicos mortales sub vexillo Crucis moriendo devincere.


NUM. XLVI. Sir Iohn Grey's Letter Missive to Sir Iohn Lisle his Proctor. Registrum Chartac. fol. 6. A mon trescher  bien ame Monsieur Jehan Lisle.
WOrchipful Sir, I grete you wele, de|siryng to here, c. And wete ye,

that the Kyng of his gracious Lordshippe, God yelde him, hase chosen me, to be onne of his Brethrene, of the Knyghtes of the Gartier; And I hase chosen you, to be myne Attourney, to take my Stalle, in my name, what tyme that my Lorde of Bedforde, c. And I pray you, that ye wille do so moshe for me, at this tyme; as I may do thyng to your plesaunz in tyme comyng, c.
Writen before Roone,the xi. day of November.
John Grey.


NUM. XLVII. The Countess of Bristol's Deprecatory Letter. Ex ipso Autogr.
SIR,
PResuming from what I have been told of former times, that my Husband the Earl of Bristol, with many others, being by his Ma|jesties appointment to be installed Knights of the Garter, at Windsor, the next moneth, he may receive that honor by Proxie, at my request and nomination on his behalf, because himself is at present beyond the Seas, my desire to you hereby is, that, acquainting his Majesty herewith, you would be pleased, with his Soveraign permissi|on and approbation, to appear and act at that Solemnity in quality of my Lord's Proxie, according to the accustomed forms in such cases, wherein I assure my self you will perform a ve|ry acceptable service to my Lord, and therein ob|lige very much,
Your affectionate friend to command, A. Bristoll.
Queens-street,
March the 13.
1660.
Superscribed,
For Sir Richard Fanshae
Knight these. dd.


NUM. XLVIII. The Soveraign's Nomination of a Proxy thereupon. Ex ipso Autographo.
CHarles the Second by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, To our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir Richard Fanshawe, Knight, Greeting; Whereas we have appointed our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin George Earl of Bristol, lately elected into our said most Noble Order, to be installed (together with others) at the approaching solemnization of the Noble Feast of Saint George, in our Ca|stle at Windesor, on the 15.16. and 17. days of April next ensuing the date hereof. And where|as the said Earl cannot be there personally present, being detained in Foreign parts upon our special service (in which case he is priviledged alike with Foreigners by ancient Statute of our said Order, to receive his installation by Proxie) Know ye, that we of our particular grace and favour to you our said Servant, and finding in you all the statutable qualifications requird for such a Deputation, have nominated and ap|pointed, and by these presents (at the request and nomination of the Countess of Bristol, in the be|half of the Earl her Husband) do nominate, ap|point, and authorize you the said Richard Fanshawe, for and in the name of the said Earl, to possess his Seat in our Colledge at Windesor, and to take the Oath in such case accustomed, and to do and perform all other things which the Statutes require, and we do further by these presents will, authorize, and require all persons whom it may concern, as well Knights as Offi|cers, not only to admit this Proxie or Deputy of the said Earl, but also to do and perform in his regard all other things which shall appear re|quisite according to the Statutes and laudable Customs of our said most Noble Order. For all which these our Letters shall be to you and them sufficient Warrant on that behalf. Given un|der the Seal of our Order, at our Court at Whitehall, the sixteenth day of March 1661. and in the 13. Year of our Reign.


NUM. XLIX. Sir William Philipp's Letters of Procu|ration, to Sir Andrew Butrely and Sir Iohn Henington. Ex Libro Nigro, pag. 62.
OMnibus praesentes Literas inspeciuris aut audituris, Gulielmus Phyllipp Eques in|signitus, salutem. Noveritis, quod ubi supre|mo nostro Ordinis nostri Galliae pariter at Angliae Regi, complacuit ad id honoris ae gloriae me provehere velle, ut in samigeratissimam So|cetatem illam me unum intromitteret,  insupr ex abundanti suae gratiae, secum reputns quem|admodum in his transmarinis  bellicis rebus suo secum jussu distineor, potestatem mihi fe|ret sedis occupandae, caeteros ritus peragendi per idoneum procuratorem, Equitem (ut minus) au|ratum, insignibus donatum,  boni at irrepre|hensi nominis: Ob id ego prudenti ac virtute di|lectissimorum mihi, Domini Andreae Butreley,  Domini Johannis Henington, in quibus (ni sal|lor) quod ad strenuissimos Equites attineat nil desideres: cos vel eorum (ut res feret) alterum, in vicem meam statuo  deputo,  quicquid in me facultatis est, erga istam mei causam tribuo. Quibus tamquam mihimet ipsi impero, ut pro me, ac nomine mo Locum in Choro ac Concili mihi praenotatum ingrediantur Wyndesori, in|tra regale Castrum, ubi Claritas Ordinis sunda|ta relucet, Clamidem meam, Galeam atq, En|sem suscepturis, illic Offerant, ut ex more pr|pendeant;

pendeant; causas absentiae commonstrent, omnem legitimum at honestum jusjurandum quod po|stulabitur ultr prestent,  summatim omnia vice me sic exhibeant ac compleant, at si prae|sens ipse forem. In cujus rei testimonium Si|gillum meum ab Armis hc affixi. In obsidione Rothomagi, Novembris xi.


NUM. L. Sir Iohn Fastolfs Deputation to Sir Henry Inghouse, and Sir William Breton. Fr. Regr. fol. 14. b.
A tous ceulx, qui ces Lettres verront on or|ront, Johan Fastolf Chivaler salut. Sa|voir venilles que come il ait pleu a nostre Sove|rain Seigneur le Roy de Fraunce D'engle|terre, come Soverain  primer de L'ordre Mon|steur Seint George, de la Compaignie du Jartier, me faire tant de honnure que de me vueiller eslier  resseiver en un dez Compaignons du dit Ordre du Jartier,  en oultre de sa treshabun|dante grace considerant que je suis ocupi, pour le present, en son tres-honourable service perdec, m' a donn cong d'estre enstaill,  d'avoire touz aultres choses que en cas appertiennent fetes  fourns par procureur; mais tontevoies qe ce soit per Chivalier de nom  d'armes,  saunz reproche, pour ce est il, que singulierment con|fiant es sens  tresages discrecions  preudom|mie dez treshonnours Seigneurs,  mes tres|chiers  grauns amys messieur Henry Inghouse Guillaume Breton Chivalers, esquelx a ce que je tiens riens ne faute que aux vaillans Chi|valers doit appertenir, ay faite, ordein, consti|tu,  deput,  par ces presentes face, ordonne, constitue,  depute lez ditz Messieurs Henry  Guillaume,  checun deux par luy mesmes, vrais, certains,  especiaulx procureurs,  a eux, ou L'un d' eux ay donn,  donne povoir generall  especial mandement es meilleurs fourme  ma|niere que je say ou puis, pour  en nomme de moy demander, receveir,  obtenir L'estall en le chore,  lien en le Chapitre, en la Chapelle ou Collage du Roy nostre dit Seigneur, dedeins son Chastell de Wyndesore, ou quel est le dit Ordre found,  establez, vacanis,  qui pour moy y sont ou serront assignez,  y offrir mou manteau, moit healme,  mon espee,  les y attacher se|lanc la constume  maniere du dit Ordre, les cau|ses aussy de m'absence declarer,  tout serement licite  honneste, que de Constume y serra a requise, en lame de moy faire  donner,  generelment tout ce faire, excercer,  expedier, que es choses desuisditz serra aucunment necessaire  besoig|nable,  ma person de tout representier, si comme je y feusse mesmes en personne. En testimoigne de la quelle chose jay seell ces presentz du Seel de mez armez,  signe de ma maine, Donne  Lan|cone iii. jour de Feverier.
J. Fastolf.


NUM. LI. A Commission for Installation of Sir Iohn Fastolf by Sir Henry Inghous his Proctor. Ex Regist. Chartac. fol. 14. b.
HEnry par la grace de Dieu Roy D'engle|terre  de Fraunce, Seigneur D'yrlande  Souverain de L'ordre du Jartier, a nostre bien ame Johan Robessart Chivaler, lun de noz Com|paignons du dit Ordre, Salut. Come par le trespass de fieu nostre tres-chier  ame cosyn, le Counte de Westmerlaunde, dount dieux ait l'ame, en son vivant l'un de noz Compaignons du dit Ordre, au Chapitre tenuz en nostre Collage  Chapelle de nostre Castel de Wyndesore, le xxii. jour d'Aurel derreine pass veille de la Feste Monsieur Seint George, nostre ame John Fastolf Chivaler, pour consideration dez servi|cez q'il avoit faitz le temps pass a fieu nostre tres-redout Seigneur  Pere le Roy, que dieux assoile  depuis a nous comme uncore fait de jour en aultre pour reduire  mettre en nous mains nostre Royaume de Fraunce,  aultres noz Seig|neuries de par de l, en regarde aux grauns sens, vaillance,  preudommie darmez qui sont en sa personne par lez Compaignons du dit Ordre te|nans lors le dit Chapitre, saunz quelque con|tradiction  dun commun accord ait estre choisy  eslieu ou lieu de fieu nostre dit Cosyn un dez Compaignons de dit Ordre,  de present soit tielment occupi en fait de noz guerres quil ne puist pardec venir, ne repairer, pour en sa per|sonne entrer en sa possession, ains par nostre cong  lycence ait faite  constittu son procureur nostre ame Henry Inghous Chivaler pour  en nomme de luy en resseivoir la possession, confians a plain de voz sens, preudommie, loyault,  bon|ne diligence, vous mandons en commettant par ces presentes que si tost que par le dit Inghous, serres devement requis,  vous apperra du po|voir a luy donne par le dit Fastolf, vouz tran|sportez en nostre dit Chastel de Wyndesore,  en noz College  Chapelle de iceluy  pour  en nom du dit Fastolf mettez illec de par nous en possession le dit Henry Inghous son procureur, en la maniere accustumee, avec dez beneficez, honneures, prerogatives, Franchisez,  libertez ad ce appartenantz, en luy assignant l'estal en cuer  lieu en Chapitre, tielz que nostre dit Co|sin en son viuant lez soloient tenir  ocupier, Receyuez aussi son mantel  sez heaume  espee, mettoiz es lieux ou souloyent estre ceux de nostre dit Cousin en son viuant, Adjoustees en ce lez so|lempnitez de ce faire, vous donnous plain povoir, auctorite,  maundement especial, mandous a tous lez compaignons du dit Ordre que dez ditz estal, lieux, honneur, franchisez, prerogatives,  liber|tez, facent, sueffrent,  laissent joier le dit Fa|stolf plainement  paisiblement, ainsi  par lae maniere que lez ditz estatuz le contiennent  portent, sanz aucun contredit on difficult.

Donn en nostre Chastell de Walingesorde, soubz le seel du dit Ordre le xxv. jour de Fevrier L'an de grace mil quatre cens vingt  six,  de no|stre Reigne le cinquiesme.


NUM. LII. Another Commission for Installation of the Earl of Worcester, and other Knights-Subjects by their Proctors. Ex lib. vocat. Denton. fol. 100. b.
Edward par la grace de Dieu Roy D'engle|terre  de France, Signeur d'Irlande,  Soverayn de L'Ordre de Gartier, a nostre tres|chier  tresamey Cousin Henry Counte D'Essex,  a nous treschiers  bien aymes, Johan Sire de Berners, Johan Sire de Wenlok, nous con|freres de mesme L'ordre, ayons entre les aultres esten nostre treschier  tresayme Cousin Johan Counte de Worcestre  nos treschiers  chiers  bien aymes William Sire de Hastinges, nostre Chamberlayn, John Sire de Montacu, William Sire de Herbert,  Missieur Johan Astley Che|valier,  nous confreres de la dict Ordre,  soit ainxi que en les estatus en cedit nostre Royaulme seront establis personelement dedeins certain temps apres la reception de la Gartier, coment plus au plain est declarez en icelles estatutz, sea|voer faisons, que pour aulcunes considerations nous a c specialement moynantes,  mesmement que nostre dict Cousyn de Worcestre  les aultres Signeurs  Chevaliers dessusdits sont de present,  seront encores, tellement occupez entour nostre personne  nostre service pour le bien de nous  de nostre dit Royaulme quils ne puissent estre en|stallez personellement au temps que vouldrions a nous ordonnes  deputes, ordonnons  deputons par ces presentes vous jointment  severalle|ment  ace donnons playn pouver  auctorit, de admitter, recevoir,  establir en toute bonne haste que faire ce pourra iceluy nostre cousin de Worcestre  les Seigneurs  Chevaliers dessus|dits,  chescun d' eulx, par leur procureur ou procureurs par eulx en ceste partie constitues  deputes en les estalles a chescun deulx en nostre College de Seinct George, dedens nostre Cha|steau de Windesore, assigns ainsi  par telle maniere, que ung  chascun d' eulx y fussent a|doncquez presentz en leur propres personnes; aulcunes ordenances ou estatus faitz ou ordonns au contraire nox obstantz. En tesmoing de la quelle chose nous avons fait faire cestes nous Lettres soubs le Seel de la dict Ordre Patents, Donne a nostre Cyte de Lincoln le 21. Iour de Mars, L'au de nostre Reigne le secund.


NUM. LIII. Another for the Installation of the Earl of Warwick. Ex Collect. Iohanuis Vincent.
Elizabeth R.
ELIZABETH by the Grace of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defen|der of the Faith, and Soveraign of the most No|ble Order of the Garter, To our trusty and right entirely beloved Cousen and Counsellor the Duke of Norfolk, one of the Companions and Knights of the said Order, by us assigned and deputed to be our Lieutenant at the Feast of the glorious Martyr Saint George, Patron of the said Order, to be kept within our Castell of Windesor, the xxii. of May next coming, and others the Com|panions of the said Order that then shall be pre|sent, Greeting. Whereas, We with others the Companions of the said Noble Order assembled, at a Chapter holden at our Palleys of Westminster the xxiv. of Apprell last, have elected and cho|sen, among other, our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousen the Earl of Warwike to be Knight and Companyon of our said Order, and forasmuch as our said well-beloved Cousen, for divers services which by him is to be done for us in our affairs beyond the Seas, cannot con|veniently repair unto our Castell of Windesore personally to be installed, in the Collegiate Chap|pel of that Order, and to perform other Cere|monies, whereunto by the Statutes of the said Order he is bounden, and for that cause hath by our special license appointed our trusty and well-beloved Sir Henry Sidney Knight sufficiently au|thorized, as his deputy and procurer, to be in|stalled in his name, and to receive his Oath, and to perform all other such things and Ceremonies for him, as by the Statutes and Ordinances of the said Order be requisite, We therefore in con|sideration of the premisses will and by these pre|sents give unto you full power, licence, and au|thority, not only to accept and admit the said Sir Henry Sidney to be Deputy and procurer for our said well-beloved Cousen the said Earl of Warwick, and to install him in the behalf of the said Earl, but also further to do therein as to the Statutes and laudable usages of the said Noble Order in this case appertaineth: And these our Letters shall be your sufficient War|rant and discharge in this behalf. Yeven un|der the Seal of our said Order at our Palleys of Westminster the 20. day of May in the fifth Year of our Reign.



NUM. LIV. A Letter giving notice to the Sove|raign's Commissioners of the day of Installation of a Knight-Subject by his Proxy. Ibidem.
By the Queen.
RIght trusty and right well-beloved Cousen, we greet you well, And whereas we have appointed you, together with our right trusty and well-beloved Counsellor the Lord Hastinges of Loughborow, our Lord Chamberlen, to be in Commission for the stallment, in our Castell of Windesore, of our right trusty and well-be|loved the Lord Grey of Wilton, being lately chosen to be of the Fellowship, and a Compani|on of our Noble Order of the Garter. And forasmuch as the same Lord Grey is presently Prisoner with the French King, and therefore cannot be installed in his own person, Our plea|sure is, that he shall be installed by Sir Humfry Radclysse, Knight, whom we have appointed to be his Deputy in that behalf. And therefore have thought good not only to give you know|ledge thereof by these our Letters, but also to re|quire you to make your repair to our said Castell of Windesore, so as you may be there by Tues|day at night being the 19. of this present moneth, to the end that upon Wednesday next, being the xx. of this same moneth, he may proceed to the said Installation accordingly.
Yeven under the Seal of our said Order at our Mannor of Green|wich,the xvi. of April, the fourth and fifth years of our Reigns.

To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousen Th'Erle of Huntington, Compaignion and Knight of our Noble Or|der of the Garter.



NUM. LV. The Oath given to Sir Iohn Robesart's Proxy. Ex Regist. Chartac. fol. 5. a.
MOY Thomas Barr, Chivaler, procureur a mon Maister, Sire John Robesart, eslieux d'stre de l'honourable compaignie du Gar|ter, promete  jure, en lalme,  en nomme de mon dite Maister, de loialment garder,  ob|server les pointes queconquez, de lez estatutz, du dite Ordre, en cea, que a luy pertiendra, selonc le forme,  effecte dez estatuz susditz,  selonc son loial povoir.


NUM. LVI. The Oath given to the Lord Scroope's Proxy. Ex Collect. I. V.
YOV being Deputy and Procurer for the Lord Scroope of Bolton, named and chosen to be one of the Companions of the most honourable Order of the Garter, shall in the said Lords name promise and swear by the holy Evangelists by you here touched, that the said Lord, wittingly and willingly, shall not break any Statutes of the said Order, or any Article in them contained, the same being agreeable, and not repugnant to the Laws of Almighty God, and the Laws of this Realm, as for forth as unto him belongeth and appertaineth, As God you help and his holy Word.


NUM. LVII. The Certificate of Election to the French King Henry the Second. MS. quart. penes W. le N. f. 109. b.
TReshault  trespuissant Prince, trescher  tresaym bon frere  Cousin, tant  si affectueusement que faire pouvons, a vous nous recommendons. Comme par la tresgrande noblesse, prouesse,  aultres grandes vertus  merites de vostre tresnoble personne tant approuvs, que justement la fame en est par tout cognue,  oul|tre ce pour tant plus augmenter  faire accroi|stre, la bonne  fraternelle amiti  consede|ration d'entre vous  nous, nos Royaumes  Subjects, avons assembl en deu Collegialle  ancienne maniere avec les Chevaliers de nostre Ordre du Jarretiere, an Chapitre tenu  cele|br en nostre manoir de Greenwich, le xxiv. jour D'avril derniere pass, avons tous ensemble  d'un Commun  unanime consentiment  vouloir esleu, choisi,  nomm vostre tresnoble personne au nombre de nostre dit amiable Compagnie,  Or|dre du Jarretiere, de la quelle Election il nous a semble bon, vous advertir par cestes, vous priant trescordiallement, treshault  trespuissant Prince, trescher  tresam, bon frere  Cousin, de faire cest boneur a nous  toute la dite Com|paignie, de consentir a la dite Election, en ac|ceptant pour l'amour de nous,  comme par ce vous nous feres chose tres-agreable; ainsi nous estimerons nostre dit Ordre d'autant plus garni  decor, come entendres plus amplement par nos Ambassadeurs, qui pour ceste cause sont prests a partir par devers vous. Parquoy nous ne vous tiendrons ny plus long propos, Ains prions le Createur (treshaut  trespuissant Prince, trescher  tresaime bon frere  Cousin) vous avoir en sa tressainte  digne garde. Ex|cript a nostre Manoir de Greenwich, le  jour de May 1551.



NUM. LVIII. A Credential Letter sent to Emanuel Duke of Savoy, with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order. Ex MS. 4. penes W. le N. Cl. fol. 110.
TResbault  tresexcellent Prince, trescher  bien aim Cousin, a vous bien affectu|cusement nous nous recommendons. Comme sur l'advertissement que nous vous feismes de vostre Election icy au nombre  amiable Compaignie de nos confreres Chevaliers,  Compaignons, de nostre Ordre de la Jarretiere; vous avez signifi depuis vostre bonne  pronte acceptation,  sin|gulier contentement de la dite Election, si desi|rant affectueusement, qu'elle pregne son den ef|fect, Nous avons prontement  ce despech devers vous nostre tresseal  bien aim le Sieur de Clin|ton Say, Chevalier  Compagnon du dit Or|dre,  nostre seal  bien aim Gartiere, Roy d' Armes de l'Ordre; avec ample pouvoir  Commission non seullement pour vous presenter, bailler,  donner de par nous la Jarretiete, man|teau  aultres ensignes appartenantes au dit Or|dre, mais aussi faire tout aultre chose en tel cas accoustum  requise, come ferious si nous y fus|sions en personne, vous priant, trescher  bien aym cousin, de les accepter d' aussi bonne vouloir que desirons l'accroissement, par ce, de vostre hon|neur  renom: Et oultre ce d'adjouster soy a tout ce que nos dits commissaires vous diront  fe|ront, en nostre endroit, touchant leur Commission, ainsi que feries a nous mesmes: Que sera la fin de cestes pour la present,  ainsi treshault  excellent Prince, trescher  bien aym cousin, Dien vous ait en sa digne tuition. Escript a nostre Palaice de Westminster le 17. jour de Octobre, 1554.


NUM. LIX. Another to Frederick Duke of Wir|temberg. Ex Eq. aurat. Anglo-Wirtemb. p. 120.
QVandoquidem, m Domine Consanguinee (intelligit serenissimus Rex Angliae Du|cem illustrissimam Wirtembergiae, Fre|dericum) liquid nobis constat, qud, ut opti|mam affectionem erga Regnum hoc  T E semper ostensam, demortua Regina p. m. dilecta nostra soror agnosceret, ac vicissim suam in te benevo|lentiam peramicam contestaretur: elegerat te ac nominrat, ut Equestris Ordinis Garterii, sive Cruralis fasciae consors esses: quod tamen ob cou|sas aliquas in actum deducere distulit ac procra|stinata est: Nos autem obligationi promptae tue voluntati successimus,  ejus per Legatum tuum, nuper ade binc profectum, certum testimonium  confirmationem accepimus; eam nobis con|servare, ac praedictae nostrae dilectae sororis ami|citiae, laudabil erga te proposito satisfacere desideramus. Quod ut effectum jam mod suum obtineret, bunc ipsum in sinem praesentem Baero|nem Spencerum ad te Legatum elegimus, qui praeter amicam nostram salutationem, nostrum quo Garterium Ordinem tibi adferat ac tra|dat. Quamobrem hisee rogamus, ut eum ab il|lo acciptas, firmiter credas bunc ipsum Ordi|nem unum esse de praecipuis signis ac Testimoniis, quodeun nos externo Principi, ad nostram in ipsum amicissinam declarandam voluntatem,  de ipso existimationem, in qu merita ipsins  virtutes babeamus, tribuere possinmus: Ita ut bac ratione re ips  ipso facto quotiescun se offeret occasio, qu nobis tibi commodandi grat fa|ciendi facultas erit, ben nos affectos, promptos, ac paratos sis inventurus  experturus. Sicut idem san praenominato Spencero pluribus  lati tibi corm significandi dedimus manda|tum. Qu de causa fidem huic ut habeas, ora|mus, certo de nobis tibi persuadeas id, qud interim sumus  manchimus semper. Date Win|cestre, 18. Sept. 1603.


NUM. LX. Another to Maurice Prince of Orange. Ex Continuat. Thuani pag. 331. Edit. Francof. an. 1628.
MI cognate, virtutum tuarum fama,  egregia fortitudinis documenta, quae tum in Provinciarum Unitarum Belgii, jampridem firmo faedere regnis nostris junctarum, tum in re|ligionis, quae nobis cum Provinciis illis communis est, defensione edidisti, jamdudum in nobis desi|derium inveniendi occasionem qu quanti te feci|mus testaremur, excitarunt, convocatis igitur Equitibus  fratribus Ordinis aureae Perisce|lidis,  in corum numerum allecto cognato  fu|turo genero nostro, Electore Palatino, visium est ex consensu totius Collegii, ut te ipsi socium ad|jungeremus hac Electione ex voto nostro fact, tibi more majorum nostrorum insignia Ordinis mitti|mus,  Winwodo Equiti ac Legato nostro man|davimus ut ea tibi exhibeat, iis te amiciat: Insuper Gartero, fecialium nostrorum principi, ne|gotium dedimus, ut, quod sui muneris est, exequa|tur. Habe hoc  nobis sinceri affects testimo|nium: quem deinceps, quoties oceasio se dabit, pluribus aliis argumentis declarare parati su|mus, Ex Arce nostr Westmonasteriensi 9. kal. Jan. 1612.


NUM. LXI. Another to Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburgh, with the Garter and George. Ex Collect. E.W.G.
MON Frere, l'asseurance, que j'ay de vou|stre Amiti par pleusieurs tesmoignages, que vous m'en avez donnez m'oblige a rechercher tous les moyens qui seront capables de l'entre|tenir,

 de la conserver; Et pour ce sujet j'ay trouve  propos, comme Souverain du tresancien  tres-noble Ordre de la Jartiere, de vous eslire l'un des Chevaliers, paers,  Compagnons du dit Ordre, estimant par l de faire une plus estroite Amiti avec vous,  d'augmenter le bien  la prosperit de cette tres-noble societ, la|quelle par plusieurs siecles a eu non seulement les Roys D'angleterre nos predecesseurs pour Souverains, mais aussi l'honneur d'avoir plusi|eurs Empereurs, Roys,  Princes Estrangers pour Compagnons: Comme aussi de vous donner par l une marque evidente de mon affection,  de la haute estime que j'ay de vos merites,  de vostre personne,  pour confirmation de la dite Election je vous envoye par le Sieur Chevalier de Walker Iartiere, Roy d'Armes, la Medaille dite le George, la Jartiere  l'Estoille, pour les Por|ter a la maniere accoustume: Assavoir la Me|daille antour du Corps, la Jartiere  la Iambe gauche,  l'Estoille sur le Coste gauche de la Casaque ou du Manteau. Le dit Sieur de Wal|ker vous asseurera de ma part, que je desire avec passion de vous tesmoigner, que je suis,
Mon frere, Vostre bien affectionn frere  Cousin. C. R.
A Paris le 23. de Januier 1654.

A Mon frere Monsieur le Marquis de Brande|burg P. Electeur du Saint Empire.



NUM. LXII. A Commission for delivery of the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, to Charles Duke of Burgundy. Ex amplo Codice MS. penes praef. Iohannem Vincent, fol. 175.
EDward, par la Grace de Dieu, Roy D'an|gleterre  de France,  Seigneur d'Ir|lande, Souverain de L'Ordre de la Jarretiere, A tous ceulx qui ces presentes lettres verront, sa|lut: Comme treshault  puissant Prince, nostre tresame frere, Charles, Duc de Bourgoigne, pour les glorieuses merites de ses vertuz, haultesse,  Noblesse, dont la Renommee s'est par tout Re|spandue, a est nadguaires par nous  noz con|freres Chevaliers,  Compaignons du dit Ordre, en nostre Palais de Westmonstier assemblez, esleu Chevalier  Compaignon d'icelluy Ordre, en lieu lors vacant, si comme par nous aultres lettres a nostre dit frere adresses en signifiant la dite esle|ction est contenu plus a plain, voulans  desirans tresaffectueusement la dit eslection sortir son deu effect,  perfection, scavoir faisons que nous con|fians es feaultez, discretions,  diligences de nostre feal  bien am Messir Galliard, Seig|neur de Duras, Chevalier  Compaignon dudit Ordre, Et de noz feaulx  bien amez conseil|lers Messire Jehan Scott, Chevalier, controleur de nostre hostel, Thomas Vahan, Tresorier de nostre Chambre, Maistre Jehan Russell Docteur es Descretz, archidiacre de Barkshire, Jarre|tiere, Roy D'armes, les cinq, quatre, trois, ou deulx, dont le dit Seigneur de Duras soit tous|jours l'un, avons ordonn commis  deput, Or|donnous, Commttons,  Deputons, par ces pre|sentes, noz Ambassadeurs Procureurs  Messa|gers especiaulx,  leur donnons povoir, aucto|rit  mandement especial, d'eulx transporter par devers nostre dit frere,  de luy presenter, bailler,  donner de par nous la Iarretiere, le mantell,  autres enseignes par nous presente|ment a luy envoyes, avec toutes les ceremonies  solempnitez deus  acoustumes d'estre pre|sentez, baillez, on donnez en tel cas, Et oultre de Recevoir de nostre dit frere le serment, selon la forme  maniere de estatuz du dit Ordre, Et autres choses faire  exercer  expedier, que a eulx sembleront estre necessaires en ceste partie, tout ainsi que faire deurions  pourrions, si y estions en nostre personne, En tesmoign de ce, a ces pre|sentes noz lettres nous avons fait mettre le Seau du dit Ordre du Jatretier, Donn en nostre Pa|lais de Westmonstier le x. jour de Januier l'an M. CCCC. LXIX.


NUM. LXIII. Another for delivery of them to Fer|dinand Arch-Duke of Austria. Ex MS. fol. penes E. W. G. f. 18.
HEnry le huitiesme, par la grace de Dieu, Roy D'angleterre,  de Fraunce, De|fenseur de la Foy, Seigneur D'irlande, Souve|rain de la tres-noble Ordre de Saint George, nomme la Jarretiere, A tous ceulx, qui ces pre|sentes Lettres verront, Salut. Comme treshault, excellent  puissant Prince, nostre tresam Cou|sin  bon Nepueu, Dom. Fernando, Infante de Castille, Archiduc D'austrich, Conte de Tyrol, c. Lieutenant du Saint Empire, pour les grans merites de ses vertus, hautesse,  noblesse, dont la renomme, s'est par tout espandue, a est na|guerres par nous  noz Confreres Chevaliers  Compaignons du dit Noble Ordre, en nostre Ma|noir de Richemont assambles, esleu Chevalier  Compaignon d'icelluy Ordre de Saint George, en lieu vacant, voulans  desirans tresaffecteusse|ment la dit eslection sortir son deu effect  per|fection; Savoir faisons, que nous confians es feaults, descrecions,  diligence de nostre feal  bien ame Messire Henry, Seigneur de Morley,  aussi de noz feaulx  bien amez Maistre Ed|ward Lee, Docteur en Theologie, Archidiacre de Colchester, nostre Aulmonier, Messire Guillaume Husey, Chevalier,  Messire Thomas Wriothe|sley, Jarretiere, nostre Principal Roy D'armes, nostres Conseillours, les quatre, troys, ou deux, dont le dit Seigneur de Morley soit tousjours l'ung, avons ordonn, commys,  Deput, Or|donnons, commettons,  deputons, par ces pre|sentes, noz Ambassadeurs, procureurs,  messai|gers especiaulx,  leur donnons povoir, autorit

 mandement especial, d'eulx transporter par devers nostre dit Cousin  bon Nepuen,  de luy presenter, bayller,  donner, de par nous, la Iarretiere, l'habit,  aultres Enseignes par nous presentement a luy envoyes, avec toutes les solempnitez  Ceremonyes deuz  accustumez d'estre presentes, bailles, ou donnes, en tel cas; Et oultre de recevoir, de nostre dit Cousin  bon Nepueu, le serment, selon la fourme  maniere dez Estatuz du dit Noble Ordre,  aultres choses faire exercer  expedier, que a eux sem|bleront estre necessaires en cest partie, tout  ainsy que faire deurions ou prrions, si y estions en nostre personne. En tesmoigne de ce, a ces pre|sentes noz lettres, signees de nostre main, nous avons faict metre le Seau du dit Noble Ordre de Saint George nomm la Jarretiere.
Donn en nostre Chasteau de Wyndesore,le xviii. jour d'Aoust, L'an de Grace M. D. XXIII. Et le xv. An de nostre Regne.
Pexsall.


NUM. LXIV. Another for their delivery to Emanuel Duke of Savoy. Ex Collect. Gul. le N. Cl.
PHilippe Marie par la grace de Dicu Roy  Royne d'Angleterre, France, Na|ples, Jerusalem, Irlande, Defenseurs de la Foy, Prince  Princesse d'Espagne, Sicille, Ar|chiduc  Archiduchesse d'Austriche, Duc  Duchesse de Millain, Burgoigne, Brabant, Conte  Contesse de Flanders, Hasburg, Tyroll, c. A tous ceulx qui ces presentes Lettres verront, Salut. Comme treshault  tresexcellent Prince Emanuel Philibert, Duc de Savoy, Chablais, Auguste, Prince  Vicar perpetuel du Saint Em|pire, Marquis en Italie, Prince de Piemont, Conte de Geneve, c. Lieutenant  Capitain Generall pour nostre trescher pere L'empereur, pour ses grandes merites  prouesses, noblesse,  autres vertus, dont la renommee s'est par tout divulgee  esparse, eut est naguieres par nous  nos confreres Chevaliers  Compagnons, de no|stre Ordre de la Jarretiere, en nostre Chasteau de Windesor assemblees, esleu Chevalier  Com|pagnon d'icelluy Ordre en lien l vacant, com|me par nos aultres lettres, a nostre dit Cousin addresses, en signifiant son Election est contenu plus a plain, voulans  desirans affectueusement la Election sortir son deu effect  perfection, Sea|voir faisons, que nous, confians es fialtie, discreti|on,  diligence de nostre trefeal  bien aim le Seigueur de Clinton  Saye, Chevalier  Com|pagnon de nostre Ordre,  de nostre feal  bien aym Jarretiere, Roy d'armes d'icelluy Ordre, a|vons Ordonn, Commis,  deput, Ordonnons, Com|mettons,  deputons, par ces presentes, nos Am|bassadeurs, procureurs,  Messagiers especiaulx,  leur donnons pouvoir authorit  mandement especial, d'eulx transporter au aim nostre Cosin,  a luy presenter, bailler,  donner de par nous la Iarretiere,  le manteau,  aultres enseignes par nous presentement a luy envoyes, avecque toutes les Ceremonies  solempnities, deus,  accoustums d'estre presentees, baillees  donnees en tel cas,  oultre de recevoir, de nostre Cosin, le Sacrement, selon la forme et maniere dez esta|tutz du dit Ordre,  toute aultre chose faire  expedier que a eulx sembleront necessaires en cest endroict, tout ainsi que faire deburious  pourrious, si y estions en nos personnes propres. En temoign de ce, avons souscript de nostre main propre ces presentes lettres,  y faict mettre le Seel du dit Ordre de la Jarretiere; Donn ou nostre Palais de Westminster le xvii. jour de Octobre 1554.


NUM. LXV. Another for their delivery to the French King, Charles the Ninth. Ex ipso Autogr.
ELizabeth par la grace de dieu, Royne d'An|gleterre, France, Irlande, Defenseur de la foy, c. a tout ceulx, qui ces patentes Lettres verront, Salut. Come treshault, tresexcellent, tres|puissant Prince, nostre trescher  tresam frere,  Cousin, le Roy tresebrestien Charles de France, tant pour ses tresgrandes noblesse, dons,  vertus singuliers, dont Dieu l'a orn,  la renommee s'en est par tout divulgue,  esparse,  que pour tant plus augmenter,  establir la bonne amitie,  intelligence qui est entre nous,  nostre dit bon frere, ait est naguieres par nous  nos con|freres Chevaliers  Compagnons de nostre Ordre de Jarretiere, en nostre Chastean de Windsore assembls, eleu Chevalier  Compagnon d'iceluy Ordre, en lieu l vacant, voulant  desirant af|fectueusement la ditte election sortir son deu ef|fect  perfection; scavoir faisons que nous con|fians es feaults, discretions,  diligences de nostre trescher  bien aim Cousin, le Sieur de Hunsdon, Chevalier,  Compagnon de nostre Ordre,  de nos feaulx  bien aims Messieurs, Thomas Smith, Chevalier, nostre Ambassadeur resiant aupres nostre dit bon frere,  Messieur Gilbert Dethick, Chevalier, Roy D'armes d'ice|luy Ordre, les avons ordonn, commis,  depu|t, ordonnons, commettons,  deputons, par ces presentes nos ambassadeurs, procureurs,  messa|giers expeciaulx,  leur donnons pouvoir, au|thorite,  mandement especial d'eulx trouver, devers nostre dit bon frere,  de luy presenter  donner, de par nous, la Jarretiere,  le manteau,  autres enseignes par nous presentement a luy envoyes, avecques toutes les Ceremonies,  so|lemnits deus,  accoustumieres d'estre presen|tes, bailles,  donnes en tel cas,  oultre ce, faire,  expedier, toutes aultres choses, que a eulx sembleront necessaires en cest endroit, tout ainsi que faire deburious,  pourrions, si y estions enostre propre personne. En tesmoing de ce, avons sousescript de nostre main propre ces presentes,  y fait mettre le Scel du dit Ordre de la Jarreti|ere; Donn a nostre maison de Richmond le

xxviii. jour de May, l'an de grace, mil cinq cens, soixante  quatre,  de nostre regne le sixiesme.


NUM. LXVI. Another for their delivery to Maxi|milian the Emperor. Ex Collect. Gul. le N. Cl.
ELizabetha, Dei grati, Angliae, Franciae, Hiberniae Regina fidei Defensor, c. Om|nibus ad quos presentes Litterae sint perventurae, salutem. Cm invictissimus  potentissimus Prin|ceps, frater  consanguineus noster, Clarissimus Maximilianus, Romanrum Imperator, c. non solum ob dignitatis suae fastigium, dots ac vir|tutes animi heroicas, quibus illum ita cumulat ornavit ac illustravit Deus Optimus Maximus, ut earum per universum Orbem fama dimana|verit, verum etiam ut amicitiae ac intelligentiae arctioris vinculum inter nos firmetur ac stabilia|tur, Ex nostro nostrorum Confratrum, Equitum ac sociorum Ordinis Garterii assensu  consensu, nuper in dictum Ordinem nostrum Garterii elec|ctus  susceptus fuerit; Vt hanc electionem, prout par est, absolvamus,  ad effectum per|ducamus, notum facimus, qud prudentiae  dex|teritari pernobilis  perdilecti consanguinei no|stri Thomae, Comitis Suffexiae, c. unins Equi|tum Sociorum dicti nostri Ordinis, ac dilecti no|stri Gilberti Dethick, Militis,  Regis Armo|rum, plurimm confidentes, illos Legatos, Pro|curatores,  nuncios nostros speciales ordina|vimus, deputavimus,  constituimus, prout per praesentes Ordinamus, Deputamus,  Constitui|mus, iis potestatem, authoritatem, ac manda|tum speciale damus, non solum sese versus di|ctum Imperatorem conferendi,  illi nostro no|mine praesentandi Garterium, pallium, ali in|signia quae in praesenti illi  nobis mittuntur, verm etiam omnes Ceremonias ac Solennitates peragendi, quae, in hc parte, ex usu  consue|tudine fieri  peragi solent, omni reliqua ex|pediendi, quae ad hoc negotium spectant, quaeq, il|lis videbuntur necessaria, haud minus ac si nos ipsi praesentes facere  expedire vellemus. In cujus rei testimonium has literas fieri fecimus patentes, nec non illas manu nostr subscriptas, Sigillo dicti Ordinis communiri jussimus. Da|tum in Regi nostr Westmonasteriensi xx. die Maii Anno Domini 1567. regnorum ver no|strorum nono.
ELIZABETHA.


NUM. LXVII. Another for Delivery of them to Fre|derick the Second, King of Denmark. Ex Autogr. in Bibliot. Hatton.
ELizabetha Dei grati Angliae Franciae Hiberniae Regina, fidei Defensor, c. uni|versis  singulis praesentes has literas nostras vi|suris, inspectaturis,  audituris, salutem. Cm serenissimus Princeps, frater  consanguineus noster charissimus Fredericus, Dei grati Daniae, Norwegiae, Gothorum, Vandalorm Rex, c. plurimarum Heroicarum Virtutum splendore  grati nobilitatus, Orbem Christianum fam no|minis sui impleverit, e jam ante annos ali|quot animum nostrum accenderit, ut eam ami|citiam in person ejus melioribus quibus potui|mus officiis cultiorem redderemus, quam haere|ditario quodam jure sanctissimae memoriae nobilis|simi Majores  Antecessores nostri nobis com|mendrunt, nullis autem officiis erga tam cha|rum Principem satisfacientes nobis, eum nuper elegerimus, conspirantibus omnibus omnium Com|militonum suffragiis, in illustrissimi Ordinis Garterii nobilissimam societatem, quo arctiori be|nevolentie vinculo, si fieri posset, eum in dies singulos nobis magis magis conjungeremus, ut|pote Principem ver Christianum, in cujus ami|citi vel maxim cupimus conquiescere, sum|m desiderio aventes ut quod non nisi auspica|tissim incaepimus, ad optatum finem perduca|tur; Sciatis, quod nos, de fidelitate, pruden|ti  diligenti praenobilis viri plurimm nobis chari, Domini Peregrini, Domini de Willough|by, Ersby,  spectabilis Viri Gilberti De|thick Equitis, Regis Armorum Ordinis, pluri|mm confidentes, ipsos nostros veros,  indubi|tatos Ambasciatores, Procuratores,  Oratores speciales, assignavimus, fecimus,  constituimus, assignamus, facimus,  constituimus, per prae|sentes, dantes eis potestatem, authoritatem  mandatum speciale ad praefatum Fratrem  Consanguineum nostrum charissimum proficis|cendi, e deferendi  donandi, nostro nomine,  pro nobis, Subligaculum, Trabeam,  reliqua Insignia Illustrissimi Ordinis nostri Gar|terii, per nos ad praesens ad illum transmissa, caeter peragendi qum officiosissime,  religio|sissim poterunt, quae ad honoratissimi illius Or|dinis decus  ornamentum quoquo modo putabunt pertinere, haud aliter atque ipsi faceremus, si praesentes essemus. In cujus rei testimonium bas Literas nostras manu nostr subscriptas, Sigillo dicti Ordinis Garterii communiri fecimus. Datae  Regi nostr Grenewici 27. die Mensis Junii, anno salutis Humanae supra millesimum quin|gentesimum, octuagesimo secundo, regni ver nostri vicesimo quarto.
ELIZABETHA.


NUM. LXVIII. Another for delivery of them to Henry the Third of France. MS. 4. penes Arthur. Com. Anglesey. p. 63. b.
ELizabeth, by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, c. To all those to whom these presents shall come, Greeting. Forasmuch as

the right high, right excellent, and right mighty Prince, our right dear and right well-beloved Brother, and Cozen, the most Christian King, Hen|ry of France, as well for his right great Nobi|lity, gifts and virtues singular, wherewith God had endued him, the renown whereof is dispersed and divulged throughout, and that the more to augment and establish the good amity and intel|ligence which is between us and our said good Brother, he hath been not long since by us and our felow Brethren the Knights and Companions of our Order of the Garter, in our Castell of Windesore assembled, chosen Knight and Com|panion of the same Order, in place there vacant, We willing and desiring affectiously the same Election to take its due effect and perfection, give to understand, that We, trusting in the fidelities, discretions, and diligence of our right dear and well-beloved Cozen, the Earl of Darby, Knight and Companion of our said Order, and of our faithful and well-beloved, Sir Edward Stafford Knight, our Embassador resident with our said good Brother, have ordained, committed, and de|puted, and do ordain, commit, and depute them by these presents our Embassadors, Procurators, and Messengers especial. And we give them power, authority, and especial charge to go unto our said good Brother, and to present and give him from us the Garter, the Mantle, and other En|signs by us presently sent unto him, with all the Ceremonies and Solemnities due and accustomed to be presented, given, and delivered in such case: And furthermore to do and dispatch all other things, which unto them shall be thought neces|sary in that behalf, even so as we our selves ought and might do, if we were there in our own proper person; In witness whereof we have subscribed these presents with our own proper hand, and thereunto caused the Seal of our said Order of the Garter to be put. Dated at our Mannor of Greenwich, the xx. day of January, the year of our Lord 1584. and of our Reign the 27.
ELIZABETH.


NUM. LXIX. Another for Delivery of them to Henry the Fourth of France. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
ELizabeth, par la grace de Dieu Royne d'An|gleterre, France, Irlande, Defenseur de la Foy, c. A tous ceux qui ces presents verront, salut. Comme le treshault, tresexcellent,  trespuissant Prince, nostre treseber  tresam frere,  Cousin, le Roy tresebrestien Henry de France  de Navarre, tant pour sa treshaulte noblesse, dons,  vertus singuliers, dont Dieu l'a orn  l'a renomm, s'en est par tout divul|gue  esparse, que pour tant plus augmenter  establir la bonne amiti  intelligence, qui est entre nous,  nostre dit bon frere, ait este n'agua|res par nous  nos Confreres  Compagnons de nostre Ordre de la Jartiere, en nostre Chasteau de Windsore assembles, este Chevalier,  Com|pagnon d'icelluy Ordre, en lieu l vacant, vou|lans  desirans affectucusement la dite Election sortir son deu effect  perfection, Svoir fai|sons, que Nous confians es feautes, disretions  diligences de nostre tresher  bien aim Cousin, le Comie de Shrewsbury, Chevalier  Com|pagnon de nostre dit Ordre,  de nostre feal  bien aim Guillaume Dethick Iartier, nostre premier Roy d' Armes, c. d'icelluy Ordre, les avons Ordonne Commis  Deput, Ordonnons, Commettons,  Deputons par ces presentes, Nos Ambassadeurs, procureurs,  messagiers especi|als,  leur donnons pouvoir authorit  man|dement especial, d'eux trouver vers nostre dit bon frere,  de luy presenter  donner, de par nous, la Jarretire, Robe, Manteau, Collier,  les autres ensignes par nous presentement a luy en|voyes, avecques toutes les Ceremonies  Solen|nits deus  accoustumes d'stre presentes, bailles,  donnes en tel cas. Et oultre ce, faire  expedier toutes autres choses que  iccux sembleront necessaires en st endroit, tout ainsi que faire deburions  pourrions, si y estions en nostre propre personne; En tesmoign de ce, avons soubs|eserit de nostre propre main ces presentes,  y fait mettre le Seel du dit Ordre de la Jartiere. Donn a nostre maison de Greenwich, le 6. jour de Septembre, L'an de grace Mil cin cens qua|tre vingts  seize,  de nostre Reigne, le trente huitisme.
ELIZABETH.


NUM. LXX. Another for their Delivery to Christian the Fourth, King of Denmark. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
JAcobus, Dei grati, Angliae, Scotiae, Fran|ciae, Hiberniae Rex, Fidei Defensor, c. Vniversis  singulis, Patentes hasce litteras nostras lecturis  inspecturis, salutem. Cum multae justissime sint causae, cur nos serenissimo Principi, fratri,  consanguinco nostro charissimo, Christiano, Dei grati, Daniae, Norvegiae, Go|thorum, Vandalorum Regi, Omnia benevo|lentie at amicitiae Officia praestare, at honores (quantum in nobis est) maximos at amplissimos tribuere debeamus;  ob cas causas (more in|stitut Majorum qui maximis principibus  nobilissimis, at exemi virtute praeditis homi|nibus, hunc honorem semper habuerunt) Regem illum propinquitate at amiciti nobis conjun|ctissimum in corum numerum asciverimus, totius societatis consensu elegerimus, qui celeberrimo at illustrissimo Garterii (ut appellatur) Ordine apud nos honorantur; ideirco notum atq, testa|tum omnibus esse volumus, nos pro fide, pruden|ti  diligenti Nobilissimi viri, Cognati no|stri, Rogeri Comitis Rutlandiae, item spectabilis viri Gulielmi Segar, armigeri, Regis Armorum Ordinis, nobis spectat at explorat, illos

assignsse, fecisse,  constituisse, per hasce lit|teras assignare, facere,  constituere, certos  indubitatos Ambasciators, procuratores,  Oratores nostros, iis potestatem, autboritatem  speciale mandatum dedisse ad praefatum Re|gem, fratrem,  consanguineum nostrum profi|ciscendi, e nostro nomine  pro nobis Subli|gaculum Trabeam,  reliqua illustrissimi Ordinis nostri Garterii insignia, hoc tempore  nobis ad illum transmissa, deferendi, tradendi, at donandi, ad omnia deniqu (qum poterunt officiosissime ac religiosissime) praestanda  pera|genda, quae ad honoratissimi illius Ordinis de|cus  Ornamentum, spectare videbuntur, perin|de at ipsi faceremus, si praesentes essemus. In cujus rei testimonium, hasce litteras nostras Pa|tentes, propri manu nostr subscriptas, Sigillo praedicti Ordinis nostri communiri fecimus. Datae  Regi nostr Grenevicensi die 23. Junii, Anno Christi 1603.
JACOBUS.


NUM. LXXI. Another for delivery of them to Fre|derick Duke of Wirtemberg. Ex Lib. Collect. Tho. Row Eq. Aur. Ord. Canc. f. 206.
JAcobus Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Fran|ciae, Hiberniae Rex, fidei Defensor, c. Vniversis  singulis praesentes has literas no|stras visuris, inspecturis, vel audituris, salutem. Cm illustrissimus Princeps, ac Dominus, Domi|nus Fredericus Dux Wirtembergensis, Te|kensis, Comes Montis belegardi, Dominus in Hay|denheim, Consanguineus,  Affinis noster cha|rissimus, plurimarum Heroicarum virtutum splen|dore,  grati Nobilitatus, Orbem Christianum fam nominis sui impleverit, e jam ante ali|quot annos animum nostrum accenderit, ut eam amicitiam in person ejus, melioribus quibus po|tuimus Officiis, cultiorem redderemus, quam hae|reditario quodam jure Sanctissimae memoriae No|bilissimi Majores  antecessores nostri nobis commendrunt, Nullis autem Officiis erga tam charum Principem satisfacientes nobis, cm nuper elegerimus (conspirantibus omnibus omnium sus|fragiis) in illustrissimi Ordinis nostri Garterii Nobilissimam Societatem quo arctiori benevo|lentiae vinculo (si fieri posset) eum in dies singu|los nobis magis magis conjungeremus, utpote Principem vere Christianum, in cujus amicitiae vel maxim cupimus conquiescere, summo desi|derio aventes, ut quod non nisi auspicatissime in|cepimus ad optatum finem perducatur. Sciatis, qud nos de fidelitate, prudenti,  diligenti praenobilis viri, plurimum nobis chari, Domini Roberti Spencer de Wormleiton,  spectabilis viri Gulielmi Dethick Equitis, Garteri, Regis Armorum Ordinis, plurimm confidentes, ipsos nostros veros  indubitatos Legatos, Procura|tores,  Oratores speciales assignavimus, fecimus,  constituimus, assignamus, facimus,  con|stituimus per praesentes, dantes eis potestatem, authoritatem,  mandatum speciale, ad prae|fatum consanguineum nostrum charissimum pro|ficiscendi, eiq, deferendi,  donandi, nostro no|mine  pro nobis, Subligaculum Trabeam,  reliqua vestimenta, insignia illustrissimi Or|dinis nostri Garterii, per nos ad praesens ad illum transmissa, caetera peragendi, quam officiosissi|me religiosissim poterunt, quae ad honoratissi|mi illius Ordinis decus,  ornamentum quoquo modo putabunt pertinere, baud aliter ac si ipsi faceremus, si praesentes essemus. In cujus rei testimonium has litteras nostras, manu nostr sub|scriptas, Sigillo dicti Ordinis nostri Garterii com|muniri fecimus. Datae Manerio nostro de Wood|stock, decimo octavo die Mensis Septembris, An|no regni nostri Angliae, Franciae, Hiberniae primo,  Scotiae 37. 1603.
JACOBUS.


NUM. LXXII. Another for their delivery to Maurice, Prince of Aurange. MS. in Bibl. Hatton. f. 227. b.
JAcobus c, Cum uibil magis Officium Regale deceat, qum viris virtutes  fortitudinis fam illustrissimis honores maximos  amplissi|mos tribuere; Quorum in numero, singulari vir|tute emicuit, hc nostr, aetate, illustrissimus con|sanguineus noster, Mauritius, Princeps Auriaci, Comes Nassoviae, c. Nos more instituto Ma|jorum, qui tantis viris, quae apud ipsos charissima sunt honoris Monumenta, communicare soliti sunt, praedictum principem Mauritium cm ami|citi nobis conjunctissimum, tm propter merita sua dilectissimum, in eorum numerum ascripsi|mus, totius societatis consensu elegimus, qui celeberimo at illustrissimo Garterii (ut appella|tur) Ordine apud nos honorautur. dcirco no|tum at testatum omnibus esse volumus, nos pro fide, prudenti,  diligenti nobilissimi Radol|phi Winwood, Equitis Aurati, nostri apud foederatas Belgii Provincias Legati; Item spectabilis viri Gulielmi Seagar, Garterii, nomi|ne, Principalis apud nos Armorum Regis,  no|bis spectat, at explorat, illos assignasse, fecisse,  constituisse, per, has literas assignare, facere,  constituere certos  indubitatos Ambasciato|res, Procuratores,  Oratores nostros, iis po|testatem, authoritatem,  speciale mandatum dedisse, ad praefatum principem Consanguineum nostrum proficiscendi, ei nostro nomine,  pro nobis, quedam Garterii insignia (caeteris suo tem|pore postea praestandis) hoc tempore  nobis ad illum transmissa deferendi at donandi, ad omnia deni, qum poterunt officiosissim,  religiosissime  peragenda, quae ad honoratissi|mi illius Ordinis decus  Ornamentum spe|ctare videbuntur, perinde atque ipsi faceremus,

si praesentes essemus. In cujus rei, c. Date  Palatio nostro Westmonasteriensi, vicesimo quar|to die Decembris, Anno Domini 1612.


NUM. LXXIII. Another for their Delivery to Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden. Ex Lib. Collect. praef. Tho. Row. fol. 207.
CArolus, Dei grati, Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, Hiberniae Rex, fidei Defensor, c. Vniversis  singulis hasce literas nostras Lecturis aut inspecturis, salutem. Cm serenis|simus ac potentissimus Princeps, frater,  con+sanguineus noster charissimus Gustavus Adol|phus, Dei grati, Suecorum, Gottorum, Van|dalorumq, Rex, virtutis suae, ac nobilitatis splendore, rerum gestarum glori ac nominis sui fam Orbem Christianum impleverit: ad nostrum officium pertinere putavintus, illi non solm omnia benevolentiae, atque amicitiae officia, tanquam principi nobis conjunctissimo,  ami|cissimo praestare, sed etiam honores (quantum in nobis est) maximos at amplissimos tribuere, es inprimis quibus militaris in summo duce virtus solet decorari; pro more igitur  insti|tuto Majorum nostrorum Regumi Angliae, qui maximis Principibus,  eximi virtute ac no|bilitate praeditis hominibus hunc honorem ha|buerunt, Nos Regem illum, communibus omni|um Sociorum suffragiis, in celeberrimi Ordinis Garterii (ut vocatur) collegium elegimus. Et proinde notum  testatum omnibus esse volumus, Nos pro fidelitate, prudenti  diligenti nobi|lissimi viri de Conclavi nostro, Jacobi Spenei de Wormston, Equitis aurati,  spectabilium vi|rorum Petri Yong armigeri, unius ex nobili|bus nobis in cubiculo praesentiae nostrae mini|strantibus,  Henrici Saint Georgii, Armigeri, unius ex Heraldis nostris ad Arma, nobis specta|t at explorat, illos assignasse, fecisse,  con|stituisse, per hasce Literas assignare, facere,  constituere, certos  indubitatos Legatos, Ora|tores,  Procuratores nostros, iis potestatem, au|thoritatem,  speciale mandatum dedisse, ad praefatum Regem, fratrem,  consanguineum no|strum proficiscendi, ei nomine nostro,  pro nobis, Subligaculum, Trabeam,  reliqua illustrissimi Ordinis nostri Garterii insignia, jam  nobis ad illum transmissa, deferendi, tradendi, at donandi, ad omnia deni (quam poterunt officiocissim ac religiocissim) praestanda  pera|genda, quae ad honoratissimi illius Ordinis decus,  Ornamentum pertinere videbuntur: perinde at, ipsi faceremus, si praesentes essemus. In cujus rei testimonium hasce Literas nostras Pa|tentes, propri manu nostr subscriptas, Sigillo dicti Ordinis nostri Garterii communiri fecimus. Datae  Palatio nostro Westmonasteriensi, vi|cesimo quarto die Junii, Anno Domini 1627. Sti|lo Angliae.


NUM. LXXIV. Another for Delivery of them to Charles Prince Elector. Ibidem, fol. 213.
CArolus, Dei grati Magnae Britanhiae, Franciae, Hiberniae Rex, fidei Defen|sor, Periscelidis Ordinis Georgiani Supre|mus, c. universis  singulis hasce literas no|stras lecturis, aut inspecturis salutem. Cm nos omnes  singuli, illustrissimi Ordinis Garterii Socii, Equites, decimo octavo die Aprilis, Anno regni nostri nono, apud Palatium nostrum Albae Aulae Westmonasterii Capitulariter congregati, charissinum nostrum Nepotem, unicae,  dilectis|simae Sororis nostrae mod filium natu maximum, Carolum Principeur Imperii Electorem, Comi|tem Palatinum non solm propter Regii nostri Sanguinis communionem,  propinquitatem, sed etiam ad fovendas,  excitandas ineuntis aetatis virtutes, mirific, cum admiratione,  spe totius Orbis Christiani pullulantes, tm in sui Principats administratione, qum in rei militaris scienti more,  instituto majorum nostrorum Regum Angliae (quibus solenne fuit nobilissimos quosque,  summa virtute praeditos Principes, hoc honore decorare) communibus suf|fragiis, in celeberrimum nostri Ordinis Garterii Collegium  Societatem co-optavimus,  elegi|mus; Proinde notum esse volumus, Nos pro fide|litate, prudenti,  diligenti, spectatissimi viri Gulielmi Boswell armigeri, procuratoris nostri Regiorum in Belgia negotiorum, assidu vigilan|tissimi; Nec non Johannis Philipoti Armigeri, Sommerset, unius ex Heraldis nostris, in bisce mysteriis eruditi (jm vice  munere Garterii Armorum Regis, propter ejus debilitatem  in|valitudinem fungentis) nbis cognit,  explora|t, illos assignasse, fecisse,  constituisse, perque hasce literas assignare, facere,  constituere cer|tos,  indubitatos Legatos, Oratores,  Procu|ratores nostros; iis potestatem, auctoritatem,  speciale mandatum dedisse, ad praefatum Prin|cipem,  Nepotem nostrum proficiscendi, ei no|stro nomine,  pro nobis Periscelidem,  inau|ratam gemmis distinctam Sancti Georgii ima|ginem,  symbolum, duo praecipua illustrissimi Ordinis nostri Garterii insignia, jam  nobis ad illum transmissa deferendi, tradendi, donandi,  induendi, modo  form institutioni illius Ordinis maxim congruentibus,  ad omnia de|ni qum poterunt officiosissim,  religiosissim praestanda,  peragena, quae ad honoratissimi illius Ordinis decus  Ornamentum in hac par|te pertinere videbuntur. In cujus rei testimo|nium hasce literas nostras Patentes, propri manu nostr subscriptas, Sigillo dicti Ordinis Garterii communiri fecimus. Datae apud Pa|latium tostrum in Civitate nostr Eboracensi, vi|cesimo octavo die Mensis Maii, Anno regni nostri Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, Hiberniae nono, Anno Domini 1633.



NUM. LXXV. Another for their Delivery to Charles King of Sweden. Ex ipso Autogr.
CArolus Secundus, Dei Grati, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, Hiberniae Rex, fidei Defensor, at Praenobilis Georgiani Ordinis, vulg  Periscelide Nuncupati, Supremus Magi|ster, Omnibus ad quos praesentes hae literae per|venerint, Salutem. Cm Serenissimus ac Po|tentissimus Princeps ac Dominus, Carolus, edem grati Suecorum, Gothorum, Vandalorum Rex,  Princeps haereditarius, Magnus Princeps Finlandiae, Dux Schoniae, Esthoniae, Livoniae, Careliae, Bremae, Verdae, Stetini, Pomeraniae, Cassubiae Vandaliae, Princeps Rugiae, Domi|nus Ingriae Wismariae, nec non Comes Palati|nus Rheni, Bavariae, Juliae, Cliviae, Montium Dux, Frater, Consanguineus, ac Amicus noster Charissimus: tm propter natalium splendorem  eximias ills, quae in eo conspiciuntur supra aeta|tem, virtutes, qum propter habita ad praeclara Regiorum suorum Antecessorum facinora, specia|tim quae  serenissimo  potentissimo Principe Domino Gustavo Adolpho nuper Suecorum Rege sunt gesta,  quibus non parum honoris prae|fato Nostro Georgiano Ordini accessit, utpote qui ejus erat Commilito, ut deni sanctior illa ami|citia quae inter Regios utrin Nostros Praedeces|sores faelicitr intercessit, mags excolatur atque indies firmior reddatur, in praefatum Nostrum Ordinem fuerit in pleno ejus Capitulo electus  cooptatus. Omnibus quae illud impertiendum  notificandum Nostrarum duximus esse partium. Hc de caus, at ad mags honorificam ejusdem rei declarationem, nec non ut quae adhuc restant ad consummandum hoc tam gratum opus perim|pleantur, ejusdem Ordinis integrum habilum, Or|natum,  Insignia per manus perdilecti  per|quam fidelis Consanguinei  Consiliarii Nostri Caroli Comitis Carliolensis, Vice-Comitis Ho|ward de Morpeth, Baronis Dacre de Gillesland, locum-tenentis Nostri Generalis in Comitatibus Westmorlandiae Cumbriae, Nostrique jm ad praefatum Serenissimum  Potentissimum Princi|pem, Dominum Carolum, Suecorum, c. Regem Legati Extraordinarii; Et spectabilis Viri, Do|mini Henrici St. George,  primariis officialibus Nostris ad Arma unius, vulg Richmond Herald curavimus transferenda; Dantes  Concedentes eisdem Nostris in hc parte Plenipotentiariis, ple|nm  omnimodam facultatem  Mandatum spe|ciale, ut ad praefatum Serenissimum  Potentissi|mum Regem Suecorum, c. Fratrem Consangui|neum,  Amicum Nostrum, se conferant ei supra|memorata Insignia, Ornatum habitum Nostri praefati Ordinis,  nobis  ex Nostra parte, per|amanter offerant. Illis ipsum induant, jusju|randum in verba Statutorum dicti Ordinis ab eo accipiant, caeterq, praestent omnia quae ad No|strum Ordinis dcus in similibus inauguratio|nis solennibus fieri assolent,  adeo rit  hon|rific exequenda mags inservire judicabunt, non secus atque nosipsi mandare aut perficere possemus, dato qud illic corm adessemus. Dabantur in Palatio Nostro Albae-Aulae apud Westmonaste|rium, Vicessimo nono die Mensis Novembris; Ann Domini 1668.


NUM. LXXVI. A Warrant for delivery of the Duke of Savoy's Habit to Garter. Ex Cod. MS. in Offic. mag. Guardrob. Reges voc. Warr. Dormant tempore Hen. 8. c. p. 17.
WE will and command you, to deliver to Sir Gilbert Dethick, Principal King at Arms, for the Livery of the Order of the Garter, to be carried by him to our dear and well-beloved Cosen the Duke of Savoy, newly elected and chosen to be one of the Companions of the said Order, One Mantle of Blue Velvet, lined with white Taffata, and one Kirtle, lined with white Sarnet, with one Robe lace of Silk, and Gold, and Silk Riband for the said Robes, and as much Crymson Velvet as will cover one Book of the Order of the said Garter, with Silk Lace to the said Book, one Case to be made, covered with Crimson Velvet, garnished with passamain Lace of Gold, lined with Crim|son Satten, and quilts of the same Satten, for the carriage of one rich Collar of Gold, of the Order of the Garter, one pair of trussing Sheets, two great Coffers covered double with Hide Lea|ther, double lined, and bound with Plates, with great Girths of Leather to them, one Pack-Sad|dle, with all things necessary to the same, for carriage of the said Robes. And these our Let|ters, c.
Given at our Pallace at Westminster the 19. day of October in the first and second years of our Reign.

To our trusty Sir Edward Waldgrave Master of our Great Wardrobe.



NUM. LXXVII. A Warrant for the Delivery of the Ha|bit of Frederick the Second King of Denmark. Ex Codice MS. in Offic. Mag. Gard|rob. Regis vocat. Lib. quart. Warr. particular. p. 446.
Elizabeth R.
WE will and command you to deliver to the Lord Willoughby, for the Livery of the Garter for the King of Denmark, 20 yards of Purple Velvet for his Robe, and 18 yards of Crimson Velvet for his Kirtle, and also 26 yards of White Sarcenet for lining of them. Item, a Scutcheon richly embroidered with Da|mask

Gold and Purls, one Lace for the same Robe of Silk and Gold, with Buttons and Tas|sels of Silk and Gold.


NUM. LXXVIII. A Warrant for Delivery of the Habit and Hatchments of the French King, Henry the Third. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Elizabeth R.
WE will and command you immediately upon the sight hereof, to deliver, or cause to be delivered, for the several uses hereafter en|suing, the parcels following; that is to say, first, for a Livery of the honorable Order of the Garter, for our dear Brother, Henry the French King, one Kirtle, Hood, and Tippet, containing 18 yards of Velvet Crimson, one Mantle con|taining 20 yards of Velvet Purple, and twenty six yards of Taffata White, to line them, one Cushen of Velvet Purple, with Fringes, Buttons, and Tassels of Gold, and Purple Silk, with a Pillow of Fustian stuffed with Down, one double Banner containing 16 yards of Velvet Crimson, and Blue, embroidered on both sides with the Arms of France and Poland, with Cloth of Gold, Cloth of Silver, Venice Gold, Silver and Silk, one Banner Staff painted in Oyle Colour, one Helm of Steel, all gilt, and Mantles to the same Helm, containing two yards and a half of Cloth of Gold, lined with one yard and an half of Satten, white, two knopps of Wood gilt with burnished Gold, for the same Mantle, with silk Tassels to them, a Crown of Wood, with the Crst carved, and gilt with burnished gold. A Sword having the Pomel, and Hilts all gilt; one Scabbard for the same with a gilt Chape, and a Girdle, both being covered with Cloth of Gld, containing one yard, one Book of the Sta|tutes of the Order aforesaid illumined, covered with Velvet Crimson, and edged with gold Lace, three great Escocheons, whereof one of our Arms, another of the French Kings Arms, both within the Garter, under Crowns Imperial painted, and gilded with fine Gold in Oyl, upon fine Holland Cloth set in Frames of Wanscot, likewise painted and gilt, and the third of the Arms of our right trusty, and right well-belovd Cousin, and Counsellor the Earl of Derby, like|wise painted and gilt in like Holland Cloth, and set in a like Frame, all placed in the Chappel, wherein the said King was installed, one Plate of the said Kings Arms, ingraven in Copper, gilt, and enameled, fixed within his Stall, within our Chappel, at Windsor. And that ye content, and pay, as well for the making, imbroidering and painting of the premises, as also for the carrying of the Htchments of the said King, to our Castel at Windsor, and also that you deliver two Trunks for the Carriage of the Parcels aforesaid into France, c. And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant, and discharge for dli|very of all the premises.
Given under our Sig|net, at our Mannor of Greenwich the 22. day of April, in the 27. year of our Reign, Anno 1582.

To our trusty and well-beloved Servant, Iohn Fortescue Esquire, Master of our great Wardrobe.



NUM. LXXIX. A Warrant for Delivery of the Habit of Christierne the Fourth King of Den|mark. Ex Collect. E.W.G.
James R.
WE will and command you to deliver, or cause to be delivered, to our most dear and well-beloved Brother the King of Denmark one Robe of Purple Velvet of our Noble Order of the Garter, and one Kirtle, Hood, and Surcoat of Crimson Velvet of our said Order lined with White Taffata, bordered with Fustian, and sew|ed with Silk, with a long String, Button, and Tassel to the same, in such manner and form as to the said Robes belongeth, and also one Gar|ter to set upon the shoulder of the same Robe, richly embroidered upon Blue Velvet, with sundry sorts of Pearls, Purls, Plates, Venice Twists, and Silk; And these our Letters signed with our own hand, shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf.
Given under our Sig|net at our Honor of Hampton-Court, the xxviii. day of September in the fourth year of our Reign, of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the fortieth.

To our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir Roger Aston Knight Master of our Great Wardrobe.



NUM. LXXX. A Warrant for Delivery of the Ensigns of the Order to be sent to the Em|peror Maximilian the Second. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Elizabeth R.
By the Queen.
RIght trusty, and right well-beloved Cou|sin, we greet you well. And whereas we have now resolved to send forthwith our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin the Earl of Sussex, unto our good Brother and Cou|sin the Emperor, and have also appointed Sir Gilbert Dethick Knight, alias Garter, Princi|pal King at Arms, to attend upon our said Cou|sin of Sussex, in the presenting unto the said Emperor the Robes of our Order of the Gar|ter, and such other things as belong there|unto. We will and command you to deliver, or cause to be delivered, unto the said Garter, all

such things, as you have by our Order given here|tofore unto you, caused to be prepared for this purpose, that is to say, the great Collar of Gold, with the little George, the Garter, the great George with the little Chain, and all other things that you have made ready to be sent in this Iourney. And these our Letters with a Bill of the said Garter's, testifying the receipt of the same, shall be your sufficient Warrant in this behalf.
Given under our Signet at our Pa|lace of Westminster,the xx. of May, the ninth year of our Reign 1567.

To our right trusty, and right well-beloved Cousin and Coun|cellor, the Marquess of Win|chester, our high Treasurer of England.



NUM. LXXXI. A Warrant for Delivery of the Collar and George to Edward Prince Pala|tine. Ex lib. vocat. The Book of Warrants in the Iewel-house.
Charles R.
OVR will and pleasure is, that you deli|ver to the use of our entirely beloved Cou|sin Edward Prince Palatine one of the Compa|nions of our most Noble Order of the Garter, one Collar of Gold, containing 26 Garters with Red Roses enamelled in the midst of them and 26 Knots, the Collar weighing 30 Ounces Troy weight; As also one rich George on horseback, with a Dragon to be fastned and pendant there|to, And for so doing this shall be your War|rant.
Given under the Signet of our said Or|der at our Court at Whitehall,Zthis 17. of June, in the 13. year of our Reign.
By his Majesties the Sove|raign's special command. De Vic.

To our trusty and well-beloved Servant, Sir Gil|bert Talbot Master of our Jewel-house.



NUM. LXXXII. A Warrant for the Delivery of the Collar, George, and Garter for Charles King of Sweden. Ex eod. Lib.
Charles R.
WHereas we have named and appointed our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Counsellor Charles Earl of Carlisle our Ambassador extraordinary to our good Brother the King of Sweden, and our trusty and well-beloved Henry St. George Esq one of our Officers at Arms, to invest our said good Bro|ther, lately Elected Knight of our most Noble Order of the Garter, with the whole Habit, En|signs, and Ornaments of the same. These are to will and require you to deliver unto our said Cou|sin, and our said Officer at Arms, or to either of them the great Collar, George, and Garter, and what other things you may have provided on our former Warrant for that occasion, And this with a Note under their or either of their bands, men|tioning the particulars to be delivered by you, and acknowledging the Receipt of them, shall be your sufficient discharge.
Given under our Sig|net Manual the 29. of November, 1668.
By the Soveraign's special command. De Vic.

To our trusty and well-beloved. Sir Gilbert Talbot Master of our Jewel-house, and our other Of|ficers of the same.



NUM. LXXXIII. A Warrant for Delivery of the Collar, George, and Garter, for Iohn George Duke of Saxony. Ex Libro praed.
Charles R.
WHereas we have named and appointed our trusty and well-beloved Sir Tho|mas Higgons Knight, our Envoye ex|traordinary into Germany and Tho. St. George Esquire, one of our Officers at Arms, to carry to and invest our dear Cousin the Elector of Saxony, late Elected Knight of our most Noble Order of the Garter, with the whole Habit, Ensigns, and Ornaments of the same, These are to will and require you to deliver unto the said Sir Tho|mas Higgons, and Tho. St. George, or to eitehr of them, the great Collar, George, and Garter, and what ever other things you may have provi|ded on our former Warrants for that occasion; And this with a Note under their or either of their bands, mentioning all the particulars so de|livered by you, and acknowledging the Receipt of them, shall be your sufficient discharge.
Given under our Signet manual this 29. of Novem|ber, 1668.
By the Soveraign's special command. De Vic.

To our trusty and well-beloved Sir Gilbert Talbot Master of our Jewel-house, and our other Of|ficers of the same.




NUM. LXXXIV. A Receipt given to the Iewel-house up|on delivery of the Ensigns of the Or|der for Charles King of Sweden. Ex Lib. vocat. The Day-Book in the Iewel-house, p. 321.
DEcemb. 31. 1668. Delivered unto Henry St. George Esq one of his Majesties. Offi|cers at Arms, by virtue of his Majesties Sign Manual, bearing date the 29. of November last past, viz.
Imprimis, 1 Onix George of the Order set round with 38 large Rose Diamonds,  4 smaller Rose Diamonds on a Loop to the said George. Also one Garter of the Order set with 202 Rose Diamonds in the Letters, 6 between the words, and 24 about 4 Ilot boles. Also on the Buckle of the said Garter 11 great Rose Dia|monds, and 10 small ones, and on the Tabb 3 large Rose Diamonds, and 23 smaller, Also one Collar and George of the Order, Gold ena|melled, weight 30 ounces 10 penny weight 6 grains, with three Cases of Crimson Velvet, fringed with Gold Lace. All which is acknow|ledged to be received by me
Hen. St. George.


NUM. LXXXV. Another Receipt given for the Ensigns of the Order sent to Iohn George Duke of Saxony. Ex Lib. vocat. The Day-Book in the Iewel-house, p. 324.
FEbr. 26. 1668. Delivered to Sir Thomas Higgons according to his Majesties War|rant, bearing date the 29. of Novemb. 1668.
Imprimis, One Collar of the Order of the Garter, consisting of 21 Roses, and 21 Knots, poize 30 ounces 16 penny weight, As also one rich Aggot George set about with 32 rich Dia|monds, and three Sparks in the Ring, Also a rich Diamond Garter, all the Letters of Dia|monds, and at the Buckles end 9 fair Faucet Diamonds, and at the Loop end 9 very fair Faucet Diamonds, and -8 smaller Diamonds. Also one enamelled George, poize one Ounce. All these I have received out of his Majesties Iewel-house, with Cases to them,
Tho. Higgons.


NUM. LXXXVI. A Warrant to provide Necessaries for Transportation of the King of Swe|den's Robes. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
THese are to pray and require your Lord|ship, that you cause to be provided with all speed, these Necessaries following for the Transportation of the King of Swedens Rbes, and other things belonging to the Order of the Garter; namely, one pair of fine Holland Sheets of two breadths and a half, and three ells long; Two Trunks for the packing up, and transpor|tation of the Robes, Collar, and Georges, and two Sweet Bags of Taffaty, to lay amongst the said Robes: for the doing whereof this shall be your Lordships Warrant.
Whitehallthis 27. of
April, 1627.

To the Right Honora|ble the Earl of Den|beigb, Master of our Great Wardrobe.



NUM. LXXXVII. A Warrant to provide several particu|lars for the Investiture of the Duke of Saxony. Book of Warrants in the Grat Wardrobe, commencing at Mi|chaelmas 1667. fol. 25.
THese are to signifie unto your Lordship, That it is his Majesties express pleasure, That you do provide or cause to be provided in part of the Habit of the most Noble Order of the Garter, which his Majesty is now sending un|to the Elector of Saxony Knight Elect of the said Order, and towards the furnishing of the Officer of Arms, who is to go upon that Em|ployment both with a Robe for himself, and such other necessaries as are to be used for his Majesties honor and service on that occasion, the following particulars.
One Black Velvet Cap and Feather, such and of the same fashion as the Knights of the Order do wear on St. George's day, when the Feast is kept and solemnized.
One Girdle and Hangers of Crimson Velvet. One large Cushen of Blue and Purple Velvet, with Buttons, Fringe, and Tassels of the like coloured Silk and Gold.
Fine Holland Sheets to fold the Habit in
Two Trunks to carry them.
One Mantle for Garter or the Officer of Arms that goes in his place, to officiate upon that oc|casion. The said Mantle to be made up of 18 yards of Scarlet Sattin, and 10 yards of White Deux Caps Taffaty to line the same, and to have an embroidered Scutcheon on the left

shoulder, and Laces and Tassels of Silk and Gold, alike in every respect unto that Mantle which Garter wears upon St. George's day, and at the Chapters of the Order.
One Scutcheon with the King's Arms in a quarter of the Order, and a handsome gilded Border or Frame.
Two other Scutcheons without arms, having only the Garter about them, to put in them the Elector of Saxony's arms, in a handsome gild|ed Frame. And these shall be your sufficient Warrant,
dated at Whitehall this 17. of July 1668.
E. Manchester.

To the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Sand|wich, Master of his Ma|jesties Great Wardrobe, and to the Officers of the same.



NUM. LXXXVIII. A Warrant for the Habit of the Order, and other Necessaries, to be used at the Investiture of Charles King of Sweden. Ibidem, fol. 29. b.
Charles R.
OVR will nd pleasure is, That you pre|pare or cause to be prepared for the King of Sweden now Knight Elect of our Order of the Garter, the whole Habit of our said Or|der, together with a Mantle for the Officer of Arms, whom we shall appoint to go therewith, and all other Necessaries as you had them spe|cified in a Warrant lately directed unto you for the Habit to be sent to the Elector of Saxony, and besides one yard and half of skie colour Vel|vet, wherewith to cover two Statute Books of the Order, And for so doing this shall be your Warrant.
Given under our Sign manual this 30. of August, 1668.
By the Soveraign's special Command. De Vic Chancellor of the Garter.

To our right trusty and right well-beloved Co|sen and Councellor, Ed|ward Earl of Sandwich, Master of our Great Wardrobe, or in his ab|sence to his Deputy.



NUM. LXXXIX. A Warrant for allowance of Dyet and Reward to Garter, in a Legation with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
By the King.
TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well, willing and commanding you, that of such our Treasure, as remaineth in your custo|die to our use, ye deliver to our trusty and well-beloved Servant, Sir Gilbert Dethick Knight, alis Garter, Principal King at Arms, attend|ing by our commandment upon our right trusty, and right well-beloved Cousin and Councellor, the Lord Marquess of Northampton, in his Embassage to our good Brother, the French King, ten shillings by the day for his Dyet, and also by way of our Reward ten shillings by the day, amounting in the whole to twenty shillings by the day, and to allow him for the Posting and Tran|sportation both outward and homeward, as well of himself and his train, as also of certain Robes of our Order, and other things necessary for that Voyage, such sums of Money as by his Bill subscribed with his own hand, he shall sig|nifie unto you to have employed in that behalf, as also further to allow him, for the Dyet of Chester Herald after the old rate, that is to say five shillings by the day, and five shillings in reward by the day, and for the Dyet of Rouge|dragon Pursuivant two shillings and six pence by the day, and two shillings six pence in re|ward also by the day, and also for their posting Moneys, according to the tenor aforesaid, be|ginning the 28. of April last past, until the re|turn of our said right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Councellor. And these our Letters shall be your Warrant sufficient in that behalf.
Given under our Signet, at our Mannor of Greenwich,the eleventh of May in the fifth year of our Reign.

E. Somerset.
W. North.
J. Bedford.
J. Warwick.
E. Clinton.
Jo. Gate.


To our trusty and well-beloved Councellor, Sir William Cavendishe, Knight, Treasurer of our Chamber.



NUM. XC. Another. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Elizabeth R.
ELizabeth, by the Grace of God Queen of England, c. To the Treasurer and Chamberlains of our Exchequer greeting. We

will and command you, of such Treasure as i or shall come into the Receipt of our said Ex|chequer, to deliver or cause to be delivered, to our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir Gilbert Dethick Knight, alias Garter, Principal King of Arms, attending by our commandment upon our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin, the Earl of Sussex in his Embassy, now to our good Brother the Emperor, the sum of 10 s. by the day for his Dyet, and also by way of our Re|ward other 10 s. by the day, amounting in the whole to 20 s. by the day; the said allowance of 20 s. by the day to begin 7 days before his arri|val at the Sea side, when he shall pass over the Seas in his Iourney, and so to continue until his return unto our presence, upon the end of his Voyage. Willing you further, for his bet|ter furniture in this Iourney, to advance unto him beforehand his said Dyets and Rewards af|ter the rate of 20 s. by the day, for two Months. And also to allow unto him upon his return, for the posting and transportation both outward and homeward, of himself and his men, and for cer|tain Robes of our Order, and other things ne|cessary for his Voyage, such sums of Money as by his Bill subscribed with his own hand, he shall signifie unto you to have been by him disbursed in that behalf, And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge in that behalf.
Yeven under our Privy Seal at our Man|nor of Richmond,the 14. day of June in the ninth year of our Reign.

To the Treasurer and Chamber|lains of our Exchequer.



NUM. XCI. Another for like Allowances to Gar|ter and Somerset. Ex Collect. A. V. W.
ORder is taken this present  ofAnno 1582. that of such the Queens Majesties Treasure as remaineth in your custody, you shall make payment unto Gilbert Dethick Knight, alias Garter, Principal King of Arms, and to Somerset Herald of Arms, the sum of Clix l. in full payment of a Bill of CCiv l. signed by them for their Dyets, Rewards, Tran|sportations, and Posting Charges, going with the Lord Willughby of Eresby, to Frederick the Second, King of Denmark, and in their return again, according to a Privy Seal granted unto them for the said Allowances. Dated at Grene|wich the 28. day of June, Anno 24. of the the Queens Majesties Reign. And these shall be your sufficient Warrant for the payment thereof, Written the said day and year.

To our loving Friends Mr. Stoneley, and the four Tel|lers of the Queens Maje|sties Receipt.



NUM. XCII. A Privy Seal for like Allowances to Clarenceux and Somerset. Ex Collect. A. V. W.
Elizabeth R.
ELizabeth, c. To the Treasurer and Cham|berlains of our Exchequer greeting, Where|as we have appointed our well-beloved Servants Robert Cook, alias Clarenceux, one of the Kings at Arms, and Robert Glover, alias Somerset, one of our Heralds at Arms, to pass at this pre|sent into France with our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin the Earl of Derby, by us sent in special Ambassade to our good Brother and Cousin the French King, for certain our af|fairs of importance, and have been contented to allow unto the said Clarenceux for his Dyets, ten shillings by the day, and ten shillings more by the day in Reward. And to the said Somerset five shillings by the day for his Dyets, and five shillings more by the day in Reward. We will and command you of our Treasury at the Receipt of our said Exchequer, not only to pay or cause to be paid unto the said Clarenceux and Somerset, and to either of them, or their assigns, their said several Dyets and Rewards, from the 17. day of January in this present 27. year of our Reign, until they return to our presence, but al|so to advance unto them presently imprest out of their said several Dyets and Rewards before|hand, the sum of one hundred pounds, viz. to Clarenceux one hundred Marks, and to Somer|set xxxiii l. vis. viii d. And further to pay unto them hereafter, all such sums of Money as they shall signifie unto you, by their several Bills sub|scribed with their several hands, to have been by them severally disbursed for the Charges of their posting and transportation in this their Iourney, And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf. Given under our Privy Seal, at our Mannor of Grene|wiche, the 28. day of January, in the seven and twentieth year of our Reign.


NUM. XCIII. A Warrant for like Allowances to Garter. Ex Collect. E. W. G.
James R.
JAmes by the Grace of God, c. To our Com|missioners for the Office of High Treasurer of England, Greeting, Whereas We do send over to Prince Maurice of Nassau, our Servant Wil|liam Segar Esq Garter King of Arms, to carry the George and Garter to the said Prince: We have assigned to him for his Charges, an allow|ance of 30 s. by the day, whereof we will and

command you of our Treasure in the Receipt of our Exchequer, to pay or cause to be paid to the said Garter o his Assigns, the said allowance of 30 s. by the day to begin from the 24. day of this Month of December, and to continue to the day of his return to our presence. And our fur|ther pleasure is, that you advance unto him by way of imprest, the sum of fifty pounds, to be defalked upon his said entertainment. And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf. Given under our Privy Seal at our Palace of Westminster the 26. day of December, in the 10. year of our Reign, of En|gland, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the six and fortieth.


NUM. XCIV. Another. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
ORder is taken this 15. of May 1627. by virtue of his Majesty's Letters of Privy Seal, dated the 8. of the same, that you deli|ver and pay of such his Majesty's Treasure, as remaineth in your charge, unto Sir William Sea|gar Knight, alias Garter, Principal King of Arms, employed by his Majesty's Commandment for the carrying over the Order of the Garter to his Majesty's entirely beloved Cousin, Henry Prince of Orange, the sum of threescore pounds by advance, upon his allowance of xv s. per di|em for his Dyet, and xv s. per diem by way of Reward, to be afterwards defalked upon his said Dyet and Reward, And these together with his acquittance, shall be your discharge herein.
Marlburgh. Rich. Weston.


NUM. XCV. A Privy Seal for Allowances of Enter|tainment and extraordinary ex|pences to Richmond Herald. Ex ipso Autographo.
CHarles the Second by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ire|land, Defender of the Faith, c. To the Com|missioners of our Treasury now being, and to the Treasurer, under Treasurer, and Commissioners of our Treasury for the time being, Greeting. Whereas we have appointed our trusty and well-beloved Henry St. George Esq Richmond He|rald, to attend our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Councellor Charles Earl of Carlitle, our Ambassador extraordinary into Sweden, there to perform the Ceremonies at the delivering of the Garter unto our good Brother the King of Sweden. And have also thought fit to allow unto him 30 s. by the day for his en|tertainment during the service, to commence from the day of the said Earl of Carlitle's de|parture from and be continued till his return into our presence inclusive. Our will and plea|sure therefore s, and we do hereby authorise and require you, out of such our Treasury as now is, on which hereafter shall be and remain in the Receipt of our Exchequer, to pay or cause to be paid unto the said Henry St. George, or his As|signs, the said allowance of 30 s. by the day, ad|vancing unto him the sum of 250 l. to be ac|counted and adjusted at his return, according to the rate of 30 s. by the day. And you are also to pay unto him or his Assigns, such extraordi|nary expences in that service as one of our Princi|pal Secretaries of State shall approve of, And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf. Given under our Privy Seal at our Palace of Westminster the 30. day of November i the xx. year of our Reign.


NUM. XCVI. A Privy Seal for Allowances of con|stant entertainment, and extraordi|nary expences to Somerset Herald. Ex ipso Autogr.
CHarles the Second by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ire|land, Defender of the Faith, c. To the Com|missioners of our Treasury, Treasurer, and under-Treasurer of our Exchequer now and for the time being, Greeting. Whereas we have employed our trusty and well-beloved Sir Thomas Higgons Knight, to go in quality of our Envoy Extraordi|nary to the Elector of Saxony, and to carry with him the Order of the Garter to that Prince, Our will and pleasure therefore is, and we do hereby require and authorise you, out of such our Trea|sure as now is or hereafter shall be remaining in the Receipt of our Exchequer, to pay or cause to be paid unto the said Sir Thomas Higgons or his Assigns, the sum of three pounds by the day of lawful Money of England, for his enter|tainment in the service aforesaid, to commence from the day of his departure from our presence, and that you advance and pay unto him the said Sir Thomas Higgons or his Assigns, in part and upon account of the said Allowance, the sum of 300 l. of like lawful English Money. And our further will and pleasure is, and we do hereby likewise authorise and require you, out of such our Treasure as aforesaid, to pay or cause to be paid unto Thomas St. George Esq, So|merset Herald at Arms, whom we have also em|ployed to attend the performance of the Ceremony to be used in this service, the sum of 30 s. by the day, for his constant entertainment in our said service, to commence from the day of his depar|ture from our presence. And that you also ad|vance and pay unto the said Thomas St. George, or his Assigns, in part of the said allowance of 30 s. by the day, the sum of 150 l. of lawful Money of England, which said several sums of 3 l. by the day, and 30 s. by the day, are to

be continued unto them unto the day of their re|turn unto our presence respectively, and to be re|ceived without account, impress, or other charge, to be set upon the said Sir Thomas Higgons, and Thomas St. George, or either of them their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns for the same. And we also direct, that such further allowance be made unto the said Sir Thomas Higgons, for his extraordinary expence in this our service, as you our Commissioners of our Treasury now being, or our Treasurer, under-Treasurer, and Commissioners of our Treasury for the time being shall think fit, and that such allowance be likewise made, for the extraordinary expence of the said Thomas St. George in our service, as shall be thought fit and approved by one of our Principal Secretaries of State, And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf. Given under our Privy Seal at our Palace of Westminster the fifteenth day of August, in the 20. year of our Reign.


NUM. XCVII. A Warrant for Post-horses, c. for Garter's use. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
WHereas the Bearer hereof, William Sea|gar, Garter, Principal King at Arms, is upon some special occasions, concerning his Majesties service, to make his speedy repair into the Low Countries, and in his Iourney to the Sea side, shall have need of Post-horses, for himself and others employed in that service, and when they come to the Port of their embarquing, shipping, for transportation; These are therefore in his Majesties name, to will and command you, and every of you, to whom it may apper|tain, to see the said William Seagar, furnished from place to place with six able and sufficient Post-horses, And likewise also to give your as|sistance for getting of convenient shipping for their transportation, and to suffer them quietly to imbarque together, with such Trunks, and other necessaries as they shall have use of, with|out lett, hindrance, or other molestation; hereof you may not fail, as you will answer the con|trary; From the Court at Whitehall this 30. of December 1612.

J. Northampton.
J. Suffolk.
E. Worcester.
E. Wotten.
Ju. Caesar.
E. Zouch.
C. Edmonds.


To all Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Vice-Admirals, Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, Officers of the Ports, Post-masters, Bailiffs, Con|stables, Headboroughs, and all other his Majesties Officers and loving Sub|jects to whom it may appertain.



NUM. XCVIII. A Warrant for Post-horses, for Somerset Herald. Ex Collect. A. V. W.
WHereas there is appointed to attend on the Earl of Derby, for her Majesties service into France, Robert Glover, alias So|merset, one of the Heralds of Arms, who is to repair with all diligence unto the Port of Do|ver, there to embarque with the said Earl of Derby: These are to will and require you, and in her Majesties name, strictly to charge and command you, and every of you, to whom it shall appertain, to see him provided of four good and able Post-horses, for himself, his Servants, and Crriages, with a Guid from place to place unto Dover aforesaid, and at his return likewise from thence to the Court, as also of all such other things necessary, as he shall require at your hands, for the better accomplishing of his Voyage, at prices reasonable, and accustomed in her Ma|jesties like services. Whereof fail you not, as you will answer to the contrary at your perils.
From the Court at Grenewich the 20. of Ja|nuary, 1584.

To all Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Bailiffs, Constables, Headboroughs, and to all other her Majesties Officers and loving Subjects, to whom it may ap|pertain, and to every of them.



NUM. CI. Instructions given to the Soveraign's Ambassadors, sent with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order to Iulianus de Medicis, Brother to Pope Leo the Tenth. Ex Collect. Iac. Waraei Eq. Aur.
FIrst, the due recommendation and presenta|tion of the Kings Letters, with a brief Ora|tion to be made touching the land of the said Order of the King Soveraign of the same, and also of the virtues and notable deeds of N. that shall receive it.
And after the proposition so said, to present their Commission and cause it openly to be read, where they shall require him to make his Oath, as followeth.
Ego Julianus Dei gratia, c. honorificentissimi ac approbatissimi Ordinis Garterii Miles,  Confrater electus, Iuro ad haec Sancta Dei Evan|gelia per me corporaliter tacta, quod omnia  singula Statuta, Leges,  Ordinationes ipsius dignissimi Ordinis bene, sincere,  invilabiliter observabo, ita me Deus adjuvet  haec Sancta Dei Evangelia.
Which Oath given, Sir E. P. shall deliver the Garter unto him, and cause the same in good and honorable manner to be put about his Leg, the said Doctor so saying audibly these words following.
Ad lauden  honorem summi at Omnipo|tentis Dei, intemeratae Virginis  Matris suae Mariae ac gloriosissimi Martyris Georgii hujus Ordinis Patroni, circumcinge tibiam tuam hoc Garterio, ut possis in isto bello firmiter stare  fortiter vincere in signum Ordinis,  augmen|tum tui honoris.
Which thing so done, the said Sir E. P. shall deliver unto the said I. the Gown of Purple Co|lour, and cause him to apparel himself with the same, the said Doctor so saying these words fol|lowing, at the doing over of the same.
Accipe vestem hanc purpuream, qu semper munitus non verearis pro fide Christian, libertate Ecclesiae,  oppressorum tuitoine fortiter dimi|care  sanguinem effundere, in signum Ordinis,  augmentum tui honoris.
And then following, the said Sir E. P. shall cause the said I to do upon him the Mantle of Blue Velvet, garnished with the Scute and Cross of Saint George, and the Doctor so saying these words.
Accipe Clamidem coelestis coloris Clipeo Crucis Christi insignitam, cujus virtute atque vigore semper protectus hostes super are  praeclarissimis tuis meritis gaudia tandem coelestia promereri valeas, in signum Ordinis,  augmentum tui honoris.
And when the said I shall be so apparelled with the Ornaments aforesaid, the said Sir E. P. shall put the Image of Saint George about his neck, the Doctor so saying these words.
Imaginem gloriossimi Martyris Georgii hu|jus Ordinis Patroni, in collo tuo deferas, cujus fultus praesidio hujus Mundi prospera  adversa sic pertrauseas, ut bostibus Corporis  animae de|victis non modo temporalis militae gloriam, sed peremis victoriae palmam recipere valeas, in sig|num Ordinis,  augmentum tui honoris.


NUM. CII. Instructions to the Soveraign's Amabassa|dors, sent upon a like Embassy to Iames the Fifth King of Scots. Ex. Autogr. in Bibl. Hatton.
THE said Lord William shall within five or six days next after he hath been with the said King of Scots, for his first Ambassade, and resort to Court there, and in most reverend fashion deliver unto the King of Scots the Letter missive of Certification of his Election into the Noble Order of the Garter, from the King our Soveraign Lord his Highness, with due commen|dations from his Highness. The Letter read, and be consenting to the reception of the said Order, then incontinent the Book of Statutes to be deli|vered unto him, and a day appointed as well for to have his consentment on the Articles of the said Statutes, and in the mean time his Oath to be prepared by his consent and advice. On which day being at the least Sunday, and he agreeing to receive the same honorable Order, he must be in a place convenient.
First they shall present their Commission unto the said King, and cause the said audibly and distinctly to be read, and so followingly shall in good and reverent manner require him to make his corporal Oath, for the inviolable observing of the same, like as by the tenure of the Sta|tutes every Knight of that Order is bound to do in form following.

The Oath.
We James by the grace of God King of Scots, promise and swear by our Faith, and Honor, and holy Evengelist by us presently touched, that we shall accomplish and keep truly unto our pow|wer, all the Statutes, Points, and Ordinances of the right Noble Order of Saint George named the Garter, from point to point, and from Arti|cle to Article, as is contained and declared in the Book thereof to us delivered; the which we have accepted and do accept, as if that we read them now presently [Note, if he will make any ex|ceptions they must be here rehearsed] the which Articles we promised now again to keep, hold and entertain, without breaking: So God help us, and all the Saints. Yeoven, c.
Which Oath given, the Lord William shall put the Garter, in due and reverent manner about his left Leg, and in this doing, Garter shall say.
Sir, the Soveraign and honorable Company of the Order of the Garter have received you as their Brother and Companion, and in knowledge and token thereof, they give and present you this Garter, the which God give you grace to wear to his land and praise, to the honor of the blessed Virgin Mary, and the glorious Martyr Saint George, Patron of that Noble Order, and to the augmentation of your honor.
Which thing so done, the said Lord William shall deliver unto him the Gown of Crimson, and cause him to apparel himself with the same, the said Garter saying these words following, at the doing on the same.
Ye take this Garment, wherein God give you grace strongly to stand in the true Faith of Christ, and depressing the Enemies of Saints, in token of the said Order, and to the augment|ing of this Order, and your honor.
And then lovingly the said Lord William shall cause the said King to put on the Mantle of Blue Velvet, garnished with the Arms of St. George, invironed with a Garter, the said Garter say|ing as followeth.
[Note the Hood to be put on the right shoulder]
Take ye this Mantle of heavenly colour, with the shield of the Cross of Christ garnished, by whose strength and virtue ye always be defended, and by virtue of it you may overcome all your Enemies, and so through your most noble desert, may worthily come to the joys everlasting, in token of the said Order, and increase of your honor.
And when the said King shall be so apparel|led with the adornments aforesaid, the said Lord William shall put the Coller of the Order, with the Image of Saint George about his neck, the said Garter saying.
Take ye and bear this Coller, with the Image of the most glorious Martyr Saint George, Pa|tron of this Order, about your neck, by the help whereof you may the better pass through both the prosperity and adversity of this world, so that your Enemies both of body and soul may be over|come, ye then may receive not only glory of tem|poral Chivalry, but also the rejoycing of ever|lasting victory, in sign and token of this Order, and increase of your honor.
Which things thus fully ended, the King to go to some solemn Church, and there to bear a solemn Mass, and so to return, an so to his Lodging, where if he dine abroad, to wear the said whole Habit, during the dinner time, and after to do this pleasure.
Then Garter to remember to purchase and sollicite a Certification of the Reception of the said Order by him, and also his Oath, both under the said Kings Seal. Also to advertise him the manner of the coming of his Procura|tor for his Installation within seven Months; he to bring with him a Procuration under the Kings Seal for his Installation, with all other things necessary, as the said Garter knoweth by his old Presidents in such case accustomed.
All these things thus duly and in reverent order done, with other the Kings Affairs there, the said Lord William and the said Garter to return to the Kings Highness.



NUM. CIII. A Letter signifying Election, to Edward Count Palantine of the Rhine. Ex Collect. E. W. G.
Charles R.
CHarles the Second by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland Defender of the Faith, . and Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter. To our right dear and entirely beloved Cousin Edward Count Palatine of the Rhyne, Duke of Bavaria, c. Greeting. Whereas our Royal Progenitors, the Kings of England, have in all times, since the Institution of the most Noble Order of Saint George, called the Garter, by our most Noble and Victorious Ancestor King Edward the Third, elected and chosen into the Fellowship thereof, such Princes and other eminent persons, as well Strangers as their own Subjects, as have for the greatness of their Births, and other Hero|ick virtues, especially in martial actions, been thought worthy of the same; We therefore con|sidering, that since the late horrid Rebellion, in that our Kingdom, that many of the Compa|nions thereof are dead, and that others contrary to their Honor and Oaths, have deserted their Allgiance, and are no more worthy to be esteem|med Companions of so Noble an Order; an finding how necessary it is for our honor and s|vice, to elect others in the places vacant, wo for their birth, courage, fidelity, and affection us, may be worthy to be admitted thereunt; have therefore thought fit by our power, as So|veraign of the said Order (dispensing with the usual Ceremonies) to elect and chuse you our said right dear and entirely beloved Cousin Ed|ward Count Palatie of the Rhyne and Du of Bavaria, to be Fellow and Companion of the said most Noble Order of the Garter, and do herewith send unto you the George and Rib|band, part of the Ensigns thereof, by our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir Edward Walker Knight, Garter, Principal King of Arms, which Ensigns we do hereby will and authorise you t wear, assuring you when it may conveniently be done, you shall have all other Ceremonies and additions incident to the same, fully perfected, And we no way doubt but that you by your No|ble Virtues, Courage, and endeavours in milit|ry actions, and your affection and fidelity to us will shew your self worthy thereof, and that you will faithfully, and with honor serve and assi us in all our just and warlike enterprises, a becomes a Companion of so Noble an Order. Gi|ven at the Castle of Saint Germain's en lay,  19. day of Semptember, in the first year of  Reign, 1649.


NUM. CIV. A Letter authorising Edward Coun Palatine of the Rhyne, to use the Ensigns, and stile himself Knight of the Garter, as if he had been in|stalled. Ex Collect. E. W. G.
Charles R.
CHarles the Second by the grace of God, . and Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, To our right dear and entirely b|loved Cousin, Edward Count Palatine of th Rhyne, Duke of Bavaria, Greetings; We havi duly considered the eminence of your birth, your near relation to us in blood, and the great hope and expectation that we have of your courage affection, and inclination to serve and assist us, were pleased upon Sunday the 19. of September past, to send unto you the George and Ribband, part of the Ensigns of the said most Noble Order of the Garter, by our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir Edward Walker Knight, Garter, Principal King of Arms, together with our Let|ters, declaring that we had chosen you Fellow and Companion of the said most Noble Order, and authorising you to wear the same. And having since duly considered, that it is not possible at present to have all other the additions and Ce|remonies fully perfected; we have, as Sove|raign of the said Order, thought it fit t

dispence with the same, and do therefore hereby further will and authorise you, to wear and use the Garter or Ribband on your left Leg, the Glory or Star of Silver, embroidered with St. George's Cross within a Garter, upon your Cloak and upper Garments, as likewise the great Coller of the Order upon such days us are accustomed; to use the Garter about your Arms, and to stile your self Knight and Companion of the said most Noble Order of the Garter, as fully as if you had been installed in our Castle of Windesore, where (when it shall please God to restore us to the possession thereof) you shall for|mally be invested and recieve the Habit, and all other the above recited Ornaments of the said most Noble Order. Given at our Court in the Castle Elizabeth, in our Island of Jersey, this six|teenth of October, in the first year of our Reign 1649.


NUM. CV. A Letter signifying Election, c. sent to Count Marchin. Ex praef. Collect.
Charles R.
CHarles by the grace of God King of En|gland, Scotland, France, and Ireland, De|fender of the Faith, c. and Soveraign of the most Noble Order of St. George called the Gar|ter. To our right trusty and right well-beloved John Gaspar Ferdinand de Marchin Earl of Graville, Marquess of Clairmont d' Antrague, Baron of Dunes, Marchin, Mezers and Modane, Captain General for the service of his Catholick Majesty, and Lieutenant General of all our Forces both by Sea and Land in all our Domi|nious, Greeting. Whereas our Royal Progeni|tors and Predecessors Kings of England, have in all times since the Institution of the said most Noble Order, by our most victorious Ancestor King Edward the Third, elected and chosen into the Fellowship thereof many Emperors, Kings, and Soveraign Princess, and other eminent and illustrious persons, as well Strangers as their own Subjects, who for the nobleness of their Ex|traction, accompanied with heroick virtues (espe|cially in Military Enterprises) have been held worthy and capable thereof. Whereupon we having duly considered the nobleness of your Birth and Extraction, with the eminent and famous actions performed by you, in the several Military Commands you have for years been em|ployed, together with your great zeal and affe|ction to engage your self in our service and cause, for the recovery of our just rights, have thereupon held it fit and agreeable by some signal testimony of our favour, to evidence the great value and esteem that we have both of your person, merit, and affection. To which end, these are to certi|fie you, that we by our power, as Soveraign of the said most Noble Order (and by the consent of all the Companions thereof here present) have elected and chosen, and do elect and chuse you our said right trusty and right well-beloved John Gaspar Ferdinand de Marchin, Earl of Graville, c. Fellow, Peer, and Companion of the said most Noble Order, and do herewith invest you with the Garter and George, the most peculiar Ensigns of the same. And because at this time some other Additions and Ceremonies incident thereunto cannot be fully performed, we do hereby for the present, by our Soveraign power dispense therewith, and do will and authorise you at all times hence forward, to wear the Gar|ter about your left Leg, the Image of St. George hanging about your Neck, the Star or Glory of Silver with St. George's Cross embroidered within a Garter upon your Cloak or upper Gar|ment, as likewise to use the Garter about your Arms, and to stile your self Knight and Com|panion of the said most Noble Order, in as am|ple manner as if you had been formally installed in our castle of Windesor, the proper place for that Solemnity; we no way doubting, but that by your future, as well as precedent, actions you will fully declare your self to be highly worthy of the honor of being Knight and Companion of so Noble an Order: And these our Letters of Election and dispensation shall be to you for the same your sufficient and full authority. Given under our Signet at our Court in the City of Ant|werp, this twenty sixth day of February 1658. in the tenth year of our Reign.


NUM. CVI. A Warrant to Garter, for delivery of the Garter and George to William Prince of Orange. Ex eod. Collect.
Charles R.
TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well, Whereas we have made choice of our most dear Nephew the Prince of Orange, to be a Cmpanion of the most Noble Order of the Gar|ter; we do hereby authorise you, according to your Office, to deliver unto our said most dear Nephew the said Order, and our Letters, with such Ceremony as is usual, and as may be per|formed in the place where he is: And for so do|ing this shall be your Warrant.
Given at the Palace Royal in Paris the 25. day of April, 1653, in the fifth year of our Reign.

To our truly and well-beloved Sir Edward Walker, Knight, Garter King of Arms.




NUM. CVII. The Soveraign's Letter sent with the Garter and George to the Prince Ele|ctor of Brandenburgh. Ex eod. Collect.
MON Frere, L'asseurance que j'ay de ve|stre Amiti, par plusieurs tesmoignages que vous m'en avez donnez m'oblig a recher|cher tous les moyens qui seront capables de l'en|tretenir  de la conserver. Et pour ce sujet j'ay trouv  propos, comme Souverains du tresan|cien  tresnoble Ordre de la Jartiere, de vous eslire l'un des Chevaliers, Paers,  Compag|nons du dit Ordre, estimant par la de faire une plus estroite Amiti avec vous,  d' augmenter le bien  la prosperit de cette tresnoble Societ, laquelle par plusieurs siecles a cu non seulement les Roys d' Angleterre, nos Predecesseurs pour Souverains, mais aussi l' bouneur d' avoir plu|sieurs Empereurs, Roys  Princes Estrangers pour Compagnons, comme aussi de vous donner par la une Marque evidente de mon affection,  de la baute esteme que j'ay de vos merites,  de vostre personne; Et pour confirmation de la dite Election je vous envoy par le Sieur Chevalier de Walker, Jartiere Roy d' Armes, la Medaile dite le George, la Jartiere  l' Estoille pour les porter a la maniere accoustume: assavoir la Medaile autour du Corps, la Jartiere  la Iambe gauche,  l' Estoille sur le coste gauche de la Casaque ou du Manteau. Le dit Sieur de Walker vous asseurera de m part que je desire avec pas|sion de vons tesmoigner que je suis,
Mon frere Vostre bien affectionn Frere  Cousin, Caolus R.
A Paris le 23. de
Januier 1654.

A mon Frere Monsieur le Marquis de Branden|burg, P. Electeur du Saint Empire.



NUM. CVIII. A Warrant to Garter to deliver the Garter and George to the Prince Ele|ctor of Brandenburgh. Ex eod. Collect.
Charles R.
TRusty and well-beloved we greet you well. Whereas we have made choice of our good Brother the Marquess of Brandeurgh to be one of the Knights, Peers, and Companions of the most Noble Order of the Garter; These are to require you to repair with what convenient baste you can to the Court of the said Marquess, and there to deliver unto him our Letters sig|nifying our said Election (which we herewith send you) together with the Garter, and other Ensigns of the said Order. And that you perform the same with such Ceremony as is usu|al, and as that place can afford: And for so doing this shall be your Warrant.
Given at the Palace Royal in Paris the 23. day of Ja|nuary 1654. in the fifth year of our Reign.

To our trusty and well-beloved Sir Edward Walker Knight, Gar|ter, King at Arms.



NUM. CIX. A Warrant for delivery of the Collar for the Prince Elector of Branden|burgh. Ex Libro vocat. The Book of War|rants in the Iewel-house.
Charles R.
OVR will and pleasure is, that you forth-with deliver unto our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir Edward Walker Knight, Garter, Principal King of Arms, one great Col|lar of our Order of the Garter, with a George appendant thereat, to be by him sent and deli|vered unto the Prince Elector of Brandenburgh, formerly elected a Companion of our most Noble Order of the Garter: And for your so doing this shall be your sufficient Warrant and dis|charge.
Given at our Court at Whitehall the 25. of February 1662.
Ex mandato. De Vic Cancell.

To our trusty and well|beloved Servant Sir Gil|bert Talbot Knight, Ma|ster of our Jewel-house, and to the Officers thereof.



NUM. CX. A Warrant for Garter to send the Ha|bit to the Elector of Brandenburgh. Ex Collect. E. W. G.
Charles R.
TRusty, c. Whereas we have formerly elect|ed our good Brother and Cousin the Ele|ctor of Brandenburgh, to be Knight and Com|panion of our most Noble Order of the Garter, and have by you sent him our Letters, together with the Garter and Image of St. George, au|thorising you to deliver the same. And now seeing by our happy Restauration, we have had the opportunity together with the Companions of our said Order, to perform the Ceremonies of Installation, and to solemnize the Feast of St. George in our Castle of Windesor, the proper place for doing thereof, and have now two years past ordered you to place the Atchievements of the said Elector of Brandenburgh, over his Stall in the Chappel of our said Castle, and did then

in respect of the shortness of our time, and other important affairs, dispence with the formal In|stallation of the said Elector and other Princes, with Declaration that it should not hereafte be brought into example We therefore intending to compleat our favour, have caused the full Habit of our said Order to be delivered unto you, to|gether with the great Collar of the Order; all which We do hereby will and authorise you, to send and convey, together with our Letters unto the said Elector of Brandenburgh, We at this time dispencing with the sending an Ambassa|dor and your self Garter King of Arms, to de|liver the same according to former Precedents. And for your so doing, this shall be your suffici|ent Warrant. 
Given, c. the 8. of April, 1663.

To our trusty and well-beloved Sir Edward Walker Knight, Garter, Principal King of Arms.



NUM. CXI. Sir Edward Walker's Letter to Prince Maurice of Nassau, sent with the Ha|bit for the Prince Elector of Bran|denburgh. Ex Collect. E. W. G.
Monseigneur,
J'AY receu avec les Lettres de sa Majest le Roy mou Mistre tout l' habit du tresnoble Ordre de la Jartiere, pour son Altesse le Prince Electeur de Brandenburgh, avec Ordre, de les envoyer a vostre Altesse, que par vos moyens soient adresser a son Altesse Electoral a contient une just au corps de velour cramoisi, une manteau de ve|lour bleu, le grand Collier du tresnoble Ordre d'or, avec l'image de St. George emmaille pe|sante 30 onces,  un bonnet de velour noir. Com|ment on se doit porter le Papier donra plus de satisfaction a son Altesse Electoral, Quoy que l'Habit n'est jamais port si non qu' a la Feste de St. George, mais le grand Collier s'est port par le Souverain Compagnons, pendant les Prie|res de matin sur tous les jours mentionez dans le papier pour le liure des Statutes de l'Ordre, quand ils seront reformez. Ie tasherai avec tout soin de les envoyer en attendant j'ay envoy tout Phabit a mon cher amis le Chevalier Guil|laume Davidson de les envoyer a vostre Altesse de qui vous receurez cela,  la lettre de sa Ma|jest  je n'en doubte point bien tost tout le reste  puis je prie bumblement vostre Altesse de les adresser a son Altesse Electoral, avec les tresbum|bles  obeissantes services de luy, qui s'era toute sa vie, de sou serenissime Altesse Electoral  de vostre
Monseigneur le tres-humble  tres-obeissant Serviteur, Ed. Walker, Garter.
De Londres le x. jour
d'Avril, 1663.


NUM. CXII. Prince Maurice of Nassau his Letter to Sir Edward Walker, upon the Re|ceipt of the Habit for the Prince Ele|ctor of Brandenburgh. Ex eod. Collect.
Monsieur,
J'AY receu la vostre du 10/20 d'Avril, que m'a|vez fait l' bonneur de m'escrire dans la quelle vous me donnez advertissement, que vous envoyeres tout l'Habit du tresnoble Ordre de la Jartiere a Monsieur Baronet Davison, lequel ha|bit je viens de recevoit de luy a ce momment, Ie suis assez persuad, qui n'a pas tenu  vous, de ne l' avoir pas envoy plus tost j'ay ne pas man|qu d'envoyer la vostre aussy bien, que celle de sa Majeste  son Altesse Electorale de Branden|bourg,  ne manqueray pas non plus, d'envoyer le subdit habit avec la premiere occasion a sub|dite son Altesse, je suis asseur que tout cecy sera tresagreable a son Altesse Electorale,  qu'elle en sera fort rejouye de le tenir, d'autant qu'elle la defire long temps, Quant a moy, je vous re|mercie de la peine prise,  vous asseure, que je seray  jamais,
Monsieur, Vostre tres-humble Serviteur, Maurice P. de Nassau.
A lae Hay ce 10.
de Juin 1663.

A Monsieur Monsieur E. Walker Iartiere Premier Roy d'Arms,  Londres.



NUM. CXIII. A Letter to the Soveraign from the Prince Elector of Brandenburgh, ac|knowledging his Receipt of the Ha|bit of the Order. Ex ipso Autographo.
Monseigneur mon tres-honor Cousin,
A Yant tousjours estim comme je dois, l' bon|neur que vostre Majest m'a fait autre|fois de me recevoir dans la Societ de son Ordre de la Jartiere, Ie ne scaurois reconnoistre, qu'a|vec un respect extreme, le present de l'habit tout entier de cet Ordre, qu'il luy a pl de faire ad|dresser  m Cousin Monsieur le Prince de Nas|sau,  parequel Elle a vouln achever entiere|ment les obligations infinies que je luy ay d'estre du nombre d'une si illustre compagnie. Ie suis en impatience de recevoir cette chere marque d'af|fection  de bien veillance de vostre Majeste la suppliant de croire, que j'en conserver ay eelle|ment la memoir,  que je n' auray de plus

forte passion au monde, que de confirmer de plus en plus la confiance dont Elle me donne tousjours tant de nouveaux tesmoignages,  de saire voir en toutes sortes d' occasions combien je suis
Monseigneur mon tres-honor Cousin,  De vostre Majest Le tres-humble  obessant Serviteur Frederick-Guillaume Electeur de Brandenbourg.
De Konigsberg ce 4.
Iuin, l'an 1663.

A sa Majest le Roy de la grande Bretagne.



NUM. CXIV. A Certificate from Charles Duke o Burgundy, of his receiving the Order of the Garter. Ex amplo Cod. penes Iohannem Vin|cent, gen. fol. 175.
CHarles, par la grace de Dien, Due de Bour|goigne, de Lantrin, de Braban, de Lem|brogh,  de Lucembourg, Conte de Flandres, d' Artois,  de Bourgoigne, Palatine de He|nault, de Hollande, de Zellande, Namur, Marquis du Sainct Empire, Seigneur de Frieze, de Sallins,  de Mallins, Certifions  faisons seavoir a tous, que par les mains de Messire Gal|liard, Seigneur de Duras Chevalier, Thomas Vaghan, Tresorier de la Chambre, Maistre Je|han Russel, Docteur en decret, Archediacre de Berkeshire, Jarretiere Roy d' Arms, conseil|lers  Ambassadeurs de tres-bault,  tres-puis|sant Prince, nostre tres-bonnour frere le Roy d' Angleterre, Souverain de l' Ordre de la Jarretiere, pour ce envoys devers nous, nous avons aujourdbuy receu son dit Ordre de la Jar|retiere, ensemble le Manteau,  autres Orne|mens,  choses, au dit Ordre appartenans,  accoustumes. Et avec ce, avons en leurs mains fait le serment  ce requis,  pertinant, selon les estatuz d' icelluy Ordre, le tout soubz les conditions,  modifications sur ce advises,  faictes, entre luy  nous, Donn en nostre ville de Gand, sonbz nostre grant Seel, le 4. jour de Fe|rier, l'an de grace, Mil cccc. lxix.
Par Monseigneur le Due.


NUM. CXV. Another from Ferdinand Prince of Spain. MS. penes E. W. G. f. 16. b.
FErdinand, par la grace Dieu, Prince  Infante des Espaignes, Archidue d' Au|strice, Due de Bourgoingne, d' Estier, de Carnite, de Carmole, c. Certifions,  faisons scavoir a tous, que par les mains de Messire Henry Seigneur de Morley, Maistre Edoward Lee, Docteur en Theologie, Archediacre de Colche|ster, Aulmosiner, Messire Guillame Huysey Che|valier,  de Messire Thomas Wriothesley, Che|valier, dit Jarretier, Principal Roy d' Armes des Angloys, Ambassadeurs,  Conseilliers de tres-hault, tres-excellent  tres-puissant Prince, no|stre tres-honoreable Seigneur,  Oncle, le Roy d' Angleterre, c. Desenseur de la Foy, Seig|neur d' Irlande, Souverain de le tresnoble Ordre de Sainct George, nomme la Jarretiere, pour ce envoyez devers nous; Avons ce jourdbuy viii. de Decembre, jour de nostre Dame, receu son dit Ordre de Sainct George, nomm la Jarretiere, ensamble les Jarretiere, Manteau, Habit, Colier,  aultres ournemens, au dit Ordre appertenans,  accoustumez. Et avec ce, avons en leurs mains, faict le serment, a ce requis  partinent, selon les Statutz d' icelluy Ordre de Sainct George, le tout soubz les conditions,  modifications sur ce auiseez,  faictes entre le dit Seigneur le Roy  nous, C'est assavoir, de porter les Colier, Jarretiere, aucunes foys en l'an a nostre plaisir. Item, quant serons en quelque lieu, ou place, non convenable, Ou que n'aurons loysir d'ouyr matynes le jour de Saint George, les pourrons par ung Prestre faire dire, en nostre presence. Et si pour aucun bien grant affaire, ou empesebement, que nous pourroit sur|venir, nous estions occup le dit jour Saint George, En ce cas, ne serons tenu porter le dit habiz, si non durant le service divin, Lequel aschen, poutrons incontinent oster  devestir iceulx, sans attendre jusques apres le disner  souper. Toutefoys, si pour les canses dissusdites, ne pourrous porter, le susdits habitz, le dit jour Saint George entier, Lors voulons  promettons les porter a ung aultre jour solempnel dedens Pan. Donn en la ville de Newremberg, soubz nostre Nom,  Seel, le dit viii. jour de Decem|bre, l'an de grace, Mil, Cing; Ceus, ving, troys.


NUM. CXVI. Another from the French King Fran|cis the First. Ex Orig. penes Camer. Scacchar.
FRancoys, par la grace de Dieu, Roy de France, Seigneur de Genues, Souverain du tresdigne Ordre de Monseigneur Sainct Mi|chel. A tous ceulx qui ces presentes lettres ver|ront, salut: Comme Messire Arthur Plantaginet, Viconte de Lisle, Chevalier du tresdigne Ordre Monseigneur Sainct George (Maistre Jean Tail|lour, Doctent ez loix, Archediacre de Bouking|ham, Vice-chancellier d' Angleterre, Messire Nicolas Carew grant Eseuyer d' Angleterre, Messire Anthonie Browne Chevalier,  Messire Thomas Wriothesley Iartier, Chevalier, Pri|mier Roy d' Arms du dit Ordre, Ambassadeurs commis  deleguez de la part de tres-bault,  tres-puissant Prince, Henry par la mesme grace, Roy d' Angleterre, Seigneur d' Hibernie,  Defenseur de la Foy, nostre trescher,  tresame

frere, Cousin, perpetuel ally, confeder  bon compere, Nous ayent exhib present certaines Lettres Patentes, dattes du xxii. jour d'Octo|bre Mil, Cin Cens, vingt  Sept, Signes Sampson:  seelles en cyre Rouge, du Seau du College d' icelluy tresdigne Ordre de Saint George, dit de la Jartiere, par la teneur des|quelles que avons fait lire pardeuant nous  les Chevaliers de nostre Ordre Sainct Michel estans les nous apparissoit les dessusdits Ambassadeurs avoir plain povoir, facult  puissance de nous signifier,  presenter de la part de nostre dit tres|cher frere  Cousin, Souverain d'icelluy tres|digne Ordre Sainct George. (Et aussi de Pa|miable association d' icelluy l' ellection, unique|ment faicte de nous, par iceulx Souverain Chevaliers d'icelluy tresdigne Ordre) Et de nous prier  requerir icelle ellection accepter,  prendre le Manteau, Collier,  autres insignes de Chevalerie, du dit tresdigne Ordre,  faire le serement selon les Articles contenuz au livre des statuz du dit Ordre,  que ont acoustum de jurer  promettre les Chevaliers d'icelluy. Et si la forme des dits sermens, ne nous estoit agreable, leur estoit donn povoir de nous dispenser de faire les dits sermens, on partie d' iceulx, telz qu'il appartiendroit, soy contentant de nostre simple foy  parolle. Savoir faisons, que nous ayans esgarde  consideration a la tres-cordialle,  tres|entiere amour, alliance indissoluble,  con|federation perpetuelle, qui est entre nostre dit tres|cher  tresame Frere, Cousin, Ally perpetuel,  bon compere  nous, Et que de sa part il a ac|cept l' election par nous,  noz freres faicte de sa persome au tresdigne Ordre Sainct Michel, du quel nous sommes Souverain, Avons pour ces causes,  autres a ce nous mouvans accept,  acceptons Icelluy tresdigne Ordre de Sainct George, dit la Jartiere ( ce fait nous sommes revestuz,  affublez des Manteau  autress In|signes du dit Ordre a nouz presentez  livrez par les dessusdits Ambassadeurs) Et apres les remercyemens en telz cas requiz, avons fait le serement en la forme,  maniere qui sensuyt. Nous Francoys par la grace de Dieu Roy de France, Seigneur de Gennes Souverain de l' Ordre Sainct Michel, promettons en parolle de Roy, de garder, observer,  a nostre povoir, entretenir les Statuz,  Ordonnances du tres|digne Ordre Sainct George, nomm de la Jar|tiere; En ce qu'ilz, sont compatibles non con|traires, ne desrogans a ceulx de nostre dit tres|digne Ordre de Sainct Michel,  pareillement des Ordres, que par cy devant pourroins avoir prins des autres Princes. En tesmoing de ce nous avons fait mettre, le Seau du dit Ordre aux presentes signes de nostre main. Donn a Paris x. jour de Novembre, l'an de grace Mil, Cin Cens vingt  sept,  de nostre Regne le trezi|esme.


NUM. CXVII. Another from Emanuel Duke of Savoy. Ex Collect. Ed. Byshe Clarenceux.
JE Francois Roffier Savoysey, Secretaire de tresbault, puissant,  excellent
Seigneur,  Prince, Monseigneur Emanuel Philibert, par la grace de Dieu, Due de Savoy Re. general. 
Lieutenant de l' Empereur, atteste, fait foy,  certifie, Comme Monsieur de Clinton Say, Chevalier de l' Ordre, d' Angleterre, qu' on dist de la Jarretiere,  de Compaignie le Sieur Jar|retiere Roy d' Arms du dit Ordre, Ambassa|deurs, Commissioneurs,  Procureurs speciaulx du Roy,  de la Royne d' Angleterre, ont ce jourdbuy present, baill,  donn, de par leurs Majests, la Jarretiere,  le Manteau,  au|tres Enseignes  correspondants a mon dit Seig|neur le Duc de Savoy, avec toutes les Ceremoi|nies  Solempnits dees  accoustums. Et de plus ont receu du dit Seigneur Duc, le serment, jouxte la forme,  maniere des Statuts, du dit Ordre,  des Lettres de pouvoir, qu'ils ont apport, soubs-escriptes des mains propres d'iceulx Roy  Royne d' Angleterre, seelles du Seel du dit Ordre de la Jarretiere, Donnes en leur Pa|lais de Westminstre, le dix septiesme d' Octobre 1554. lesquelles Lettres leues Pay par Com|mandement demon dit Seigneur,  Maistre a haulte voix,  a louange public, quant faicte s'est la susdite presentation,  le dit serment, presents a ce assistants  appelles haults  puis|sants Seigneurs le Prince d' Oranges, les Contes de Lalaing,  d' Aremberg,  le Seigneur de Bossu, eulx trois des Chevaliers de l' Ordre de la Toyson, les Seigneurs Antoine Doria, Mar|quis de Sainct Estienne de Lavanto, du Conseit de l' Empereur,  generall Capitaine des ses Galleres,  Antoine de Drungua,  pleusi|eurs aultres tesmoinge, fait au Camp  au  d' auxy dans la Chambre de mon dit Seigneur le duc, le sixiesme jour de Novembre l' an de grace prins a la nativit Mil, Cin Cens, Cin|quante quatre.
Roffier.


NUM. CXVIII. Another from the French King Henry the Third. MS. penes Arthur. Com. Anglesey, p. 4.
HEnry by the grace of God, King of France, and Poland, to all those to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting. We give you to understand, that forasmuch as it hath seemed good to the Queen of England, our right dear and right well-beloved good Sister and Cousin, Cief and Soveraign of the Order of the Gar|ter, and to the Fellow-Brethren, Knights, and

Companions of the same Order, for the confir|mation of the mutual and brotherly amity be|tween us and our said good Sister, to chuse and associate us into the Company of Knights of the same Order, and for that effect hath deputed to|wards us our dear and well-beloved Cousin the Earl of Derby, Knight, and Companion of the same Order, to whom, and Sir Edward Staf|ford Knight her Ambassador resident with us, she hath given power by her Letters Patents of the 20. day of January last past, to present and give unto us, on her behalf, the Garter, the Man|tel, and other Ensigns of the same Order, which she hath sent us, which they have done with the Ceremonies and Solemnities in such case requi|site and accustomed: For these causes, liking the said Election and Association, We have accepted and do accept the said Order of the Garter with honor, and do promise to keep the Statutes there|of, which also have been given us in writing up|on the same assurance, that the said Lady the Queen our good Sister hath them given Vs, and the Declaration and Protestation which we have made, that we be not constrained and bound unto things contrary and derogatory to our Religion Catholick, Greatness, and Majesty Royal, and to the Statutes and Ordinances of our two Orders of the blessed Holy Spirit and of St. Michael, as it is contained in the Act of our Oath, which thereof we have made and given. In witness whereof, we have signed these presents with our hand, and thereunto caused to be put our Seal. Given at Paris the 12. day of March in the year of our Lord 1585. and of our Reign the 11.
Henry.


NUM. CXIX. Another from Gustaus Adolphus King of Sweden. Sir Tho. Rowe's Iournal, p. 208.
GUstavus Adolphus Dei grati Suecorum, Gothorum, Vandalorum Rex, Mag|nus Princeps Finlandiae, Dux Esthoniae Care|liae, Ingraeque Dominus, c. Omnibus hasce li|teras lecturis vel audituris, Salutem. Quan|doquidem complacuit seremissimo, ac potentissimo Principi Domino Carolo, Dei grati Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, Hiberniae Regi, Fidei Defensori, fratri, consanguineo,  amico nostro charissimo, nobilissimi Ordinis Aureae Perisce|lidis Magistro, reliqu inclyto caetui Equitum ac Commilitonum illustrissmi bujus Ordinis in expressissimam amoris tesseram, ac mutuam inter nos initam amicitiam arctioribus necessitudinis vinculis, devinciendaem  confirmandam, Nos etiam eligere,  associare in Collegium Equi|tum bujus Ordinis, atque in hunc finem Orato|res, Procuratores,  indubitatos Legatos suos constituere atque ablegare ad nos, Nobilissimum virum de conclavi suo Dominum Jacohum Spens de Wormeston, Equitem auraetum  spectabiles viros Petrum Young Armigerum, ex Nobilibus in Cubiculo presentiae suae ministrantibus unum,  Henricum Saintgeorgium Armigerum, ex Heraldis suis ad Arma unum, plenari ipsis potestate concess ac diplomate suo abunde ipsis fide adstructa  munit publico Sigillo Ordinis, dato vigesim quart Junii jam elapsi, deferendi, donandi, atque tradendi nobis ipsum auream Pe|riscelidem, Torquem rosatum, Sancti Georgii Imagunculas, reliquas vestes trabeatas in so|lenni harum Ceremoniarum, celebratione debite requisitas,  a su serenitate ad nos transmissas. Idcirc haec omnia ab ipsis rit administrata  peracta agnoscimus  fatemur, ac praesentium Literarum tenore omnibus testatum volumus, no|stri electionem  assumptionem in ujus Collegit sodalitium nobis gratissima fuisse, ac fore; Nos Insignia Ordinis decenti cum honore suscepisse, ac sancte in lges, ac Statuta ejus per procura|tores nostros, loco ac tempore praeitulis, jura|turos, ea ips cautione, quae  suae serenitatis deputatis nobis scripto exhibita fuit, videlicet, Nos religio observaturos Articulos hujus Ordi|nis in omnibus quae Religioni  nobis professae, dignitati, ac Majestati nostrae Regiae nullatenus derogarent, aut aliis Articulis,  ordinibus quos antebac suscepimus adversarentur; atque hanc ipsissimam juramenti nostri sormulam esse cupimus, quando solennis contestatio per procura|tores nostros nostro nomine futura est,  quando ejus exemplar in acta referri contigerit. In cu|jus rei testimonium praesentes propria nostr manu subscriptas Sigilli Regii appositione communiri jussimus. Actum in Castris nostris ad Wormdit, die sext Mensis Octobris, Anno supra Millesimum sexcentisimo vigesimo septimo.
Gustavus Adolphus.


NUM. CXX. Another from Charles King of Sweden. Ex ipso Autographo.
CArolus Dei Grati Succorum, Gothorum, Vandalorum Rex  Princeps haeredita|rius, Magnus Princeps Finlandiae, Dux Scaviae, Esthoniae, Livoniae, Careliae, Bremae, Verdae, Stetini Pomeraniae, Cassubiae, Vandaliae, Princeps Rugiae, Dominus Ingriae Vismariae nc nn Comes Palatinus Rhei, Bavariae, Ju|liaci, Cliviae, Montium Dux
Omnibus hasce lecturis vel audituris salutem, Quandoquidem complacuit serenissimo ac poten|tissimo Principi, Consanguineo, Amico  Faedera|to nostro charissimo Domino Carolo, ejus nominis secundo, cdem grati Magnae Britanniae, Fran|ciae Hiberniae Regi, Fidei Defensori,  No|bilissimi Ordinis Aureae Periscelidis Magistro, reliquo inclyto caetui Equitum ac Commilito|num, illustrissimi hujus Ordinis in expressissimam Amoris Tesseram  mutuam inter nos initam amicitiam arctioribus necessitudinis vinculis de|vinciendam  confirmandam, Nos etiam eligere  associare in collegium Equitum hujus Ordinis;

atque in hunc finem Oratores  indubitatos Pro|curatores suos constituere  oblegare Legatum suum extraordinarium Conciliarum suum Illu|strem nobis sincer dilectum Dominum Carolum Comitem Carliolensem, Vice-Comitem Howard de Morpeth, Baronem Dacre de Gilisland, lo|eum tenentem generalem in Comitatibus West|morlandiae Cumbriae,  spectabilem virum Dominum Henricum St. George  primariis of|ficialibus suis ad Arma unum, vulg Richmond Herald, plenari ipsis potestate concess ac fide ipsis abunde astruct, Diplomate publico Sigillo Ordinis, dato in Palatio Alb-aulae apud West|monasterium vicesimo nono die Mensis Novem|bris Anno Domini nuper praeterito Millesimo, sexcentesimo, sexagesimo octavo deferendi, donandi atque tradendi Nobis ipsam auream Perisceli|dem, torquem rosatum Sancti Georgii imagun|culas, reliquasque vestes trabeatas in solenni ha|rum ceremoniarum celebratione debite requisitas   Majestate su ad nos transmissas; ldcirc haec omnia ab ipsis rit administrata  peracta agnoscimus  fatemur, ac praesentium literarum tenore omnibus testatum volumus nosti Electio|nem  Assumptionem in hujus Collegii sodali|tium Nobis gratissimum fuisse ac fore; Nos in|signia Ordinis decenti cum honore suscepisse, ac sancte in Leges  Statuta ejus per procuratores nostros loco ac tempore praestitutis juraturos e videlicet cautione, Nos religios observaturos ar|ticulos hujus Ordinis in omnibus quae Religioni  nobis professae dignitati, ac Majestati nostrae Regiae nullatenus derogarent aut aliis Articulis  Ordinibus quos antehac suscepimus adversa|renturs Quam ipsissimam juramenti nostri for|mulam esse cupimus, quando solennis contestatio per Procuratores Nostros Nostro Nomine futura,  quand ejus exemplar in acta referri contige|rit. In cujus rei testimonium hasce honoratissi|mae  charissimae Matris nostrae, nec nn caetero|rum nostrorum Tutorum Regni Nostri Admini|stratorum manibus subscriptas, Sigillo Nostro Regio communiri jussimus. Dabantur in Arce nostr Holmenfi die 17. Augusti, Anno Millesi|mo sexcessimo sexagesimo nono.
Hedeuig Ellenora R. S. Petrus Brahe Comes in Wissingsborg R. S. Drotzetus. Vander Linde loco R. S. Mariscal. Gustaff Otto Steenbook R. S. Archithalass. Magnus Gabriell de la Gardie R. S. Cancellar. Johan Gabriell Steenbook, loco R. S. Thesaurarius.


NUM. CXXL Letters of Procuration to Peregrine Lord Willoughby of Ersby, from Frederick the Second King of Denmark. MS. quarto penes W. le N.Cl. f. 25. b.
NOS Eridericus secundus, Dei grati Da|niae, Norwegiae, Vandalorum, Gotho|rum Rex; Dux Slesvici, Holsatiae, Storma|riae, ac Dietmarsiae; Comes in Oldenburg, Delmenhorst; Omnibus  singulis, ad quos hae praesentes Literae pervenerint, salutem: Cum pla|cuerit serenissimae Principi, ac Dominae, Dominae Elizabethae, dei grati Angliae, Franciae, Hiberniae Reginae, Fidei defensatrici, c. Cha|rissimae consanguineae, sorori,  confederatae no|strae, supremae Principi, nobilissimae,  antiquissi|mae Societatis Militaris, quam Garterii Ordinem appellant: un cum caeteris omnibus, laudatis|simi illius Collegii fratribus,  Commilitonibus, Nos in eundem numerum ascribere  cooptare, atque ad magis honorificam jusdem rei declara|tionem, mittere ad nos plenum habitum,  or|natum praedicti Nobilissimi Ordinis, per Claris|simum Dominum, Peregrinum, Baronem de Wil|loughby Etesby,  celeberrimum virum, Gilbertum Dethick, Equitem auratum, Regem Armorum hujus Ordinis, Serenitatis suae Lega|tos,  vicarios in e pate: quorum de mani|bus, nos eundem Ordinem, non minus grato mimo, qum est nobis,  serenitate su delatus accepi|mus: Cum antiquissima ejusdem Ordinis Sta|tuta ac Decreta, postulent, ut in propri person installemur, sive in aliqu sede nobis destinat col|locemur in Collegiato Sacello ejusdem Ordinis, intra Castellum Windesorianum: qu quidem, cum commod, proficisci non possimus, ratione Re|galis Majestatis, ad quam summo beneficio divi|ni numinis evecti sumus, elegimus  substitui|mus praefatum nobilissimum,  nobis imprimis dilectum virum, Dominum Peregrinum, Baronem de Willoughby  Eresby, Procuratorem nostrum, qui suppleret vices nostras in ill parte, eaque pe|rageret, quae ad honoratissimi illius Ordinis, Decus  Ornamentum, quoquo modo videbuntur pertinere, haud aliter, atque ipsi faceremus, si presentes essemus. Et quodcunque idem nobilissi|mus vir, ibi in hoc genere, nostr caus praestite|rit, tenemus  approbamus, ut ratum  Legi|timum per praesentes, nn minus, ac si nos ipsi in propri person praestitissemus. Salv tamen de|claratione nostr quae ejus Reginae serenitatis Legatis, quorum supra mentio est facta, in ill tractatione, sub manu,  Sigillo nostro tradita est. In cujus rei majorem fidem,  testimonium evidentius, Literas hasce nostras patentes,  sub|scriptione,  Sigillo nostro firmavimus. Datae in Castro nostro Croneburg, die decimo nono Men|sis Augusti, Anno ab incarnatione Domini, ac Redemptoris nostri Jesu Christi, supra Millesi|mum quingentesimum octuagesimo secundo.



NUM. CXXII. Iohn Count Palatine of the Rhyne, his Letters of Procuration to Sir Philip Sidney. Ex eod. MS. f. 124.
JEan Casimire, par la grace de Dieu, Conte Palatin de Rhin; Duc de Baviere, c. A touls ceulx, qui ces presentes Lettres verront, Sa|lut: Comme la treshaulte, trespuissante,  tres|excellente Princesse, Elizabeth, Royne d'Angle|terre, France, Irlande, Soveraigne du tres|noble Ordre de la Jarretiere, de sa grace  fa|veur speciale, par l'advis,  consentement de Confreres Chevalliers,  Compaguons, du dit tresnoble Ordre, nous a eslue Chevalier,  Com|pagnon d'iceluy Ordre, en son Palais  Wesltmin|ster, l'huitiesme jour de ce present mois de Febu|rier; Nous voulans,  desirans tresaffectueuse|ment la dicte Election sortir so deu effect,  que tout ce soit faict, touchant les Ceremoines de nostre Installation  Windesore,  quoy nous som|mes tenus, par les Ordennances,  Chapitres du dit Ordre. Et neantmoins, par les grandes oc|cupations,  affaires, qu' avons presentment n'y puissions bonnenment comparoitre en personne, Comme toutes fois, nous vouldrions,  desirons; pour ce est il, que nous confians en la feaut, dis|cretion, diligence  grand preudhommie de nostre bien aim Messire, Philippe Sidney Chevalier, lequel avons aym de long temps  aymons, avons ordonn, commis,  deput, Ordonnous, Commettons,  Deputons, par ces presentes, nostre Procureur,  Deput especial, pour de par Nous,  en nostre Nom comparoir  Windsore,  la prochaine assemble des Chevaliers du dict Ordre,   y estre install, tenir lien pour nous, faire des offrandes  solempnits dees,  ac|coustumes en tel cs. Et en oultre de faire  la dite Souvereigne, le Serment selon la forme,  maniere des Statuts du dit Ordre,  tos aul|tres choses accomplir, exercer,  expedier, que  luy semblera estre necessaires en ceste partie, tout ainsi que faire deurions,  pourrions, si present y estions en nostre personne; Promettons tenir ferme,  agreable tout ce qu'il fera, ou dira, touchant nostre Installation. En Tesmoignage de quoy  ces presentes Lettres, avons faict mettre nostre Seau le xii. jour de Feburier, l'Anne de Grace 1579.


NUM. CXXIII. Letters of Procuration to the Sieur de Chattes from the French King Henry the Fourth. Ex Collect. W. le N. cl.
HEnry, par la grace de Dieu, Roy de France,  de Navarre,  nostre cher,  bien aim, le Sieur de Chattes, Commander de L'Ormetau, Conseilleur en nostre Conseil d'Estat, Capitaine de Ciquante hommes d'Armes de nos Ordonnan|ces; Gouverneur de nostre Ville de Dieppe,  l'un de nos Lieutenants Generalls au Governe|ment de Normandie, Salut : Comme par les Stat de l'Ordre de la Jartiere, anquel de l'an mil,  cens qutre vingt seize, nous avons est associs par la Royne d'Angleterre, nostre treschere,  tresamie, honne Soeur,  Cousin, It soit port que Estrangers Chevaliers du dit Ordre debuent envoyer, apres la reception de la dicte Jartiere,  du Collier,  Habit que leur est en|voi, par la Souverain du dit Order,  qu'ils au|ront certifi avoir le dit Jartiere, Collier, Habit, un sufficient Depu  Procureur, selon l'estat de son Seigneur,  Maistre, moyennns, qu'il soit Chevalier sans reproche, pour estre mi en sa place;  y estant faire son serment,  y estre admis, par  au nom de son dit Seigneur,  Maistre: Scavoir vous faisons, que nous de|sirans, pour le respect, ue nous portons a la Royne, nostre dicte Soeur  Cousine,  l'estime que nous faisons du dict Ordre, satisfaire, qu'a nous, est, au contenu des dits Statutes, en ce que touche la dite prise de possesion,  prestation de ser|ment  recognoissance, que pou cest effect nous ne pourrons saire melleur, ou plus convenable election, que de vostre personne pour les bonnes,  louables qualitis qui sont en vons,  les tes|moignages que vous avez rendus, en divers oc|casions, de vostre affection au bien,  avantage de nos affaires  service, vous avons Commis,  Deput, Commettons,  Deputons par ces presentes signes de nostre main, pour vous trau|sporter en Angleterre,  vous trouver a la pro|chain ceremonie, qui se fera du dicti Ordre, pour prendre possession de nostre place en iceluy, selon la forme ordinaire,  si besoigne est, faire le serment en nostre Nom, ainsi que l'ou  accou|stum de fair, gardant au surplus les solemni|tes en tel cas requises  generalment faire tout ce, que vous advisers necessaire pour l'effect dessus, ores qu'il y eust chose qui requist mande|ment plus special qu'il n'est contenu en ces dits presents, par lesquelles de ce faire, vous avons donn,  donnos plain pouvoir, puissance, au|thorit, commission,  mandement special, Car+tel est nostre plaisir.
Donn a Parisle vingti|esme jour de Avrill, l'an de grace mil six cent,  de nostre Reigne, le onziesme.
Henry.
Duneuville


NUM. CXXIV. A Precedent of a Commission for In|stallation of an Elect-Knight. Ex lib. Nig. p. 315.
HENRICUS Dei grati, invictissimus Rex Angliae Franciae Fidei Defensor, Do|minus Hiberniae,  Ordinis Divi Georgii supre|mus, fidelibus ac praedilectis Cognatis nostris, N. S. D. P.
Quoniam intelligimus, quod illustrissimus, ac potentissimus Princeps, N. vel Dominus aut

vir inclytus N: quem nuper in Socium nostri Or|dinis elegimus, non possit ipse commod advenire, ut in ollegio nostro, de more, in sedem suam in|troducatur,  alias ibi Ceremonias rit perim|pleat, juxta quod ex Statutis ipsis obligatur,  ob id virum bene nobilem ac honorandum N. mi|sit, ut sedem nomine suo possideat, juramentum praestet, caeteraque perficiat, quae Statuta requi|runt. Nos ide noiscum ista reputantes, Volu|mus  virtute praesentium, eam vobis authorita|tem addimus, ut hunc procuratorem ejus, ac deputatum non solm admittere, sed  caetera quaeque facere valeates quae ad Statuta, consue|tudinesque laudabiles attinere videbuntur. Et hae literae nostrae vos tuebuntur. Sub Sigillo no|stri Ordinis. N. die Mensis N. Anno regni no|stri N.


NUM. CXXV. A Commission for the Installation of Guido Vbaldus Duke of Vrbin. Ex Collect. W. D. N.
HEnry, by the grace of God, King of En|gland and of France, and Lord of Ire|land, Soveraign of the Noble Ordre of the Gar|ter. To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousins, the Marquess of Dorset, The Earl of Surrey our Treasurer of England, and the Earl of Shrewsbury, Steward of our Household, Com|panions of the said Order, greeting. Forasmuch as we understand, that the right noble Prince Gwe de Ubaldis Duke of Urbin, who was heretofore elected to be one of the Companions of the said Noble Order, cannot conveniently repair into this our Realm, personally to be installed in the Collegial Church of that Order, and to per|form other Ceremonies, whereunto by the Sta|tutz of the said Order he is bound; But for that intent and purpose, hath sent a right honorable personage Balthasar de Castilione, Knight, suffi|ciently authorised as his Proctor, to be installed in his name, and to perform all other things for him, to the Statutes and Ordinances of the said Order requisite, and appertaining. We there|fore in consideration of the premisses will, and by these presents give unto you license, full power and authority, not only to accept, and admit the said Balthasar, as Proctor for the same Duke, and to receive his Oath, and install him in the lieu and place, and for the said Duke, but al|so farther to do therein, as to the Statutes and laudable usages of the said Order it ap|pertaineth, and this our writing shall be to you, and every of you sufficient discharge in that behalf. Given under the Seal of the said Noble Order of the Garter, at our Mannor of Grene|wiche, the vii. day of Novembre, the xxii year of our Reign.


NUM. CXXVI. Another for the Installation of Ema|nuel Duke of Savoy. Ex Collect. A. V. W.
PHilip and Mary, by the grace of God, King and Queen of England, France, Naples, Hierusalem, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Princes of Spain and Cicily; Archdukes of Au|stria; Dukes of Millayne, Burgundy, and Bra|band; Counts of Haspurge, Flaunders, and Ty|roll, and Soveraigns of the Noble Order of the Garter: To our right trusty and well-beloved, the Lord Clynton, and the Lord Paget, Knights and Companions of the said Noble Order, Greet|ing. Forasmuch as we understand, that the right high and mighty Prince, and our entirely beloved Cousin, Emanuel Philibert, Duke of Sa|voy, and Prince of Piemont, c. and our right trusty and well-beloved Counsellor, the Lord William Howard of Effingham, high Admi|ral of England, were heretofore elected to be Knights and Companions of the said Noble Or|der of the Garter, which Emanuel Duke of Sa|voy, Prince of Piemont, c. cannot conveni|ently repair unto our Castle of Windesore, per|sonally to be installed in the Collegiate Chappel of that Order, and to perform other Ceremonies whereunto by the Statutes of the said Order he is bounden; and for that cause hath sent a right noble personage Johan Thomas L'angusto des Contes de Stropiane sufficiently authorised as his Deputy and Proctor, to be installed in his name, and to receive his Oath, and to perform all other such things and Ceremonies for him, as to the Statutes and Ordinances of the said Or|der be requisite, and appertain. We therefore in consideration of the premises, will, and by these presents give unto you, full power, license, and authority, not only to accept and admit the said Johan Thomas L'angusto des Contes de Stropiane, to be Deputy and Proctor for our said entirely beloved Cousin, the said Duke of Savoy, Prince of Piemont, c. and to install him in the lieu of the said Duke, but also fur|ther to do therein, as to the Statutes and lauda|ble usages of the said Noble Order, as touching a Proctor it appertaineth. And in semblable wise we will, authorise, and license you to ad|mit, accept, and install, our said right trusty and right well-beloved Counsellor, the Lord Wil|liam Howard of Essingham, high Admiral of England; and further to do for his installing as to the Statutes of the said Noble Order it be|longeth: And these our Letters shall be your suf|ficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf. Given under the Seal of our Garter, at our Pa|lace of Westminster the 29. day of January in the first and second year of our Reign, 1554.



NUM. CXXVII. Another for the Installation of the French King Charles the Ninth. Ex eod. Collect.
ELizabeth, by the grace of God, c. To our right trusty, and right well-beloved Cousin the Earl of Sussex, our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Counsellor the Earl of Leicester, Master of our Horse; our right trusty and well-beloved the Viscount Mounta|gue; with our right trusty and well-beloved the Lord Clynton, our high Admiral of England, Knights and Companions of our Noble Order of the Garter, Greeting. Forasmuch as We, with other the Companions of the said Noble Order assembled, did lately elect and chuse our dearest and most entirely beloved Brother, the French King, to be Knight and Companion of our said Noble Order; and forasmuch as our said dear Brother cannot, for divers causes, conveniently re|pair to our collegiate Chappel, within our Castle of Windesore; and for that cause hath  a right noble personage, the Lord Rambouilliet one of his ordinary Chamberlains, Knight of the Order of Saint Michaell, and Captain of fifty ordinary men of Arms; sufficiently authorised as his Deputy and Procurer, to be installed in his name, and to receive his Oath, and to perform all other such things and Ceremonies for him, as to the Statutes and Ordinances of the said Or|der be requisite and appertains. We therefore, in consideration of the premisses, will, and by these presents give unto you full power and au|thority, not only to accept and admit the said Procurer; but also further to do therein as to the Statutes and laudable usages of the said No|ble Order, as touching a Procurer it doth ap|pertain, And these our Letters shall be your suf|ficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf.
Given under the Seal of our Order, at our Pa|lace of Westminster,the 14. day of January in the 8. year of our Reign.


NUM. CXXVIII. Letters of notice to the Commissioners appointed to Install the Duke of Holstein by his Proxie. Collect. A. V. W.
By the Queen.
RIght trusty and well-beloved, We greet you well; and whereas we have appointed you, together with our right trusty, and well-beloved, the Lord Hastings of Loughborow, to be in Commission for the Instalment, in our Castle of Windesor, of our dearest and most entirely beloved Cousin, the Duke of Holstein by his Pro|curer, the Viscount Hereford, being lately cho|sen to be one of the Fellowship and Companions of our Order of the Garter; We have thought it good, not only to give you knowledge hereof by these our Letters, but also to require you to make your repair to our said Castle of Windesor, so as you may be there on Saturday, the 14. day of this moneth, to the end that upon Sunday next the 15. day of this present Moneth of December, he may proceed to the Installation of him by his Procurer accordingly.
Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminsterthe 12. day of De|cember, in the third Year of our Reign.

To our right trusty and well-beloved the Lord Pagit of Beaudesert, one of the Com|panious of our Order.
The like Letter was directed to the Lord Loughborow, the other Commissioner ap|pointed for this Installation.



NUM. CXXIX. Letters of notice to the Commissioners for Installation of the French King Charles the Ninth. Ex eod. Collect.
By the Queen.
RIght trusty and right well-beloved Cousin, we greet you well. And whereas, we have appointed you, with others the Compani|ons of the most Noble Order of the Garter, to be in Commission for the Installation in our Castle of Windesor, of our dearest and most entirely be|loved Brother the French King, by his Procurer the Lord Rambouillet, being lately chosen to be one of the Fellowship, and Companions of our Or|der of the Garter; We have thought it good, not only to give you knowledge hereof by these our Letters, but also to require you to make your re|pair to our said Castle of Windesor, so as you may be there on Tuesday next the 15. day of this present Moneth of January, to the end, that on Wednesday he may proceed to his Installation accordingly.
Given under our Signet, at our Pa|lace of Westminsterthe  day of January in the eight year of our Reign.

To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cou|sin the Earl of Sussex, one of the Companions of our Order.
The like Letter to the Earl of Leicester. Viscount Mountague. and Lord Clinton.




NUM. CXXX. A Warrant for materials for the Ban|ner of the French King Henry the Second. Ex Collect. E. W. G.
By the King. Edward.
WE will and command you, that unto our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir Gilbert Dethick Knight, alis Garter King at Arms, ye deliver or cause to be delivered, upon sight hereof, without delay, three yards of Cloth of Gold, two yards of Cloth of Gold Tissue, and 16 yards of Blue Velvet, which shall be for the Banner, for the Mantles of the Helmet, and the lyning of the same, for the Installation of Henry the French King, and that you content and pay for the Stuff, workmanship, and the embroidering of the said Banner. And these our Letters, c.
Given under our Signet at our Mannor of Greenwich,the 10. of May in the fifth year of our Reign.

To our trusty and well-beloved Counsellor Sir Rauf Sadleyere Knight, Master of our Great Wardrobe, or to his Deputy there.



NUM. CXXXI. A Warrant to deliver Garter money to provide the Atchievements of the said King. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
THE King's Majesty's pleasure is, that of such his Treasure as remains in your cu|stody, to his Majesty's use, ye deliver unto Sir Gilbert Dethick Knight, alias Garter, King at Arms, for the provision of an Helm, garnished with fine Gold, a Crown of Copper gilt, an arm|ing Sword, and Girdle to the same, and a Plate of metal, with the Arms of the French King engra|ven; which are for the Installation of the King's Majesty's good Brother, Henry the French King, the sum of twenty pounds; and these our Let|ters shall be your sufficient Warrant in that be|half. From Greenwiche the 11. of May 1551.
Your loving friends E. Somerset. J. Bedford. E. Clinton. W. Herbert. W. Cecil. J. Warwick. W. Northt. W. Paget. J. Gate.


NUM. CXXXII. A Warrant for the delivery of the Duke of Chevereux his Atchievements to Garter. Ex eod. Collect.
Charles R.
WE will and command you, forthwith to deliver, or cause to be delivered, unto our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir Willi|am Seagar Knight, Garter, Principal King of Arms, for the installation of our well-beloved Cousin the Duke of Chevereux, these particu|lars hereafter mentioned; that is to say, one Helmet of Steel gilt with fine Gold, his High|ness Crest carved, and gilt, a pair of Mantles of Cloth of Gold lined with White Sattin, and spotted with Ermines, two Knobs and Tassels of Silk and Gold, a Sword, the Hilts, Pomell, and Chape gilt, the Scabbard and Girdle, Cloth of Gold, a great Banner of his Highness Arms, wght in Metal and in Oyl, a Cushen of Crim|son Velvet fringed, and Tassels of Silk, one Do|zen of Scutcheons on Paper in Mettal, of his Highness Arms, within a Garter, a Staff for the great Banner painted in Oyl, a Plate of Cop|per gilt, graven, and enamelled with his High|ness Arms, to be set upon his Highness Stall at Windesore; and this our Letter shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf, Given under our Signet, c.


NUM. CXXXIII. Another for the Atchievements of Gu|stavus Adolphus King of Sweden. Ex eod. Collect.
Charles R.
THese are to will and command you to pro|vide and deliver, or cause to be provided and delivered, to the use of the high and migh|ty Prince, Gustavus King of Sweden, against his Installation, these parcels following; viz. A great embroidered Banner of his Arms, of colour|ed Velvet, enriched with Cloth of Gold, and Cloth of Silver, and Twist of Venice Gold, Plates, and Purle, two yards and half of rich Cloth of Tissiue for Mantles for his Helm, Scabbard, and Girdle, two yards of Cloth of Silver to line those Mantles; two yards and half of Purple Velvet for a Cushen with Fringe, and Tassels of Purple Silk and Gold, to bear his Robes upon, two Tassels also, with Knobs gilt, to hang at the ends of the Mantles; an arming Sword gilt, an open Helmet, with a royal Crown, and an Orb and Cross on the top thereof gilt, with his Crest; a Book of Statutes of the Order, and a Plate of his Arms, and Stile to be set up in his Stall at Windesore: And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf.



NUM. CXXXIV. A Warrant for delivery of materials for the Atchievements of the French King Charles the Ninth. Ex lib. Warr. Dorm. in magno Gard|rob. Regis, tempore Eliz. Reg. p. 364.
Elizabeth R.
WE will and command you, to deliver to our well-beloved Servant David Smith, our Embroiderer, as much Blue Velvet, Cloth of Gold yellow with works, and Purple Cloth of Gold tissued with Silver, as shall suffice for the making and furnishing of one great double Ban|ner, to be richly embroidered on both sides with the Arms of France, together with the Mantle, Helmet, Crest, Sword, and Scabbard, sutable to the same Banner, for the installing of our right well-beloved Brother, Charles the Ninth French King; and that ye pay unto the said David Smith, as well for his workmanship, in the em+broidering of the premisses, as also for all such Fringe of Silk and Gold, with Buttons and Tas|sels of like Silk and Gold, and for Venice Gold and Silk for the embroidering of the premisses.
Given at Westminsterthe last day of November, in the eighth year of our Reign.

To our well-beloved I. Fortescue, Esq Master of our Great Wardrobe.



NUM. CXXXV. Another for the Atchievements of the French King Henry the Third. Ex lib. Warr. particul. in praed. Gard|rob. tempore Eliz. Reg. p. 179.
Elizabeth R.
DEliver to our well-beloved Servant Sir Gilbert Dethick, alias Garter King at Arms, as much Blue Velvet, Cloth of Gold yel|low with works, and Purple Cloth of Gold, tissu|ed with Silver, as shall serve to make one large Banner, richly embroidered on both sides, with the Arms of France, to make Mantlets, and cover the Scabbard, also the Helmet, Crest, Sword, and other Furniture of the same; and that ye pay for the embroidering of the same Banner, for Purls of Damask Gold, and for Venice Gold Fringe, and Passamain Lace of Gold with Silk and all other necessaries, for the installing of the French King. Item, one Standard of Crimson and Blue Taffaty painted and gilded, with our Arms, and Cognisance, with Gold and Silver laid in Oyl, and for Silk Fringe for the same.
Given at Westminsterthe 12. of June, in the 14. year of our Reign.

To our trusty I. Fortescue Esq Master of our Great Wardrobe.



NUM. CXXXVI. A Warrant for the delivery of the At|chievements for the Prince of Den|mark. Ex Collect. E.W.G.
Charles R.
OVR will and pleasure is, that you forth|with deliver, or cause to be delivered, un|to our trusty and well-beloved servant Sir Ed|ward Walker Knight, Garter Principal King of Arms, or by his order, the several particulars herewith sent and signed by him, to be used and made up into Hatchments for the Installation of the Prince of Denmark, lately elected a Compa|nion of our most Noble Order of the Garter, and after that you cause payment to be made for the painting and making thereof, according to former precedents; and for your so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge.
Given, c.the 12. of February 1662.

To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Coun|sellor, Edward Earl of Sand|wich, Master of our Great Wardrobe, or to his Deputy there.



NUM. CXXXVII. A Warrant for delivery of Materials to Garter, for the Atchievements of Charles King of Sweden, and the Prince Elector of Saxony.

Book of Warrants in the Great Ward|robe, commencing at Michaelmas, 1667. fol. 95.
Charles R.
OVR will and pleasure is, and we do here|by require you, forthwith to cause to be pro|vided and delivered unto our trusty and well-beloved servant Sir Edward Walker Knight, Garter Principal King of Arms, or to such person as he shall appoint to receive the same, the seve|ral parcels of Cloth of Gold, Sattin, Damask and Taffaty, and other Necessaries mentioned in the Bills herewith sent, and signed by the said Gar|ter, to be made up into Banners and Atchieve|ments to be hung up in our Chappel at Windesor, against our next Feast of the Order, which we intend to hold there in April next, over the Stalls of Charles King of Sweden, and the Prince Ele|ctor of Saxony, who are by their Proxies to be installed there; and that you cause payment to be made for the same accordingly, and for your so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant.

Given at our Court at Whitehall, the 28. day of February 1669.
By the Soveraign's special command. De Vic. Canc.

To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cou|sin and Counsellor, Ed|ward Earl of Sandwich Master of our Great Wardrobe, or in his ab|sence to his Deputy.



Ibid. fol. 95. b. Necessaries to be provided and delivered out of his Majesty's Great Wardrobe, in pursu|ance of his Majesty's Warrant of the 28. of February, for the Installation of Charles King of Sweden by his Proxie at Winde|sor, in April next 1670.
An embroidered Banner upon Satten and Cloth of Gold, according to his Colours.
A Fringe of Blue Silk and Gold for the same.
Two yards of Fustian for the Socket of the Banner.
A Crest carved and gilt.
A Staff for the Banner.
Two yards and a half of Cloth of Gold for the Mantles.
Two yards of Cloth of Silver to line the Mantles.
Two large Tassels of Blue Silk and Gold.
Two Knobs gilt with Gold.
An Helmet of Steel gilt.
A Sword with a Cross Hilt gil.
A Plate of his Arms and Stile.
Three Scutcheons of his Arms, painted on Pa|per in Metal, and his Stile underneath.
Ed. Walker, Garter.
1. Mar. 1669.


Necessaries to be provided and delivered out of his Majesty's Great Wardrobe, in pursu|ance of his Majesty's Warrant of the 28. of February, for the Installation of the Prince Elector of Saxony by his Proxie at Wind|sor in April next 1670.
Four Ells of rich Taffaty for the great Banner.
Eight yards of Silk Fringe, according to the Colours.
Three yards of Fustian for the Socquets for the Banner.
A Crest carved and gilt.
Two yards and a half of Cloth of Gold for the Mantles.
Two yards of White Satten to line the Mantles.
Two large Tassels of Silk and Gold.
Two Knobs gilt with Gold.
A Helmet of Steel gilt.
A Sword with a cross Hilt gilt.
A Plate of his Arms and Stile.
Three Scutcheons of his Arms, painted on Pa|per in Metal, with his Stile underneath.
Ed. Walker, Garter.
1. Mar. 1669.



NUM. CXXXVIII. A President of an Emperor's Oath. Ex lib. Nig. p. 311.
NOS, N. summ Dei nignitate ac grati Caesar semper Augustus, aut Rex N. pro|mittimus in verba Regio,  fidem damus, sub honore nostro, Sacrosanctis Evangeliis per nos impraesentiarum tactis: quod fideliter ac ver pro viribus observabimus Statuta Clarissimi Or|dinis Militris in Angli Divo Georgio nun|cupati, qui  de praenobili at insigni Subliga|culo nomen accepit, id de Articulo in Articu|lum, prout seriatim in libello ad nos misso conti|nentur, saltem quatenus observari possunt ac de|bent,  dummodo contrarii non fuerint aut de|rogantes hiis in quos jam ante nomen dedimus ac juravimus,  conditionibus aliis, de quibus praeconventum est, semper salvis.


NUM. CXXXIX. A President of an Emperor's or King's Proctor's Oath. Ex lib. Nig. pag. 311.  312.
EGO, N. Eques,  Procurator serenissimi at invictissimi Principis ac Domini mei, Do|mini N. Caesaris. semper Augusti vel Regis N. nominati at electi ad insignem at honoran|dam societatem Ordinis a praenobili Subligacu|lo nuncupati: vice ac nomine praedicti Domini mei, veraci animo ac fide, promitto ac juro eun|dem illustrissimum ben  fideliter adimpletu|rum ac servaturum, omnia  singula Statuta, Ordinationes,  decreta Ordinis illius, juxta vim, formam, at effectum, ad ipsum quoquo mo|do pertientia: Salvis conditionibus inter eum  Ordinis Supremum praeacceptis.


NUM. CXL. A President of an Oath of a Proctor for a Prince, Duke, c. Lib. N. p. 312.
EGO, N. Eques ac Procurator Inclyti Princi|pis, Archiducis, Ducis, Marchionis, Comi|tis, Vice-Comitis, Baronis, Domini, vel (ut mi|nimum) Equites Aurati N. ad praeclarissimam Ordinis Divi Georgii Societatem jam nuper no|minati at electi, vice ac nomine ipsius Domini mei, veraci animo integr fide promitto,  ju|ro, praefatum Dominum meum Statuta hujus Or|dinis,  singulos ipsorum Articulos ben  fide|litr observaturum ac perimpleturum, juxta vim, formam, at effectum eorundem: Saltem, qua|tenus Supremi dispensatio moderabitur  decla|rabit.



NUM. CXLI. The Oath of Philip King of Castile. Ex Lib. N. p. 184.
NOs Philippus Dei gratia Rex Castiliae, Le|gionum, Granado, Archidux Ostri|chiae,  Dux Burgundiae, promittimus,  sub fide nostr ac honore Regio, per haec sancta Evan|gelia Dei, Canonem Missae,  hanc veram Do|minicae Crucem portionem, quae corm hic sta|tuuntur,  manibus hisce nostris modo tangimus, juramus: qud omnia praesentis Ordinis Statuta, juxta qud continentur in libell nuper ad nos misso, atque  nobis accepto, perinde ac si quis Articulorum hic nobis recitaretur observabimus,  de Articulo in Articulum adimplebimus, tm fideliter ac prompt qum nos Dei ipsius  San|ctorum ejus auxilium exoptamus.


NUM. CXLII. The Oath of Ferdinand Prince of Spain, c. MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 17. b.
NOus Ferdinando, par la grace de Dieu, Prince  Infante d'Espaigne, Archeduc d'Austriche, Duc de Bourgoingne, de Stier, de Carinthe, de Carniolle, c. Promettons  Iu|rons sur nostre foy,  bonneur,  les Saintz Evangilles, par nous manuellement touchez, que nous accomplirons,  entretiendrons loyaulement,  nostre ponoyr, tous les Statutz, Pointz,  Or|donnances de le tres noble Ordre de Saint George, nomm la Jarretiere, de point en point,  de Article en Article, selon qu'il est contenu  declair dedens le livre, qui nous a est baill, lequel avons accept,  acceptons, aussi bien que si nous lisions tout au long  ceste heure presente chascun Article; Except de point porter les Collier Jarretier sinon aulcunes foys l' an  nostre plaisir. Item, quant serons en quelque lieu ou place non convenable, ou que nous n'ayons loysir d'ouir Matines le jour Saint George, les pourrons par vng prestre faire dire en nostre pre|sence. Et si pour ancun bien grant affaire ou empeschement qu'il nous pourroit survenir, estions ccup le dit jour Saint George, E ce cas ne Jerons tenu porter les dit Collier, Jarretier,  aultres habitz, y pertinans si non durant le di|vin service, lequel achev, pourrons incontinent oter  devestir iceulx sans attendere jusques apres le disner  souper, toutesoys si pour les causes dessusdictes ne pouyons porter le susdit ha|bit le dit jour Saint George entier, lors voulons  prometctons les porter en vng aultre jour so|lempnel dedens l'an; lesquelz Articles prmet|ctons derechef tenir  garder entierement sans enfrayndre; Ainsi nous ayde Dieu  tous les Saintz; Donn en la ville de Neurenberghe, soubz noz nom  seel le viii. jour de Decembre, l'an de grace Mille Cinque Cens Vingt  Troys.


NUM. CXLIV. The Oath of Emanuel Duke of Savoy. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
NOus Emanuel Philibert, par la grace de Dieu Duc de Savoy, Chamblaye, Au|gust, Prince  Vicaire perpetuel du saint Em|pire, Marquis en Italie, Prince de Piedmont, Conte de Genevet, Genevoye, Bargias, Vaude|mont, c. Lieutenant  Capitain general pour l'Empereur, promettons,  jurons par nostre foy  bonneur,  les Saints Evangiles par nous ma|nuellement touchez, que nous accomplirons, entre|tiendrons,  observerons loyaument tous les Esta|tuts, Points,  Ordonnances du tres noble Ordre de la Jarretiere en Engleterre,  ce de point en point,  d'article en article, selon ce qui est con|tenu au livre qui nous a est envoy, ou pour le moins si avant que les dits Estatuts puissent bon|nement estre observs  gards de nous,  qu'ils ne soyent contraires  ce en quoy auparavant nous nous avons oblig par nostre foy  serment,  pourve aussi que ne soyons point tenus de partir la dite Jartiere, Phabit,  autres enseignes du dit Ordre, si non quand nous verrons  aurons la commodit de le faire,  non autrement, lesquels articles nous promettons derechef garder  tenir entierement comme avant est dict, ainsi que nous ayde Dieu,  tous les Saints.
Donn au Camp de l'Empereur,  fait dans l'Eglise, dissus le sixieme jour de Novembre, l'an mil cinq cens cinquante  quatre.
Emanuel. Rossier.


NUM. CXLV. The Oath taken by the Proctor to the French King Francis the First. Ad Calcem Regist. Chartac.
JE Adrien Tercelin, Chivalier, Seignieur de Brosse, Posse, Cafferte, Bailly Cappitaine de Gisors, l'un des Chamberlans de tresbault  trespuissant Prince, Francoys, par la grace de Dieu, treschrestien Roy de France, premier de ce nom; comme Procureur,  ayaut pouoir expres de la part de mon dit Seignieur, prometcts,  jure sur sa parole,  sur son honneur, qu'il obser|vera, gardera,  entretiendra les Statutz du tresnoble Ordre de mon Seignieur, Saint George en ce, qu'ilz ne sont contraires, ne derogans aux Statutz du tresnoble Ordre de Monseignieur Saint Michel,  autres Ordres, que mon dit Seignieur Roy aye cy-devant prins  d'autres Princes.
A. Tercelin.



NUM. CXLVI. The Oath of the French King Charles the Ninth. MS. penes G. O. Y. pag. 221.
NOus promettons  jurons en parole de Roy, que nous observerons, garderons,  main|tiendrons les estatuts  ordonnances, de l'Ordre de la Jarretiere en tout ce,  si avant qu'elles ne soyent contraires ne derogatoires  nostre grandeur Royale aux estatuts de nostre Ordre de Monsieur Saint Michell, ni aucun aultre serment que nous avons faict auparavant.


NUM. CXLVII. The Oath of the Emperor Maxi|milian. MS. quaro penes W. le N. Cl. f. 99. b.
NOus promettons  jurons en parole d'Em|pereur, que nous observerons, garderons,  maintiendrons les Statuts  Ordonnances de l'Ordre de la Jarretiere en tout ce,  si avant qu'ils ne sont contraires, ni derogatoires  nostre grandeur  Majest Imperialle, ni aux Statuts d'ancun autre Ordre ou serment que nous avons prins auparavant.


NUM. CXLVIII. The Oath of his Proctor. MS. fol. penes E. W. G.
EGo N. Procurator Serenissimi  Invinctissimi Principis ac Domini mei Maximiliani Cae|saris,  semper Augusti, electi,  nominati ad honorabilem societatem Ordinis Garterii, vice, nomine, fide,  in animo praedicti Domini mei, promitto  juro, supra Sacrosancta Evangelia per me manualiter tacta, eundem illustrissimum Principem ac Dominum meum ben  fideliter adimpleturum  observaturum omnia  singula Statuta  Ordinationes praedicti Ordinis secun|dum vim, formam,  effectum, ipsum quovismodo concernentia  spectantia.


NUM. CXLIX. The Oath taken by the French King Henry the Third. MS. quarto penes W. le N. Cl.
NOus Henry, par la grace de Dieu Roy de France  de Polongne, Iurons, Vouons,  Promettons solennellement sur nostre honneur en parole de Roy, Que nous observerons, garderons,  maintiendrons les Statuts  Or|donnances du tresnoble Ordre Monsieur Saint George, nomin la Jarretiere, en ce qu'ils ne se trouveront contraires  nostre Religion Catho|lique, grandeur  Majest royalle, ni aux Statuts  Ordonnances de nos dux Ordres, du Benoist Saint Esprit,  de Monsieur Saint Michel, En tesmoing de quoy avons sign la presente de nostre propre main,  icelle faict seeller de nostre Seel du Secret.
A Paris,le dernier jour de Fevrier, l'an mil cinq cens quatre vingts cinq.
Henry.


NUM. CL. The Oath of the French King Henry the Fourth. Collect. W. le N. Cl.
NOus Henry, par la Grace de Dieu, Roy de France  de Navarre, Iurons, Vouons,  Promettons solennellement sur nostre honneur en parole de Roy, Que nous observerons, garderons,  maintiendrons les Statuts  Or|donnances du tresnoble Ordre Monsieur Saint George, nomin la Jarretiere, en ce qu'ils ne se trouveront contraires  nostre Religion Catho|lique, grandeur  Majest royalle, ny aux Sta|tuts  Ordonnances de nos deux Ordres, du Be|noist Saint Esprit,  de Monsieur Saint Michel, En Tesmoing de quoy nous avons sign la presente de nostre propre main,  icelle faict seeler de no|stre Seel du secret.
A Rouen le  jour d'O|ctobre, l'an mil cinq cens quatre vingts  seize.
Henry.


NUM. CLI. The Oath taken by the Proctor to the French King Henry the Fourth. Ex eod. Collect.
JE le Sieur de Chastes, Chevalier de l'Ordre de Saint Jean de Jerusalem, Conseilleur de Roy en son Conseil d'Estat, Capitaine de Cin|quante hommes d'Armes de ses Ordonances,  l'un de ses Lieutenants generaux en Norman|die, Vice-admiral de France,  Gouverneur de la Ville de Dieppe, Procureur pour le Roy tres|chrestien, Henry quatriesme Roy de France  de Navarre, Chevalier du tresnoble Ordre de la Jar|retiere, promets au nom,  sur l'honneur de mon dit Roy  Seigneur qu'il observera, gardera,  maintiendra les Statuts  Ordonnances du dit Ordre, selon la forme cy devant jure par sa Majest,  sous les conditions acceptes entre sa dite Majest,  la Royne Souveraine du dit Ordre.
M. Chastes.



NUM. CLII. The Oath of Frederick the Second King of Denmark. Ex lib. MS. in Bibl. Hatton.
NOs Fridericus summ Dei benignitate Daniae, c. Rex, promittimus verbo regi,  fidem damus, sub honore nostro, sacro|sanctis Evangeliis per nos impraesentiarum tactis, qud fideliter ac ver pro viribus observabimus stainta clarissimi Ordinis militaris in Anglia, qui de praenobili atque insigni Subligaculo nomen accepit, de Articulo in Articulum prout seriatim in libello Statutorum ejusdem praenobilissimi Or|dinis continentur, saltem quatenus observari pos|sunt ac debent,  dummodo contrarii non fue|rint aut derogantes hiis in quos jam ante nomen dedimus ac juravimus,  conditionibus aliis, de quibus praeconventum est, semper salvis.


NUM. CLIII. The Oath taken by his Proctor. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. fol. 126. b.
I Sir Peregrine Bertie, Knight, Lord Wil|lougby of Eresby, Deputy, and Procurator for the right high, right Excellent, and mighty Prince, Frederick King of Denmark, named and chosen to be one of the Companions of the most honorable Order of the Garter, do, in the said high and mighty Princes name and stead, truly and faithfully promise and swear, that the said high and mighty Prince will well and faithfully fulfil and keep all and singular the Statutes, Ordinances, and Decrees of that hono|rable Order, according to their true force, effect, and meaning, so far forth as they concern him, and shall be agreeable with the Word of God.


NUM. CLIV. The Oath of the Proctor to Christian the Fourth King of Denmark. Ex ipso Autogr.
EGo Henricus Ramelius, Serenissimi ac Po|tentissimi Principis Domini Christiani Quarti, Daniae, Norvegiae, Vandalorum, Go|thorum, Regis, Ducis Slesvici, Holsatiae, Stor|mariae, Dithmarsiae, Comitis in Oldenburg, Delmenhurst, nominati at electi ad insignem at, honorandam societatem Ordinis  praenobili Subligaculo nuncupati Domini mei Clementissi|mi, Legatus, ejusdem, Serenissimi Regis  in|clyti Regni Senatorii Ordinis Consiliarius, in Wusterwitz Beckeskow Dominus haeredita|rius, jussu, vice, ac nomine praedicti Domini mei, veraci animo ac fide promitt,  in Majestatis ipsius animam juro, eundem Serenissimum Regem ben ac fideliter adimpleturum ac servaurum omnia  singula Statuta, Ordinationes,  De|creta Ordinis illius, juxta vim, formam, atque effectum, ad ipsum quoquo modo pertinentia: salvis pactis  faderibus, quibus ante hoc tempu Majestas ipsius obstricta tenetur.


NUM. CLV. The Oath taken by Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg. Erchard. Cellius in Eq. Aur. Anglo. Wir|temb. pag. 153.
NOs Fredericus Dei grati Dux Wrtem|bergicus, Teccius, Comes Montispele|gardi, Dn. in Heidenheim, c. Sacri Romani Imperii Princeps, pollicemur sub fide nostr principali, Statuta  Ordinationes Nobi|lissimi Ordinis Garterii, nos sedul observatu|ros, quatenus illa sacri Romani Imperii con|stitutionibus,  fidei nostrae, quam Imperatori Romano, eidem Imperio debemus: nec non promissionibus, aliis Ordinibus  amicis nostris antehac factis, non adversantur  repugnant: Et tali quidem modo, ut Supremus, si necesse fuerit, fidelitatem, socii ver candidum amicum ex nostr affectione  opera experiri queant. In cujus rei testimonium hasce literas propri manu subscripsimus,  Sigilli nostri majoris appensione munire curavimus. Datum in sede nostr Du|cali Studtgardiae 8. Iduum Novembris, Anno  partu Virgineo 1603.


NUM. CLVI. An Attestation granted by the Sove|raign, of the Installation of the French King Henry the Fourth. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
ELizabeth par la grace de Dieu, Roine d'Angleterre, France, Irelande, Defen|seur de la foy, c. Soveraine du tresnoble Or|dre de la Jarretiere, A tous presents  a venir salut. Scavoir faisons que ayant est le Roy tres|chrestien Henry quatriesme Roy de France  de Navarre, nostre trescher  tresame bon Frere  Cousin esleu  associ en nostre dit Ordre des l'an mil cinq cens nonante six,  en consequence de la dite Election prins  receu la Jarretiere, Collier,  autres Habits d'iceluy,  fait le Serment accoustum de faire par les Chevaliers  Com|paignons du dit Ordre pour observation des Sta|tuts  Ordonnances d'iceluy par les quelles sont tenus entre autres choses les Chevaliers Estran|gers associs au dit Ordre d'envoyer apres la reception de la dite Jarretiere, Collier, Habit un suffisant Deput ou Procureur selon leur Estat ou Chasteau de Windesor pour y estre is  receu en leur place en la Chapell Collegial de Saint George avec les Ceremonies  Solemni|tes y appertenants: Iceluy Roy treschrestien vou|lant satisfaire aux Statuts du dit Ordre,  nom|mement au sus mencionn,  monstrer par le re|spect qu'il nous porte,  l'estime que du dit Ordre il fait, averoit envoy devers nous le Seigneur de Chastes, Chevalier de l'Ordre de Saint Jean,

Commandeur de l'Ormetau, Conseilleur en son Conseil d'Estate, Capitaine de Cinquante hom|mes d'Armes de ses Ordonances, Governeur de sa Ville de Dieppe,  l'un de ses Lieutenants generalls en Jon Gouvernement de Normandie, avec pouvoir  Lettres Procuratoires signes de sa main  l'effect que desss en vertu duquel pou|voir  luy commis, le dit Seigneur de Chastes fust par nostre Commandement conduit au dit Chasteau de Windsore, le 26. jour du mois d'Avril der|nier pass par nos treschers  feaulx Cousins Charles Conte de Nottingham; Baron de Effin|ham Conseilleur en nostre Conseil Privy,  Ad|miral d'Angleterre, Gilbert Conte de Shrews|bury, Baron Talbot, c. Henry Conte de Nor|thumberland, Baron Percy, c. Thomas Ho|ward Baron de Walden, Chevaliers  Com|pagnons du dit Ordre,  ce par nous commis, par pouvoir sous le Seel de nostre dit Ordre,  le jour ensuivant, ascavoir le 27. du dit mois, fust menn par les dits Chevaliers  Compagnons en la dite Chapel de Saint George au dit lieu de Windsore,  alloqu en siege competent, au reg  honneur de nostre dit Frere le Roy tres Chre|stien mis en possession de place, vestu de Manteau de l'Ordre,  assies au nom du dit Roy au reng  luy appertenant. Toutes lesquelles Ceremonies  aultres Solemnites requises le dit Seigneur de Chastes executa selon les Statuts de nostre dit Ordre,  mesmes fist au nom du Roy le Ser|ment accoustum de faire,  en bailla Attesta|tion sign de sa main, le tout en de forme con|venable,  en presence de Chevaliers  Compag|nons d'iceluy Ordre dessus nommez, qui nous en ont faict report, dont  la Requisition du dit Sei|gneur de Chastes, Nous avons, voulons bailler la present Attestation signe de nostre main,  seel|le du Seel de nostre dit Ordre. Donn  Green|wich le 3. jour de May, 1600. de nostre Reign l'an 42.


NUM. CLVII. A Report concerning Installation-Fees. Lib. Carol. pag. 84. Albae-Basilicae 5. die Martii, 1669.
QVoniam Supremae vestrae Majestati Illu|strissimi Ordinis Periscelidis Supremo Capitulo 4. Febr. proxim elapsi Albaulae cele|brato, statum at perpetuum trium aut plurium Nobilissimorum Commilitonum conventum con|stituere visum fuerit; qui omnia Illustrissimi Ordinis negotia cognoscerent,  ad Supremam vestram Majestatem renuntiarent: Cum Deca|nus Windesoriensis Feodorum Schedulam  Su|prem vestr Majestate pro externis Principibus, nec non omnibus subditis Commilitonibus qum primum naugurati fuerint, solvendorum tunc tem|poris exhibuerit, cujus quidem schedulae aequitatem licet Capitulum approbasset, cm tamen contro|versia aliqua orta fuisset de Installationis Feodis quae Canonicis, Pauperibus Militibus, Eccle|siae Windesoriensi solvi debent, totius hujus causae cognitio praedicto Deputato Commilitonum conventui demandata erat. Ideo Henrico de Vic Equite Cancellario: Doctore Ryves Deca|no Windesoriensi Scrib;  Edvardo Walker Equite, Gartero, Conventui assistentibus, Scriba Ordinis, hujus totius causae narrationem datam 16. die Maii, 1663. tunc temporis exhibuit, cui quatuor Commilitones Deputati nomina sua sub|scripserant,  quorum numero fuerunt duo nostrm qui nomina nostra infr apposuimus. Qu nar|ratione plenissimis Decani Garteri rationibus at testimoniis privato Sigillo munitis compro|batum reperimus, Feoda illae pro Installatione Principum externorum quae narratione ist ex|primuntur. Illorum decessoribus ab omni memo|ri soluta fuisse; ne feoda illa superare quae subditi Duces aut Prioribus temporibus, aut nuperrimis solverunt. Quoniam ver Schedula superiori Capitulo exhibita  Feodis per Supre|mum solvendis initium sumat, nullo tamen modo probari possit ullum unquam Supremum Feoda pro Installatione su solvisse  apert constet paucissimos admodum fuisse Illustrissimi Ordinis Supremos, qui inaugurati Installationis Feoda antea non solverant, nos narratione no|str Feodorum istorum nullam mentionem feci|mus. Quod ad Feoda illa attinet, quae ab ex|tero Rege solvenda sunt, illa Feodis istis quae  Suprem vestr Majestate, Anno 1638. tunc temporis Walliae Principe soluta fuerunt, om|nino respondere pro comperto habemus; Installa|tionis quo Feoda Canonicis,  Ecclesiae Win|desoriensi solvenda, pro multis externis Regibus  Supremo soluta fuisse, Garterus pro certo affirmavit. Canonicorum etiam  Ecclesiae Windesoriensis Feoda ab omnibus Illustrissimi Ordinis Commilitonibus cujuscun fuerint gra|ds, seu Duces, Marchiones, Comites, Vice-comites, Barones, seu Milites, solvi debere, Scriba Ordinis plenissimis testimoniis confirma|vit. Garterus insuper affirmavit Feoda pro om|nibus gradibus jam memoratis Ecclesiae Win|desoriensi folvenda illis etiam per omnia re|spondere, quae Elizabethae Reginae, Jacobi Regis,  Caroli Primi Beatissimae memoriae temporibus, nec non jam  foelicissimo Regiae vestrae Majesta|tis reditu,  quam plurimis Honoratissimis Or|dinis Commilitonibus soluta fuere. Haec omnia un cum Schedulis annexis ad Supremae vestrae Majestatis arbitrium humillim referimus, ita  omnia haec vestrae Majestatis authoritate ap|probata Illustrissimi Ordinis Registro inseri pos|sint. Quoniam ver Garterus eodem Capitulo Schedulam Feodorum, tam Decano  Ecclesiae Windesoriensi quam sii, Nigrivirgifero, Offi|ciariis Armorum,  quam plurimis aliis Regiae vestrae Majestratis Administris solvendorum exhi|buerat. Quibus Feodorum nomine gratificari soleat, quae habit ratione graduum at digni|tatum quibus Commilitones insigniti sunt, ad normam illorum Feodorum exiguntur quae Su|prema vestra Majestas tunc Walliae Princeps sol|vebat, nobis omnin consentaneum videtur, ut sola Feoda Gartero, Nigrivirgifero, Officia|riis Armorum solvenda approbentur, at Illu|strissimi Ordinis Registro inserantur: Vt reli|qua

qua ver Regiae vestrae Majestatis Administrorum Feoda Garteri billi inserta ipsu Sigillo muni|antur,   quolibet Commilitone quam primm inauguratus fuerit, exigantur, ut  Gartero cilibet Officiario secundum gradum suum, prout antiquitus obtiuit solvantur. Humi|lim insuper petimus ut (si supremae vestrae Ma|jestati ita videbitur) Cancellarius in mandatis habeat, ut Literae Ordinis mandatoriae scriban|tur, quibus Installationis Feoda  quam plurimis Commilitonibus debita exigantur,  defuncto|rum Commilitonum Haeredes at Executores Mantella at Illustrissimi Ordinis Statuta Ec|clesiae Windesoriensi reddere moneantur, quo|niam autem quamplurimi Pauperes Milites Ab|sentiae veniam per annos integros  Suprem vestr Majestate impetraverunt, humilim ptimus ut Regia vestra Majestas nulli imposterum absen|tiam indulgere, ut omnes Pauperes Milites sub Statutorum Regimine hc in re arct tenean|tur.
Ormondiensis. Sandovicensis. Mancestrensis.


NUM. CLVIII. A Commission for Prorogation of the Grand Feast of St. George. Sir Tho. Rowes Iournal, pag. 4.
Charles R.
CHarles by the grace of God, King of great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and Soveraign of the most Noble Or|der of the Garter, To all the Knights and Com|panions of Our said Order Greeting. Whereas upon some special reasons we were moved to Pro|rogue the Celebration of the Feast of St. George, from the 22.23.  24. days of April last (be|ing the usual days of that Solemnity) to the 8.9.  10. days of July following. And again from thence to the 26.27.  28. of Se|ptember, and from that time unto the 13.14.  15. of December. Now forasmuch as by reason of our other great and important Affairs, we cannot conveniently attend the Celebration of the said Feast at the said last appointed days. And considering also the Contagion and Sick|ness, dispersed into several places of this Our Kingdom, which by assembling of People, may be most dangerous, both to Our self, and Our lo|ving Subjects. We do therefore by these pre|sents prorogue the Progation, and keeping of the said Feast, from the said 13.14.  15. days of this present December aforesaid, until and unto the 17.18.  19. of April next: willing, and by the tenor hereof commanding all, and every the Knights and Companions of Our said Order, and Officers of the same, to attend Our Person upon the said days, to perform what to them, and every of them shall belong and appertain for the accustomed Celebration of the Feast of Our most Noble Order. Given under the Seal of the said Order at Our Honour of Hampton-Court, the 11. day of December, in the 12. year of Our Reign, An. Salutis, 1636.


NUM. CLIX. A Letter of Notice to the Soveraign's Lieutenant to prepare to be at the Grand Feast held by Prorogation. Ex veteri Codice MS. penes W. le N. Cl. fol. 52.
Henry R.
Right trusty and right welbeloved Cousin We grete you wele. And for asmche as the Fest of the glorious Martyr Saint George falleth this yere within xv. days after Ester, by reason whereof We have according to the Statutes of the noble Order of the Garter dif|ferred the solennenifacion of the same unto the xxiiii. day of May next coming, on wyche day we have appointed the said Fest to be kept, and also deputed you to be our Lieute|nant at the same. We therefore woll and desire you to prepare and dispose your self soo to be accordingly. Yeven under our Signet at our Vniversitie of Cambridge the xxv. day of April.


NUM. CLX. A Letter of Notice to a Knight-Com|panion to be present at the Grand Feast held by Prorogation. Ex Collect. praef. W. le N. Cl.
Mary R.
RIght trusty, c. And having deferred the keeping of the Feast of the Glorious Mar|tyr St. George, Patron of our most Noble Order of the Garter, until the coming of our most dear Cousin the Prince of Spain, To the intent the said Feast might be also honoured with the In|stallation of our said dearest Cousin; We let you wit, that we have now resolved to hold and celebrate the same Feast within our Casle of Windsor upon Sunday, the 5. of August next en|suing Requiring you therefore to put your self in order to make your repair thither for that purpose before the same day, so as you may be present at the Celebration of that Feast, and all the accustomed Ceremonies thereof. Wherefore we pray you not to fail. Yeven under the Seal of our Order, c.



NUM. CLXI. A Letter from the Chancellor giving a Knight-Companion notice of the Pro|rogation of the Grand Feast. Ex Lib. Collect. W. le N. Cl. fol. 46.
Right Honorable,
WHereas his Majesty, Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, for sundry causes, but especially for the late Death of the high and mighty King, his most dear and most entirely beloved Father, which bringeth unto him cause of grief infinitely more then of triumph, hath not thought meet to keep the Feast of St. George for this year on the days accustomed for the same, that is to say, on the 22.23.  24. days of this month of April. His Majesty there|fore, under the Seal of the said Order, remaining in my Custody, hath prorogued the keeping of the said Feast for this year, unto the 16.17.  18. days of August next: Commanding all the Knights and Companions of the said Noble Order and Officers of the same, then to attend his person, wherein, his Majesties Pleasure, it is my due to make known to your Lordship, which being by these performed, I most humbly rest
Your Lordships most ready to do you service, George More.
7. April 1625.

To the right Honorable the Earl of Arundel and Surry, Earl Marshal of England, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and of his Majesties most Honora|ble Privy Council.



NUM. CLXII. Another. Rowes Iournal, pag. 5.
May it please your Lordship,
THe King's Majesty, Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, having former|ly prorogued the Celebration of the Feast of Saint George for this year, from the usual days, upon which it should have been solemnized, unto the 8.9.  10. of July following; and by reason of the Contagion spread in many parts of his Kingdom, from those days, to the 26.27.  28. of September, and then also, upon special conside|ration unto the 13.14.  15. of December, by Several Commissions under the Seal of his Order, now remaining in my Custody. His Majesty for divers and important Causes, and to avoid the danger of the concourse of much people, during the Infection, finding it not convenient, to celebrate the Feast at that designed time, hath adjourned the Prorogation thereof, by a new Commission, to me delivered, unto the 17.18.  19. days of April next. And thereby given Commandment, to all the Knights and Companions, and Offi|cers of his Order, that they should attend his Royal person upon these last appointed days. Wherefore in discharge of my duty, I do signifie unto your Lordship his Majesties pleasure; praying your Lordship, that you will be pleased, to take know|ledge herein of the Soveraign's Order, humbly resting,
Your Lordships In all due Observance and Obedience, Tho. Rowe.
Cranford 12. Dec. 1636.

To the Right Honorable Iames Marquess Hamil|ton, Knight and Compani|on of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and my most Honored Lord.



NUM. CLXIII. Another to the Register of the Order. Ibidem, pag. 3.
Reverend Sir,
THE King's Majesty, Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, having formerly prorogued the Celebration of the Feast of St. George, for this presents Year, from the usual days upon which, it should have been solemnized, by several Commissions under the Seal of his Order, now remaining in my Custody: and finding it inconvenient for divers important causes, specially by reason of the Contagion, spread in divers pla|ces of his Kingdom, to hold the Feast, at any of those designed times. His Majesty hath pleased by a new Commission, to me delivered, to pro|rogue the last Prorogation, unto the 17.18.  19. of April next: And thereby given Command|ment to all the Knights and Companions, and to the Officers of his Order, that they should at|tend his Royal person, upon those last appointed days. Wherefore in discharge of the duty of my place, I do signifie unto you his Majesties pleasure, desiring that you will take knowledge herein of his Royal Order.
Your affectionate Friend to do you service, Tho. Rowe.
Cranford 12. Dec. 1636.

To the Reverend and my Worthy Friend, Doctor Wrenn, Dean of Windsor, and Re|gister of the most Ho|norable Order of the Garter
One Duplicate of this was sent to Sir Iohn Boroughs Knight Garter, another to Iames Maxwell Esq Black-Rod.




NUM. CLXIV. Letters of Dispensation for attending at the Grand Feast. Ex Collect. A. V. W.
By the Queen
RIght trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Counsellor, We greet you well: and forasmuch as you are as well Governor of our Town of Barwick, as also Warden of our East Marshes, for and anyenst Scotland, and may not conveniently be spared from thence, for cer|tain Affairs there by you to be done, whereby you cannot make your repair hither, to cele|brate with us the Feast of St. George, and have thought good upon that respect, to excuse your absence from the said Feast, and do by these presents dispence with you for the same. And therefore these our Letters shall be your sufficient discharge in that behalf. Yeven under the Sig|net of our said Order at our Palace of Westmin|ster the  day of April, in the seventh year of our Reign, 1565.


NUM. CLXV. Another. Ex eod. Collect.
By the Queen.
RIght trusty and right well-beloved Cousin, We greet you well, and forasmuch as you are President of our Council established in the City of York, and by reason of your charge and attendance there for our service, you cannot con|veniently be present with us to solemnize the Feast of our most Noble Order of the Garter the Even of Vigil of St. George next ensuing. We let you understand, that we are pleased and con|tent to accept your reasonable excuse in this be|half: And by these presents do pardon you for your absence from the said Feast at this pre|sent, any Statute of our said Order to the con|trary notwithstanding.
 Yeoven under our Sig|net of our Order, at our Palace of Westminsterthe  day of April 1575. in the 17. year of our Reign.

To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin Henry Earl of Huntington, President of our Council in the City of York, Knight and Companion of our most Noble Order of the Garter.



NUM. CLXVI. Another. Ex Lib. Collect. W. le N. Cl. f. 54.
Charles R.
RIght trusty and right well-beloved Cousin We greet you well: Forasmuch as you by reason of your indisposition of health, cannot be present to attend our person on the days by proro|gation for this year appointed for celebrating the Feast of our most Noble Order of the Garter (that is to say the 26.27. and 28. days of this moneth of April) We let you understand that We are pleased to excuse your absence, and by these presents do pardon, remit and dispence with any fault you may incur thereby. And do give you license to be absent at those days from the said Feast for this year, any Article or Statute of our said Order to the contrary notwithstand|ing.
Given under the Seal of our said Order, at our Palace of Westminster, the 23. day of April, in the second year of the Reign of Great Britain, c.

To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey, Earl Marshal of England, and Knight and Companion of our most Noble Order of the Garter.



NUM. CLXVII. Another. Inter Praesident. Tho. Rowe Eq. Aur. nuper hujus Ordinis Cancellar.
Charles R.
RIght trusty and right well-beloved Cousin, We greet you well: Whereas we have for divers causes, prorogued the celebration of the Feast of St. George for this present year, to the 17.18. and 19. days of April next following, whereof according to the Customs and Rules of our most Noble Order of the Garter, you have had notice and summons, for your attendance upon those days from our Chancellor; notwith|standing we are pleased to excuse your absence, and by these presents do dispence therewith, and pardon and remit any default you may thereby in|incur, and do give you license to be absent at those days, from the said Feast for this prsent year (observing in your own House the Solemni|ties appointed by the Canons of the Order) any Statute or Article thereof to the contrary not|withstanding: Given under the Signet of our Order at our Palace of Westminster, the 24. day of February in the 12. year of our Reign.



NUM. CLXVIII. A Warrant for a Privy Seal to pay Gar|ter for Scutcheons used on Saint George's day. Ex Autogr. pen. Iohan. Vincent gen.
TRusty and well-beloved, We greet you well, and will and command you, that under our Privy Seal being in your Custody, ye cause our Letters to be made forth unto the Treasurer and Chamberlains of our Exchequer in form follow|ing, We will and command you, that unto our trusty and well-beloved Servant Garter Principal King of Arms, ye pay or cause to be paid in ready money upon the sight hereof without delay, the sum of 6 l. 1 s. 8 d. for 23 Scutcheons by him provided for the Knights of our Order, on Saint George's day last, in the first and second years of our Reign, whereof 4. for Princes at 6 s. 8 d. the piece, and the rest at 5 s. the piece, and also that ye content and pay more unto the said Gar|ter the sum of 6 l. 11 s. 8 d. for 25. Scutcheons by him provided, and set up at our Mannor of St. James in the second and third years of our Reign for the furniture of the Stalls in our said Chap|pel, at the rate aforesaid: and these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge.


NUM. CLXIX. A Privy Seal to pay Garter 7 l. per an|num for Scutcheons of Arms set up on St. George's Eve. Collect. W. le N. Cl.
ELizabeth by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, c. To the Treasurer and Cham|berlains of our Exchequer greeting. We will and command you forthwith upon the sight hereof, of such our Treasure as remaineth in your Custo|dy, you content and pay, or cause to be contented, and paid to our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir Gilbert Dethick Knight, alias Garter, prin|cipal King of Arms, the sum of 21 l. for Scut|cheons of Arms of the Knights of our Order set up in our Chappel within our Palace of West|minster, as wel on St. George's Even, in the year of our Lord God 1579. as on St. George's Even in the year of our Lord God 1580. and also on St. George's Even last past; and also henceforth during his life to allow him yearly 7 l. to be paid on St. George's day accordingly. And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and dis|charge in that behalf. Given under our Privy Seal at our Mannor of Greenwich, the 7. day of July, in the 23. year of our Reign.


NUM. CLXX. Another. Ex Autogr. penes Wil. Knight.
CHARLES by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, c. To the Treasurer and Under-Treasurer of our Exchequer for the time being, and that hereafter shall be, Greet|ing. Whereas our late dear Father King James of happy memory deceased, by Warrant under his Privy Seal, bearing date the second day of July, in the sixth year of his Reign of En|gland, c. did give order for the payment unto William Seagar, alias Garter, Knight, now principal King of Arms, and to any other prin|cipal King of Arms, for the time being, upon every Saint George Even, of the sum of seven pounds, for Escotcheons of Arms of the Knights of the Order of the Garter, to be set up in the Chappel at Whitehall, or any other place where the said Feast should happen to be solemnized on every St. George's Even and Day, as by the said Warrant more at large appeareth: We minding the continuance of the said yearly al|lowance, do hereby will and command you to cause payment to be made out of such our Trea|sure as now is, or hereafter shall be in the receipt of our said Exchequer of the said yearly allow|ance of seven pounds unto the said Sir William Seager alias Garter, Knight, now our principal King of Arms, and to any other our principal King of Arms for the time being upon every St. George's Even for the Scutchions of Arms of the Knights of our Order of the Garter, to be by him or them set up in our Chappel at White|hall, or any other place where the said Feast shall happen to be solemnized every St. George's Even and day; And to continue the payment thereof yearly until you shall receive other dire|ctions from us to the contrary. The first payment thereof to begin and commence from the time of the last payment thereof unto the said Sir Wil|liam Seager alias Garter, our principal King of Arms; And these our Letters shall be your suf|ficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf. Given under our Privy Seal at our Palace of Westminster, the seventh day of February, in the second year of our Reign.


NUM. CLXXI. Commissional Letters for collecting the Contributions towards furnishing the Altar in the Chappel at Windesor. Ex lib. vocat. Frith's Regist. p. 139.
CHARLES by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ire|land, Defender of the Faith, and Soveraign of the most Noble Order of the Garter; To all and singular, whom these may concern, greeting. Whereas, We with the Knights and Compa|nions

of our said Order, in contemplation of the great want of such sacred Furniture, for our Royal Chappel of St. George within our Castle of Windesor, as may be suitable to the honour and devotion of the said Order, have at sundry Chapters there holden, advised and decreed, that a joynt contribution should be made, for provi|sion of the same; And particularly, at a Cha|pter (together with the Solemnity of the Feast of St. George) holden upon the 6. of this present October, We did again declare and constitute, that We our selves would begin, and that every Lord, which is now of our Realm, a Companion of the said Order, or was at the making of our first Decree, viz. Nov. 24. 1625. should give and confer towards the same, as to him should be thought meet; Provided that it be not under xxl. Now know ye, that We have, and do by these presents, give Authority and Command, to our Dean and Canons of our said free Chap|pel, that they forthwith by any one of themselves, or by their lawful Deputy, under their Common Seal, do ask and receive, as well of our own Offi|cers for our Self, as of every Lord and Compa|nions of the Order, that now is, of our Realm, and of the Heirs, Executors, and Administra|tor, of any that are deceased, since the time last above mentioned, the said gift and contribution. And that thereof they be accountable unto Vs, at our next Chapter, to be holden for the said Order, or at the next Session of the Lords Com|missioners for the said Order, which of the two shall first happen. Given under the Seal of our said Order, the seventh day of October, in the sixth Year of our Reign of England, Scot|land, France, and Ireland, c. 1630.


NUM. CLXXII. The Soveraign's Letter to the Dean and Canons of Windesor, for making use of their Lodgings at Saint George's Feast, an. 7. H. 5. Ex Lib. vocat. Denton. fol. 69.
TReschers  bien ayms, Nous vous solvons souuent, Et pour ce que grant multitude de gens tant estrongers, que aultres qui seront  nostre Chasteau de Windesore,  ceste prochaine solempnit, la feste de Sainct George;   cause de la Venue de l'Empereur,  du Due de Ho|land. Nous desirons,  voulons que leurs gens,  aultres estans de nostre Compengnie ayent la plus grand favour,  aise que faire se pourra en au|cune maniere touchant leur Logemens dedens mesme nostre dit Chasteau; Pour laquelle cause vous envoyons presentement nostre bien aym Escu|ier  Huisser de Chambre le porteur de cestes vers nostre dit Chasteau, pour yenor donner contre nostre venue. Si vous prions, que vous veillis bonnement souffrir nostre dit Huissier survoyer lez Logemens de vous maisons dedens nostre Col|lege,  de y logier autant de personnes come faire se pourra bonestement  ceste foys: tout seulle|ment pour la cause dessus dit. Et ce faisons vous nous faites ng singulier plesir. Et n'est pas nostre intention ne vouloir que par coulour de ce. Vous en soys ainsi chargis plus avant. Et no|stre Signeur soit garde de vous. Donn soubz nostre Signet  Lambeth, le 18. jour de May, l'an de nostre Reigne septieme.


NUM. CLXXIII. A Letter from the Soveraign, to excuse the absence of some of the Knights-Companions from the Grand Feast. Lib. Nag. 174.
SVpremus honorando ac pervenerando Patri suo Thomae Comiti Derb. salvere, ac ben valere. Quoniam ob multa varia negotia quae nostri oneris sunt perdelectus Cognatus noster Comes Salopiae,  fideles ac ben meriti nobis  Consiliis Dominus Reginaldus Bray, Dom. Tho. Lovell, Dom. Carolus Somerset, Dom. Richardus Goulford,  Dominus Gilbertus Talbot Socii clarissimi nostri Ordinis non possunt ipsi in Festo Divi Georgii septimo Maii celebrando interesse, sed venia nostra donandi sit arduis illisce rebus impediti; Nos igitur biis nostris scriptis certio|rem tuam nobilitatem facimus; Vt has excusa|tiones rationi consona acceptes, de nulla Statu|torum vi dubitaturus,  si contra denotare vi|deatur, cum penes nos sit, ut ipsaemet leges jure regantur Richmondiae 29. Aprilis.


NUM. CLXXIV. Another. Ex Collect. A. V. W.
Elizabeth.
RIght trusty and right entirely beloved Cousin and Counsellor, We greet you well. Foras|much as our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousins and Counsellors the Earls of Arundel and Derby, c. Companions of the most Noble Order of the Garter, cannot for certain employments, by our Commandment attend at the Feast of the glo|rious Martyr St. George, to be holden and kept within our Castle of Windsor, the 22. day of May next coming, and they being by Vs dispen|sed with, and pardoned for their absence at that time, like as we have thought good to advertize you thereof; so We will you to accept their rea|sonable excuses in this behalf accordingly: any Statute of the said Order made to the contrary notwithstanding. Given under the Signet of our said Order, at our Palace at Westminster the 20. of May, in the fifth year of our Reign.



NUM. CLXXV. Another. Ms. penes Arthur. Com. Anglesey, fol. 122. b.
Elizabeth.
RIght trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Counsellor, We greet you well. And forasmuch as our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and counsellor the Marquess of Winchester, and the Earl of Derby, and our right trusty and right entirely beloved Cousin and Counsellor the Duke of Norfolk, our right trusty and well-beloved Counsellor the Lord Clyn|ton our high Admiral of England, our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Coun|sellor the Marquess of Northampton, our right trusty and well-beloved Counsellor the Lord Ho|ward of Effingham, Lord Chamberlain of our Houshold, our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin the Earl of Shrewsbury, our right trusty and well-beloved the Lord Hastinges of Lough|borough; our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Counsellor the Earl of Leicester, our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin the Earl of Warwick, our trusty and well-beloved the Lord Hunsdone, our trusty and well-beloved Sir Henry Sidney, Companions of our Noble Order of the Garter, cannot for certain causes to be executed and done by our Commandment, be at the Feast of the Glorious Martyr St. George, to be holden and kept within our Castle of Wind|sore, the xvii. day of June next coming, but be by Vs pardoned of their absence from the said Feast, like as we have thought good to advertize you thereof; so We will you to accept their rea|sonable excuse in this behalf accordingly, any Statutes of the said Order made to the contrary notwithstanding. Given under our Seal of our said Order at our Honor at Hampton-Court the   day of June, in the xii. Year of our Reign.


NUM. CLXXVI. A Commission for holding the Grand Feast. Regist. Chartac. fol. 13. b.
HEnry par la grace de Dieu, Roy d'Angle|terre,  de France, Souvrain de la Com|pagnie de l'Ordre du Gartier, A tous nos Com|pagnons du dit Ordre, Salut. Comme pour certeines causes que nous movent, ne pourrons estre personnelement  la Feste de Saint George, prou|chein venant,  nostre Chastell de Wyndesore,  par les Estatutz du dit Ordre, nous est loisible pour commetter,  deputer autre personne pour nous, pour tenir lez Chapitres, corriger,  re|dresser faire les Eleccions,  de lez approuver,  de faire toutes autres choses, comme il apper|tendra, solone la forme  teneure dez ditz Esta|tutz. Pour ce est il, que nous avons commis,  deput, commettons,  deputons par cez presen|tes, nostre trescher,  tresame Oncle, Jean Re|gent nostre Royaume de France, Duc de Bedford, pour faire les ditz choses avec leures circumstan|ces,  dependences quelconques. Mandons  commandons  nous dis Compaignons, que en ce faisant lui obeissent,  entendent diligentment comme  l'ordre appartent pour cest fois. Donn  Leycestre la premier jour d'Avril, l'an de nostre Regne quart.


NUM. CLXXVII. Another. Ibid. fol. 62. b.
Henry R.
HEnry the viii. by the grace of God, King of England, and of France, Defensour of the Faith, and Lord of Irland. To our right trusty and right entirely beloved Cousin, the Marquess Dorcet, Greeting. Forasmuch as we for divers gret and vrgent causes, may not be pre|sent at the Fest of the glorious Martyr St. George, Patrone of our noble Ordre of the Gartier, to be holdyn, solempnised and kept in our Castell of Windesore, the viii. day of May next commyng. We therefore by these presents name, constitute, appoint, and ordayne you to be our Lieutenant at the said Feast. Giving unto you full power and auctorite to do and accomplische every thing at the same, which to our Lieutenant there in such case belongith, and hath been accustumed; Willing and Commanding by the tenour hereof all and every the Companions and Officers of our said Ordre, to be to you in the executing of this our auctorite obeying and attending as schall apperteyne. Yeven under the Seal of our sayd Garter at our Manoir of Beaulieu, the xxv. day of Aprill, the xvi. yere of our Reigne.


NUM. CLXXVIII. Another. Lib. N. pag. 249.
Henry R.
HEnricus Dei grati, Rex Angliae Fran|ciae, Princeps Gualliae,  Dominus Hi|berniae, Fedei Defensor, at Illustrissimi bujus Ordinis ipse Supremus, unice nobis dilecto, fide probatissimo,  Officio erga nos suo jam undi notissimo Cognato nostro Duci Norf. salutem ac foelicitatem. Nunc quoniam per multa charissi|me, nos istinc negotia detinent (ut quod optamus) gloriossimi Martyris Patroni nostri festivitatem praesentia nostra non possumus honorare, tuam pro|pterea nobilitatem ad illud ipsum nomine nostro praestandum nominamus at instituimus eam tibi dantes authoritatem quae supplenti vices nostras unquam alias assuevit, jubentes  itidem ut So|ciorum quisquis at Officialium tibi, dum man|datum hoc nostrum facessis, obediant,  quantum res ipsa postulabit, ex nutu tuo jussu pendeat, Windesori sub Ordinis Sigillo, undecimo Junii,  nostri Regui decimo septimo.



NUM. CLXXIX. A Letter of Notice to the Assistants of the Soveraign's Lieutenant, to be at the Feast. Collect. A. V. W.
By the Queen.
RIght trusty and right well-beloved, We greet you well. Where we by our Com|mission under the Seal of our most Noble Order of the Garter, have assigned and appointed our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Coun|sellor the Earl of Arundel, Lord Steward of our Houshold, and one of the Companions of the said Noble Order, to be our Lieutenant at the Feast of the glorious Martyr St. George, to be kept within our Castle of Windesor the 18. day of May next coming, for the doing of all things there, as to Our Lieutenant appertaineth. And have appointed you, with our right trusty  right well-beloved the Lord Paget of Beaudesert, to be Assistants at the said Feast. We have thought good, not only to give you knowledge thereof by these Our Letters, but also require you to make your repair to Our said Castle of Windesor; so as you may be there at the said Feast accordingly. Given under the Signet of Our said Order at Our Mannor of Greenwich, the second day of May, in the third year of Our Reign.
To Our right trusty and right well-beloved, the Viscount Mountague, one of the Companions of Our Order.
The like Letter, and of the same Date was sent to the Lord Paget, the other Assistant.


NUM. CLXXX. An Order for the fashion and materials of the Soveraign and Knights-Com|panions Vnder Habit. Collect. E. W. G.
Charles R.
IT being most certain, that nothing can be more conducing to the keeping up of that Lustre and Dignity, of our most Noble Order of the Garter, wherein it is at this present, then those very means by which it hath attained unto it constancy and immtability. For these reasons, having at a Chapter held at our Castle of Windesor, the 16. of April last past, resolved upon a review and examination of its Statutes, to see if possibly length of time, and change of Customs, might have introduced any thing in them, which might make them swerve from the ancient Rules, so far as they were not unconsistent with the present Vsance. We have thought it not unworthy our care, to descend unto the particulars of its Cloth|ing: And thereupon having found, that in what concerns the Vnder-Habits, used by the Compa|nions at the solemnizing of Instalments, or the Celebration of St. George's Feast, they followed too much the modern fashion, never constant and less comporting with the decency, gravity, and stateliness of the upper Robes of the Order. It was resolved in that Chapter, and accordingly we ordain and enjoyn, That from this time forwards the Companions shall be obliged, to a certain and immutable form and fashion, as well for their Under-Habits as their Upper-Robes, to be used on thse solemn Days and Occasions, that is to say, to the old Trunk-hose or Round-Bree|ches, whereof the Stuff or Material shall be some such Cloth of Silver, as we shall chuse and ap|point, wherein as we shall be to them an example, so we do expect they will follow us in using the same, and no other. Given under the Signet of our said Order, this  day of May, 1661.


NUM. CLXXXI. A Dispensation for a Knights atten|dance at the Grand Feast, during life. Ex ipso Autogr. in Bibl. Hatton.
Henry R.
HEnry the Eighth by the grace of God, King of England and of France, Defender of the Faith, and Lord of Ireland, and Soveraign of the Noble Order of the Garter, To the Lieute|nant at the Feast of the glorious Martyr Saint George, Patron of the Noble Order of the Gar|ter, and other Knights and Companions of the same Order, for the time being, to be assembled at any time hereafter at our Castle at Windesor, and to other our Officers, Ministers, and Subjects these our Letters hearing or seeing, Greeting. We let you weet, that We of our special grace, and for certain urgent and great causes, and special con|siderations concerning the old service done unto us, by our right trusty and well-beloved Counsellor the Lord Darcy, one of the Knights and Com|panions of the said Noble Order of the Garter, and of his great age and debility, have pardoned and licensed him by these presents at all time from henceforth, during his life, to be absent from the said Feast of St. George, and not to give at|tendance in any place, Chapter, or other Feast to be holden of the said Noble Order, and that he to sustain no damage by any mean for his said absence any Act, Decree, Ordinance, Oath, or Statute of the said Noble Order of the Garter, now being made, or hereafter to be made to the contrary notwithstanding. Given under the Seal of the Gartier of the said Noble Order, the eight and twentieth day of October, the six and twen|tieth year of our Reign.



NUM. CLXXXII. Another. Inter Praecident. Tho. Rome Eq. Aur. nuper Cancell.
Charles R.
CHarles by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and Soveraign of the most Noble Or|der of the Garter. To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin Ferdinand, Earl of Derby, Knight and Companion of our said most Noble Order, Greeting. For asmuch as we are inform|ed by our Chancellor of our Order, upon signifi|cation to him made under your Seal of Arms, of your indisposition of health, and of your petition to have licence to forbear your attendance upon our person on the 22.23.  24. of May next, being the days appointed by Prorogation for the Celebration of the Feast, of our most Noble Order of the Garter. We give you to understand, that we are pleased to excuse your absence, and by these presents, do pardon, remit, and dispense with any default you may thereby incur. And we do fur|ther, in respect of your age, and weakness unable to travel, signified unto us in your said Petition, by these presents, dispense with your attendance on our person upon the said Feast days, during your natural life, observing in your own house the Rites and Solemnities appointed by the Canons of the Order upon the usual days of Celebration, being the 22.23.  24. of April, or at such times as shall be hereafter appointed by Proroga|tion, any Statute, or Article of our said Order to the contrary notwithstanding. Given under the Seal of our said Order, at our Court at Whitehall, the 9. day of April, in the 14. year of our Reign.


NUM. CLXXXIII. A Warrant to Garter to take down the Atchievements of Iohn Dudley, Duke of Northumberland. Collect. W. le N. Cl.
By the Queen.
Trusty and well-beloved, We greet you well, letting you witte, That where the Hatch|ments of the late Duke of Northumberland at|tinted of High Treason, and put to Execution for his offence, do remain yet within our Chappel of Windesor, untaken down. Our pleasure is, in respect of his said Offence, through the which his Hatchments deserve not to be in so honorable a place, among the rest of the Knights of our Order; you shall repair to Windesor immediately upon the Receipt of these Our Letters, and in your presence, cause the said Hatchments of the said late Duke to be taken down, in such sort as others in like cases have been, whereof fail you not. Gi|ven under our Signet of our Order, c.


NUM. CLXXXIV. A Publication of the Degrading of Ed|ward, Duke of Buckingham. Ex Collect. A. V. W.
BE it known unto all men, That whereas Edward, late Duke of Buckingham, Knight, and Companion of the Noble Order of Saint George, named the Garter, hath lately done and committed High Treason against the King, Sove|raign of the said Order of the Garter, in com|passing and imagining the destruction of the most Noble person of our said Soveraign Lord the King, contrary to his Oath, Duty, and Allegi|ance; for which High Treason, the said Edward hath been indicted, arraigned, convicted, and at|tainted, and for the which detestable Offence and High Treason, the said Edward hath deserved to be disgraded of the said Noble Order, and expelled out of the said Company, and not worthy that his Arms, Ensigns, and Atchievements should remain amongst other Noble Ensigns and Atchieve|ments, of other noble, vertuous, and approved Knights of the said Noble Order, nor to have the benefits of the said Noble Order. Where|fore our Soveraign Lord the King, Soveraign of the said Noble Order of St. George, named the Garter, by the advice of other Knights of the said Noble Order, for his said Offences, and com|mitting of the said High Treason, willeth and commandeth, that the said Edward, late Duke of Buckingham, be disgraded of the said No|ble Order, and his Arms, and Ensigns, and At|chievements clearly expelled, and put from amongst the Arms, Ensigns, and Atchieve|ments of the other Noble Knights of the said Order; to the intent that all other Noble men, thereby may take Example, hereafter not to com|mit any such hainous and detestable Treason and Offence as God forbid they should.
God save the King


NUM. CLXXXV. The Soveraign's Letters for celebrating Masses, upon the Death of the Lord Fitz-Hugh, an. 3. H. 6. Lib. N. pag. 81.  82.
Exteris  aliis hujus Clarissimi Ordinis Sodalibus, extra Regnum Commorantibus  eorum cuilibet, Supremus Salutem.
QUoniam, Charissime mi Cognate, N. Hen|ricus Dominus Fitzhugh, nuper unus  Commilitonibus nostris excessit ex hc vit, cujs anime propitius esto Deus: Nos id proprerea nunciams, ut vestram commiserationem minim lateat, Missas ex praecepto Statuti pro defuncto celebrandas, caeteraque complenda, que vestr in hc parte sole imeresse. Vestram ver nobilita|tem

beata Trinitas servet  angeat. Sub Si|gillo nostri Ordinis Windesori, c.

Manentibus, intra Regnum, sed absentibus ab hc Festivitate Georgian,  eorum cuilibet Rex S. P. D.
RICHARDO N. Cognato nostro perdi|lecto Saluiem. Quoniam Henricus Fitz|hugh, nuper unus  Sociis nostri Ordinis, sexto Januarii proximo defunctus est. (Cujus animae misereatur Omnipotens.) Nos vestrae Nobilitati significamus, ut juxta tenorem Statutorum Missas defuncto curetis celebrandas. Scitis autem binc Windesori vacare sedem, quam oporteat intra sex bebdomad ab altero possideri. Caeterum quia nos aliis jam negotiis impediti, non possumus huic infiftere, mandamus, ut proxim Divi Geor|gii Vigili, vos ipsi bor tertiarum nobiscum Windesori fitis, ad perimplendum quod ista res expostulat, nisi justa forsan causa faciat, qu mi|ns fri possit, que criptis ad nos, eisdem die  bor mitti debet, sub Sigillo vestro ab Armis.



NUM. CLXXXVI. Another Letter sent upon the Death of Sir Robert Vmfrevil, an. 4. H. 6. Registr. Chartac. fol. 12. b.

De par le Roy Souverain de l'Ordre du Iarretier.
TRescher  tresame Oncle, Pour ce, que apres le trespas d'ancun des Compaignons de l'Ordre du Jarretier, le Souverain par les Esta|tus du dit Ordre, le doit signifier  faire savoir  tous les Compaignons, on qu'ilz soyent, Nous come premier,  Souverain d'icelui, vous signifions, que feu nostre trescher,  bien ame Sir Robert Dumfreville, que Dieu absoille en son vivant un des Compaignons du dit Ordre, est all de vie  trespas, si faites vostre devoir,  di|ligence des Messes Prieres, que selone les diz Estatus estes tenu faire dire  celebrer pour le repos  salut de son ame,  ny faites aucun faulte, trescher  tresame Oncle, nostre Seigneur. Dieu vous ait en sa seinte Garde.


De par le Roy Souverain de l'Ordre du Iarretiere.
TRescher  bien ame; Pour ce, que Sir Ro|bert Dumfreville, que Dien absoille, en sou vivant, un de noz Compaignons de l'Ordre du Jarretier, est all de vie  trespas le darrain jour de Januer, darrain passe,  que selon lz Esta|tz du dit Ordre, sommes tenus en advertir ung chescun dez Compaignons, vous certifions son dit trespas, dsin que facies vostre devoir des Mes|ses Prieres, leselles estes tenuz faire dire  celebrer  le  de s , par le  du quel est  place vacant,  convient selou les ditz Estatuz  en son lie dens sys sep|maines apres la certification du dit trespas, si bonnement faire se puet, que bonnement au pre|sent faire ne pourrons: si voulons,  vous man|dons, sur lez peines contenues es ditz Estatutz que soies avec nous la vaigle Seint George,  l'bere de tierce procbein venant, pour faire  acomplir en ce que dit est, come per les ditz Esta|tutz appertiendra. Et se estre ny poves nous sig|nifis soubz vostre Seel la cause de vostre empe|chement, par quoy vostre Excusacion puissios cognoistre,  l'avoir agreables, si ainsi est quelle soit digne d'estre accepte,  ny faites feaulte, Trescher  bien ame, c.



NUM. CLXXXVII. Another sent upon the Death of King Henry the Seventh, and Philip King of Castile. MS. intituled Henry the Seventh's Pro|ceedings, penes W. le N. Cl. p. 49.
FOrasmuch as it hath pleased Almighty God, to call unto his infinite mercy the late King our Fader of most famous memory, whose soule God pardonn, late Soverain of the Noble Ordre of the Garter, and also the King of Castile, ech Companion of the same Noble Ordre. We therefore advise you thereof, to the intent, that you may cause such Drisos and Suffrages, to be said and doon for their souls health, as by the auncient Statutes and Or|dinances of the said Noble Order, you be bound to do in that behalf. Given under the Seal of the same Noble Order, c.


NUM. CLXXXVIII. A Certificate that the Masses were ac|cordingly Celebrated. Lib. N. pag. 318.
NOverint universiper praesentes Literas, Nos Priorem  Conventum Ordinis Fratrum N. Mandato, ac munere praeclaro Illustrissimi Domini nostri Regis HENRICI OCTAVI, nostri, omniumque Christi Pauperum benefactoris precipui, quadringentas Missas, quinque Ceriis in Exequiis,  Missa aliis solemniore honorific ac|censis pro anima piae Memoriae Magnifici Domini N. nuper defuncti celebrasse.


NUM. CLXXXIX. An Order for reviving the Decree for payment of Obit Monies. Lib. R. pag. 86.

Carolus R.
In hc Capitulo, Supremus per D. Comitem Portlandiae monetur cujusdam Sanctionis, sub Rege Henrico Octavo, latae  in Statuta, (sin|gulorum

jre jurando firmata) relate, qu de|cretum fuit, ut defuncto ex Commilitonibus ordi|nis aliquo, certam quandam pecuniarum sum|mam tam Supremus ipse, quam superstites Com|militnes singuli solverent, per Decanum Win|desoriensem colligendam, at in pios usus erogan|dam, prout visum erit Supremo, Commili|tonibus in Capitulo. Hanc ver sanctionem, quantumvis in se honorificam, usu confirma|tam sub Edvardo Rege sexto, sub Mari, Elizabeth Reginis nuper, tamen per aliquot retr annos mins observatam, Supremus jussit public recitari. Pellegente igitur Scrib appa|ret, post obitum cujusque Commilitonis ipsi Su|premo incumbere summam 8 l. 6 s. 8 d. Regi extero, 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. Principi, 5 l. 16. s. 8 d. Duci, 5 l. Marchioni, 3 l. 15 s. Comiti, 2 l. 10 s. Vice-Comiti, 2 l. 1 s. 8 d. Baroni, 1 l. 13 s. 4 d. Equiti, 16 s. 8 d. addita insuper poena tertiae quoque partis in annos singulos cu|mulande, quantisper sortem principalem non solverint. Suprema ita Majestas, cum assensu Commilitonum omnium praesentium, ordinavit atque decrevit sanctionem hanc honorificentiae, pietatis refertissimam,  singulorum juramentis in introitu Ordinis firmatam, restitui oportere,  in perpetuum dehinc usum, at observationem re|vocari, id sub poen statut, non solm Com|militonibus ni solvant, sed  Decano quoque Windesoriensi nisi Officium suum praestet. Or|diri autem jussit  5. Commilitonibus defunctis, quorum Insignia beri obtulerant, caeterm quod ad exteros Principes attinet, Supremus significa|vit, quod si summas istas ipsi (pro se quisque) non exolvant, eedem,  nunc,  in posterum, semper ab ipso Supremo solventur. Subscribitur porr huic decreto in haec verba.

Ad Mandatum D. Supremi.
Decano Windesoriensi incumbit pecunias vi hujus Sanctionis solvendas postulare,  recep|tarum rationem reddere in proximo Capi|tulo.

F. Crane Cancell.

Deus nobis haec Otia fecit.
FINIS.




ERRATA.
PAge 8. margent, read G. Pancirol. Lib. 1. p. 270. p. 36. line 18. r. Burgos. p. 44. marg. (a) r. Hen. 2. p. 53. l. 31. r. Regular. p 54. l. 29. r. foial  loial. marg. (n) r. Pantal. l. 4. p. 97. p. 61. l. 13. r. Lusignan. p. 67. l. 18. r. Re|gular. p. 71. l. 21. r. Scapular. so p 72. l. 32. p. 73. l. 40. r. for such. p. 84. l 47. dele [the] p. 96. l. 31. r. Iusts. p. 103. l. 20. r. Beloy. p. 106. l. 43. dele [the] p. 110. l. 43. r. Trunks. p. 136. l. 56. r. second Arch. p. 149. l. 37. r. H. 4. p. 160. l. 20. r King in. p. 170. l. 29. r. Goldclif. p. 175. l. 57. r. and Cnons. p. 176. l. 5. r. appear. p. 188. l. 48. dele [Sancti] p. 189. l. 48. r. nine. p. 191. l. 28. r. H. 6. p. 206. l. 29. r. Robessart. p. 212. marg. l 6. r. honoris. p. 218. l. 9. r. further mention is made of these Liveries an. 16. E. 4. p. 224. l. 15. r. d'Espernon. p. 238. l. 58. r. enjoyed. p. 241. l. 33. r ye. p. 253. l. 45. r. purple co|lour'd Ribband. p. 25. l 7. r. Lanarick. p. 268. l. 10 r. were not p. 250. l. 13. r. Exceter. p. 302. l. 26. r. appertained. p. 314. l. 24. r. case of. p. 316. in marg. (b) r. Num. XXXIII. p. 326. l. 35. r. 23. Car. 2. p. 353. l. 7. r. Bourchir. p. 367. l. 17. . whereon. l. 42. r. receive his. p. 401. in marg. (p) r. effigie. p. 407. l. 29. r. Vrine. p. 412. l. 56. r. Not long. p. 44. l. 5. r. Rockets. p. 429. l. 41. r. Horse. l. ult. r. haut pas. p. 438. l. 18. r. Sieur. l 29. r. Gomyns. p. 446. l. 8. r. Carteret. p. 451. l. 55. r. left arms. p. 457. in marg. (z) Lib. Carol. p. 463. marg. l. 4. r. . 8. p. 473. l. 7. r. either solemn. l. 8. dele [either] p. 505. l. 17. r. future. p. 512. in marg. (*) r. Art. 11. p. 513. marg. dele [See Cha. 21. Sect. 3. sub finem] p. 535. l. 27. r. Place. p. 541. l. 5. r. dispenced. l. 6. r. penalty. p. 543. l. 5. r. come. p. 575. l. 9. r. but without. Ib. dele [but] p. 576. l. 19. r. by. p. 585. l 50. r. the Law. p. 592. l. 40.  51. r. Stile. p. 595. r. to. p. 601. l. 41. dele [to] p. 616. l. 11. r. the Soveraigns Stile p. 624. l. 14. r. their. p. 651. l. 56. r. Ane. p. 653. l. 30. r. Rennes. p. 656. l. 37. r. of his. p. 660. l. 50. r. Elect. p. 663. l. 43. r. Orleis. p. 665. l. 21. r. Bretigny and l. 30. dele [there] in marg. (x) r. Armaignac. p. 666. l. 16. r. Duke of. p. 667. l. 1. r. 10000. p. 670. l. 27. r. t Matilda. p. 678. l. 4. r. with the. p. 679. l. 19. r. Manny. p. 681. l. 31. r. Heirs. p. 683. l. 17. r. E. 3. p. 687. l. 45. r. E. 3. p. 693. l. 12.  21. r. Neots. and l. 29. third. p. 695. l. 30. r. therefore. p. 696. l. 50. r. of the Priory. p. 697. l. 19. r. an: and l. 33. r. had. p. 699. Lult. r. Fee of. p. 700. l. 29. r. therefore. p. 701. l. 44. r. Pedagium. p. 702. l. 38. r. Sir. l. 39. r. Mar|shalls Battel. p. 705. l. 10. r. in the. p. 707. l. 16. r. aussi. l. 47. dele [the].
To the end the faults escaped in any of the three pages next following each Letter of the Alphabet, car|ried on at the foot of the Appendix, may with more ease be corrected, there are here added the Figures of 2.3. and 4. to point out the page exactly.
[b] Column 1. l. 8. r. annuum. l. 57. r. quotiescunque. [b] 3. Col. 1. l. 28. r. profundis. [c] Col. 1. l. 12. r. legio. [c] 2. Col. 1. l. 25. r. sub. [c] 3. col. 1. r.  Supremo. l. 40. r. Sacrificis. [d] col. 2. l. 55. r. comme des. [d] 2. col. 1. l. 55. r. pour les. [e] col. 1. l. 47. r. legis. col. 2. l. 6. r. que. [e] 4. col. 1. l. 1. r. unusquisque. col. 2. l. 1. r. curarit. [f] 3. col. 1. l. 13. r. u Reg|num. [h] 4. col. 1. l. 12. r. Ordinis. [k] 2. col. 1. l. 20. r. Christum. [p] 4. col. 2. l. 16. r. ou. [q] 4. col. . l. 44. r. eum. col. 2. l. 26. r. virtutis. [r] col. 2. l. 52. r. per agenda. [r] 2. col. 1. l. 33. r. Omnibus. and [r] 4. col. 2. l. 41. r. either. [u] 3. col. 1. l. 54. r. Carniole. col. 2. l. 45. r. Scaccar. [x] 2. col. 2. l. ult. r. quingentessimo. [x] 4. col. 1. l. 13. r. valeatis. l. 35. r. Collegiat. [y] 4. col. 2. l. 6. r. verbo. l. 43. Equitis. [z] col. 1. l. 52.  53. r. promertons. col. 2. l. 5. r. Chablaye. [z] 2. col. 1. l. ult. r. nomme: sic col. 2. l. 20. [aa] 3. col. 2. l. 21. r. Out. [bb] col. 1. l. 45. r. estrangers. [bb] 3. col. 1. l. 47. r. immutability.




