



PEGASUS,
OR THE
FLYING HORSE
from Oxford.
Bringing the Proceedings of the
Visitours and other Bedlamites
there, by Command of the
Earle of Mongomery.

ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS
SAPI+EN+TIA ET FELI+CIT+ATE

PRINTED, At Mongomery, heretofore
called Oxford.






_TUESDAY Aprill the eleventh, The long-Legg'd
peece of impertinency which they
miscall Chancellor) was to bee brought
with State into Oxon: To this end, these
few inconsiderable, and ill fac'd Saints hi|red
all the Hackneyes in Towne (which
were basely bad, yet good enough for
them) Out they went and met the Hoghen
Moghen I told you of; What Courtship passed between them
at meeting, how hee swore at them, and they said grace at him;
how many zealous faces and ill leggs they made, and at what di|stance,
I know not; a long time they were about it. At last
they come, and the Governor and his Regiment meetes them at
Friar-Bacons study, where you might have seene the Presbyte|rian
and Independent agreed against the poore Christians of
Oxon: In the meane time Tho. Smith of Magdalen Colledge
had an excellent Designe; Hee would ride in with them too,
and that hee might have suteable accomodation, would needs
borrow an Asse, nay an Asse hee would have, and ride in next
before the Chancellor, and when they told him it was a mad
trick, hee told them noe, for hee knew there would bee many
Asses besides his. Now they come, they come! And indeede
it was such a miserable Pageant as I never saw. Had you seene
tall Pembroke in the midd'st of those little inspired Levites, you
would have sworne you had seene Saul, once more amongst the
Prophets. Along they come without any respect from those in
the Streets (which were not many) not a Cap or Knee from

them, but frownes and curses; and 'twas a wonder (but that
the Souldiers guarded them) if they had not welcom'd them
with old Eggs and Apples. Aaron Rogers, Langley, and squint
eyed Greenwood, were the chiefe men (what the worst were
when these were best, you may judge) and with them about some
ten or twelve Schollars more, freshmen and all, only they were
interlarded with some few Countrey Parsons who brought their
sonnes for Fellowships, and so worshipped the Beast for their
profit.
All that saw these Dragooners in Divinity, upon those misera|ble
Hackneyes, with suteable lookes and gestures, imagined that
some ill-fac'd Major of some beggerly Towne had beene
brought in by the mechanicall Clownes of the place. They are
now almost at Merton Colledge gate, where Master Cheynel be|gins
an Oration in English (they cannot speake Latine by the
Spirit) delivers him, in the name of the University (a lying Le|vite,
whom the University sent not) First, a Key of the Convo|cation.
Secondly a Seale (a counterfeit one, for the true ones
are safe enough.) Thirdly, a Bible; and when hee came to
that, hee was inspired and spoke fast, and much of it; and you
may easily beleeve that hee would not quickly have done with the
Bible, who will hold out three houres on one poore Text. Hee
sadly complained to his Lordship, of all sorts of People, especi|ally
the Beedles, for neglecting their duty, that they came not and
bowed their knee to Baal, nor worshipped the Calfe which they
had set up.
Hee told his Lordship that they were very Malignant, and their
staves stained with a double Guilt (witty Master Cheynel I) Well,
thinke what you will, I am sure that was intended for a jeast.
Dixit, Master Chaynel has done; my Lord bowes his body,
but wisely said nothing. Then downe comes my Lord, goes into
the Colledge; at the entrance their designed Proctor Button
makes a Latine speech to his Lordship, which hee understood as
much, as his horse Master Cheynels English one. This done my
Lord for his Chamber, and those Levites who on Hackneyes

man'd him down the streete ride back againe through the high|streete,
where they were hissed and houted at.
Next morning they are for Execution, and to Christchurch they
goe; the Visitors and Chancellor (falsly so called) enter the Hall,
call for the Buttery-booke, dash out the Deane and all the Can|nons,
put in their owne new nam'd things, and subscribe their
names to the fact; then Mistresse Fell (a gallant woman) her
children and servants are turned out, and the possession given to
Reynolds.
Afternoone a Convocation is called by a (fellow they call Bee|dle,
hee came into our Colledge, with his hands in his pockets
(staffe hee had none) in the middle of the Quadrangle, pulls out
a paper, puts on his spectacles, and read the forme in Latine,
(though 'tis certaine hee understands noe good English (Lang|ley
was the man, a Taylor) and instead of per sidem, per sidem,
per sidem; call'd it provided; provided, provided. Afternoone
they advance towards the Schooles, there marched before his
Lordship, foure fellowes in gownes, ill-fac'd, heads bare, hands
in their pockets, these went for Beedles, after these my Lord
and the rabble; to the Convocation they come, where there ap|peared
not above thirteene or fourteene who had votes (Do|ctor
Pellam, and Master VVilliamson were two, Zouch and
Paul Hood have appeared too,) yet the House was full of peo|ple,
Batchelours, Freshmen, Townesmen, Servingmen, all
came in, and sat where once gallant men did.
Never such a Conventicle (or Confusion rather) carried the
name of a Convocation, there they make Reynolds Vice-Chancel|lor,
Button and Crosse Proctors, Reynolds, Harris, Rogers, Cor|bet
(who as Vniversity Orator made a Speech to the Chancellor in
the passage by the Divinity-Schooles) Garbrand of New-Iun, Pal|mer
(the designed Warden of All-Soules) are Created Doctors,
Langley, Cornish, Cheynel. Batchelors, of Divinity, and Ma|sters,
and Batchelors, God knowes how many! The most that
was spoken there was English, and all that was done was irregu|lar
capa pe; no Statute observed, or regarded,
Thursday Aprill the thirteenth, my Lord and the Visitors
and a great guard of Musquetiers (where ever they went, even
at Convocation, they had a great guard still) are for Magdalens,
they had before summoned all the fellowes, c. to meet them
in the Hall, but none did heede or obey, (only Master Dayle
Junior was there) there they sate, and by and by bonny Thom.
Smith comes into the Hall up to my Lord, confidently ask|ed
him, by what Authoritie hee sate there? My Lord was
troubled at this, till Cheynell told my Lord, that the man was
madde, (Clodius accusat Maechos) but Smith heard him, and
told him that hee was no so madde as heec. Then they
call for the Buttery-booke, dash out Doctor Oliver, put in
Iohn Wilkinson, goe to the Lodgings, violently breake open
the doores, imprison Doctor Oliver's man, give Doctor Iohn
and Kate possession; Shee presently layes in a Barrell of
Beere, and the Doctor sends to the Cooke and commands
him to dresse no Supper, but hee obeyes not but dresses
Supper, and some very honest men eate it in their owne de|fence.
After dinner my Lord (now grown skilfull at breaking open
doores) marches to All-soules, and all the rabble with him;
they had summoned the Fellowes to meete them in the Hall
but not one man would appeare; there they fret, but to no pur|pose,
send for Doctor Sheldon (the honor of our Towne, and
his Coate) hee quietly asked by what authority they summoned
him; the Authority was shewn, and read; Doctor Sheldon told
them it concernd not him at all, for it was Dated March the
eighth (or thereabouts) and gave the Chancellor and Visitors
power to give possession to those which were Voted into the
places of those then removed, but Doctor Sheldon told them
hee was not then questioned, nor voted out till March the thir|tith
so that it was manifest they had by that no power to med|dle
with him. This puzzeld them all, nor was there any answer,
my Lord askes Pryn (who was there) what hee said to it, but
(at present) William said nothing. The Doctor leaves them, they

consult almost an houre; Pryn confesses they had no power by
their Commission to doe it, but the Parliament must not bee baf|fled,
and that they might doe many things exofficio, agreeable
to the minde of the Parliament; though not in their Commission.
Oraculous William! Well to it againe they goe, breake open
his doores; enter, give Master Palmer possession, write a mit|timus
to send Doctor Sheldon to prison; in which they used base,
aggravative language against him, the Doctor desired my Lord
to reade it, telling him, that his Lordship was pleased two or
three times to say that his answer and carriage were very civill,
and desired to know whether that language was fit to be given
to one who had so demean'd himselfe.
My Lord said, they were hard words, and when they told him
that the Lawyers drew it (Pryn and Cheynel were the men) my
Lord replyed who ever drew it, it had very hard language in it;
In the carriage and debate of the businesse, my Lord asked Do|ctor
Sheldon pardon three or foure times, and told him openly,
that what hee had done in breaking open doores hee knew not, let
the Lawyers looke to that, so Doctor Sheldon is for prison, and
they for Wadam where they summoned the Fellowes, none
appeare, goe to the Buttery booke, put out the Warden, put
Willkins of Magdalen-Hall (the Prince Electors Chaplaine) in
his place; then to Trinity, breake open all, put old Harris in
possession. Then for Saint Iohns and because there were little
children had Agues they give him time to remove, who never
will remove till compeld by violence. Then to Brasen-Nose sum|mon
the fellowes, none appeare, call for the Buttery booke,
raise out the Principalls name, put in Greenwood. Friday morning
to Christ-Church again, for they heard the new Deane, and
Cannons names were torne out, they put them in again. They
have sorely whip't a mad woman for calling them Roundheads,
and Rebells, (should all mad men bee whip't it would goe hard
with some) and Thom. Smith of Magdalens is last night carried
to Bridewell, and Master VVebbirly too; farewell, remember
me to all my friends, honest T. T. D. S. the Gentleman with

the sword, Mr. F. Mr. LL. Mr. L.  excuse me to Mrs. Ba. I am
in her debt for many things besides a letter, pray for us, not that
wee may keepe our places, but our courage and conscience;
If this world goe on, 'twill bee a shame to bee out of prison,
or in a Felloship. What I have writ is true whether sense or
no, I know not, what ever it bee, accept of my willingnesse to
serve thee, and pardon the faults, of
Oxford
April. 18
1648.
Thine c.



A LETTER from
Oxford.
SIR,
_I Have beene unjsut to you, That I have so
long deferred to give you an account of
this last Act of the Tragedy here in Ox|ford:
I shall now labour to expiate my
fault by some kinde of restitution, and ha|sten
to tell you, that the first entrance
was on this manner. Some few weekes
before Easter, the Visitation, which had
beene for some time the sleeping Lion, began to rouze it selfe
up againe, and as the passion weeke grew on, designed this V|niversitie
to that honour of Conformity with the Image of our
Saviour (I meane in suffering.)
And first let me tell you. that if there were any difference a|mong
them, betwixt Legal and Illegal, betwixt Valid and Null;
this Rallying of the Visitors after so long an intermission, and
that without so much as formality of Adjourning de die in diem
(as their Commission, and the manner of all Courts requires)
were sufficient, according to their owne Principles, to pro|nounce
all Null which they have done since this last Session of
theirs: But such nicities you will not expect they should con|sider;
though that they, which live by no other Law but that of
Ordinance, should despise even that by which they subsist, is a
pretty degree of unkindnesse and ingratitude in them; and such
as the Jews would not bee guilty of; but at the time when
they were Crucifying of Christ would not yet enter into the

Praetorium, lest they should be defiled by the heathen Souldiers
there, and so bee made uncapable by Moses's Lawe, of receiving
the Passover approaching; It being most unreasonable and in|consistent
with their Principles to Crucifie the true Lawe of
Heaven, on pretence it was contrary to their Ordinances by
which they Acted, and at the same time to despise those very
Ordinances, whose Advocates they undertooke to bee so zealou|sly.
But these are men who are to make Lawes for others, and
not to bee ruled by any themselves: And therefore I doe not
expect you should at all stand still and gaze or wonder at this,
though in all reason it have a great influence on all that fol|lowes,
which can have no greater validitie in it, then what this
null foundation can helpe it to. But it is in vaine to wound a
Carcase, and to take paines to let out life from the Trunke
that never had the honour to have any: And therefore let
that passe. When they came down to this new and strange work,
the Persons which entred were five in appearance, though the
truth is, but one Soule to animate them all; that Spirit that
was once in Chaynes at Salisbury (you know whose Periphrasis
that is.)
The first of the five was Sir Nat. Brent, that known old
visitor, that tooke such care in my Lord of Canterburies dayes
to have the Ceremonies observed, the Table rayled in, c. and
now can lye in curtaynes fetcht out of his Colledge-Chappell
formerly thought fit to adorn the East end of that, but now
found more commodious for his bed-chamber.
The second was Dr. Iohn Wilkinson, that illiterate, testy old
Creature, that for fourty yeeres together hath beene the sport
of the Boyes, most constantly yoaked with ctor Kettle)
which in this age of Idolizing of Sermons, is sufficiently known
never to have preach't above once in fourty yeeres, and having
now outlived all the little learning hee had, and his every thing
but Sugar'd drinke, and Possets; is thought fit to bee Sir Na|thaniel's
Second, in being revenged on learning which hath
brought them so much reproach.
The third is Master Rogers of New-Inn, famous for Adam

the Protolaspus, when many yeeres since hee ventured to bee a
Preacher, and attempted to imitate that sound (which hee
might often have heard) of , which 'tis supposed he
thought compounded of the Greeke , (if hee e|ver
knew so much of that Language) and the Latine Lapsus,
which yet hee was not so much Master of, as to give it a more
perfect sound then that of Protolaspus which I mentioned.
The fourth man was Master Harris, good man, that hath but
the possession of so many Benefices (Hanwell, his old Love, one
hundred and sixty pounds per annum, beside grazing, c. Bi|shopsgate
toward foure hundred pounds. Hanborough, toward
three hundred pounds. Beriton and Petersfield, in Hampshire,
not above five hundred or six hundred pounds more; beside the
foure shillings a day for the Assembly Membership; and ten
shillings for Apostleship in Oxford) but assured us in his late
Visitation-Sermon, last Iune; that hee had not the Pro-fits of
them (quite contrary to Master Greenewood the new Principall
of Brasen-nose, who being accused of the like Plurality, profest
that he had not the Livings but only the Profits of them.)
And in the fift and last place Master Chaynel, I shall but name
him Caetera fama dabit. Well, of the foure and twenty Visi|tors,
any five of which (none being of the Quorum) may by
the Ordinance make a Court; These five met together at Mer|ton
Colledge, and, for ought any man can take cognizance,
three fives or sixes more might bee a sitting in three other pla|ces
of this Towne, and Decreeing the quite conttary (varied in
three severall shapes) to what these five did in that one place.
And so if nullities in their Proceedings would doe any good,
sure there were a sound one in that Commission; which, by
putting none in the Quorum, makes no provision agaisnt this
strange absurdity. But beside this, if Acts even of this Parlia|ment
are worth heeding, or any thing but the Will and Force
of resolved Men, then sure that Act that made Clergy men un|capable
of any place of Judicature, would make foure of these
five uncapable. For though as wee see them foure, and Ma|ster
Reynolds, and Master Corbet, c. named in the Ordinance,

wee could not say there were any Divines (contrary to the Act)
invested with power of Oier and Terminer, because those names
might signifie some other non-Divines, which wee knew not;
yet when wee see them sitting at Merton Colledge in Gownes,
wee cannot mistake, or distrust our eyes, but are forced to
resolve that either Presbyterian-Divines are no Divines, or that
these foure are excluded by Act of Parliament; and then Sir
Nathaniel, and Brem, and Warden of Merton, and Vicar-Generall,
and Iudge of the Praerogative must make up the five (and some
of them if not Divines, are Ecelesiastick Persons also) or else
wee cannot possibly reare a Committee.
And againe if there bee any sence in that old Maxime, that
Parties must not be Judges, and that 'tis only the Hangmans fee
to have the dead man's cloths to weare after him (and it hath
not beene often seene that the Judge hath seized upon them for
his owne body, and appeared in them all the rest of his Circuit)
then sure these five will not bee able to make up one tolerable
Commissioner, or piece of a legall-Judge, for this one Cause,
if there were no other nullity in it; for 'tis notorious that old
Wilkinson was then Voted, and now thrust into Doctor Oli|vers
Presidentship of Magdalens; old Rogers into Doctor
Gardners Prebendary of Christchurch; Harris into Doctor
Potters Presidentship of Trinity, and one living more, that of
Gazington annexed to that place; Chaynel into Doctor Ray|lies
of Saint Iohns; And Sir Nat's sonne Corbet (the old Gen|tleman
being full and uncapable of more Spirituall Preferment)
into Doctor Hammonds Prebendary of Christchurch, and Ora|torship
of the Vniversitie, which are both very reconcileable
with Hasely, of toward foure hundred pounds per annum, which
he deprived Doctor Soame of, a yeere and halfe since; poore
modest Gentleman, how the wealth of the world crowds in up|on
him, and hee cannot looke any man in the face hee is so bash|full
at it. These five men have had the honour of going through
all the last part of the worke, as farre as it was acted here.
Their first busines was to summon Dr. Sheldon, and Dr. Ham|mond,
which had not before come into their fanges, and all the

other Heads who had any way escaped the former impression
of their malice; Their questions to them were the same Engine
that the Praesidents of old made use of to dismount Daniel,
knowing that they had no crime to lay to their charge, nor o|ther
occasion but only that they would not perjure themselves
in doing any thing conttary to their allegiance to the King, or
the Priviledges of the Vniversity; And therefore their common
Question to them both, and all others was, whether they would
submlt to this visitation, and did own the power of Parliament
therein. Dr. Sheldon's Answer was, that he was not satisfyed
that he ought to submit to this visitation. Dr. Hammond had
two other questions added to that, viz. If he were not one of
the Delegates of this Vniversity, and helpt not to frame and
passe those Reasons presented in Convocation, Iune 1, against the
power of Parliament to visit? Then whether he as Subdeane
of Christ Church had published the Orders sent by the Com|mittee
of Lords and Commons to remove some of that Society,
according to the said Orders: His answer was that hee did not
conceive that hee was obleiged to answere those questions
thus proposed to him; I am told by some that have talkt with
that Dr. that the reason of his giving his answer in those wary re|streined
termes, was to make it impossible for them, proceeding
(as he expected) according to their own principles, to charge any
thing upon him; For this answer being made to those three que|stions
together, would be justifyed, if any part of any of the three
were such, as to which he was not obliged to give answer.
And sure many parts there were in the questions confestly of
this nature. For not to mention an exception to the first. That
sure no man is bound to accuse himselfe, or to answer any que|stion
which may bee to his own prejudice; as 'twas cleare it
would bee, if hee answered that hee could not submit to their
visitation, which his Oathes bound him to answer, (if hee an|swered
at all) if hee tooke the Parliament in their sence for the
two houses (and this was the very thing for which the Oathes
ex Officio were by them formerly so complained of as unlawfull)
to omit that first question, or rather snare. I say; the second

contein'd in it an absolute falsity, which hee must have granted
a truth, if hee had answered to it either affirmatively or nega|tively.
For there was never any such thing in the world, as is
there pretended, viz. Reasons presented Iune the first against
the power of the two houses, or Parliament to visit, with those
reasons which were then presented, is sufficiently knowne
in the publishing of them; namely the scruples of rationall men
against the taking of the Covenant and Negative Oath, and
submission to the Ordinance for the directory; and what is
this I pray to any bodies power of visiting? especially when now
'tis confest by these men that they doe not meane in their visita|tion
to presse the Covenant.
The truth is these reasons have not beene answered by any,
though insteed of answering them, there was by an anonymas
(Master Cheynell the spirit bespeakes the Author) a promise
made long since, that it should be taken in peices,  the theo|logicall
part answered by the Assembly, the Law part by able
Lawyers, and the prudentiall part by prudent men, but now it
seemes by this question, that the farre easier course is to put the
honest Christian in a wild beasts skinne, and then to teare him
to peices; I meane to entitle these reasons a new, Reasons against
the power of Parliament to visit, and then to turne out all who
had to doe in the composing them; and that should bee full as
profitable to those who meant to succeede them in their places,
as if they had answered all their scruples. Meane while this
makes it not only unreasonable, but impossible for the Doctor
to give any positive Answer to that question, which was fallacia
plurimum interogationum; and so, sure, he was not oblieged to
answer it being thus proposed. For the third hee was able to make
this Dilemma to himselfe, If hee should answer that hee had not
published those orders against his brethren, he had confest himself
guilty of a Contempt of those who made those Orders; if that
hee had publish'd it, hee had confest himselfe the accuser (and
as much as in him lay, the executioner) of his brethren: The
Accuser of them if they did not obey upon his publishing of
them: The Executioner if they did. And sure hee was not

bound either to acknowledge himself a foole, or a divill; A foole
by confessing those omissions, which must bee his rume under
such Judges; a devill in having acted under such bloody censors.
Well to hold you no longer in these discourses (when reasons is
become so uselesse a solicitor) the answers of those two, and
some other the like, being given on Monday before Easter, made
such haste from hence to London, to the obedient Committee
there, and from thence with such full speede came back again,
that they brought downe that very weeke from London against
Doctor Sheldon, Doctor Hammond, Doctor Wall, and Doctor
Payne votes of removing them from their places, upon pretence
of high contempt of authority of Parliament. Was there ever
such a conclusion from such praemisses? But this will not much
amaze you, if you consider the moderne practices, and that,
as once there was a law somewhere, that no crime should be
punishable but treason, but then by the malice of interpretation
care taken, that every thing that any man did, should bee im|proved
into Treason; So now among us the contempt of au|thority
of Parliament is the only mortall Crime, but then the
giving a wary answer or such as Master Cheynell himselfe could
pick no hole in, must bee the contempt of that authority; which
I confesse it was in one of those Doctors in some sence; The
Committee having long since voted that one Master Palmer
of the house of Commons should succeede in the Wardenship
of All-soules, when hee should bee guilty of contempt; where|upon
his not throwing himselfe into that crime, which they
decreed hee should bee guilty of, was an affront to the voters,
a denyall of their Prophetique faculty, and sure a contempt
of their authority, who had so absolutely decreed, ante lapsum,
that hee should contemn,  perish for it. Well the fury of
these impatient teazers was such, that they could not celebrate
Christs Resurrection in any Charity, till they had Executed their
joyous sentence upon some of these Doctors  therfore the next
minuit after the arrivall of the Carryer, and the votes on Easter
Eve, they ran presently to Christ-Church Hall with a full guard
of Musquetiers, send their mandatary and souldier for Doctor

Hammond; and would heare no reason but hee must upon ut|most
perrill come to the hall to them and heare himselfe pro|nounced
neither Orator nor Praebend before Easter; that so if
it were possible hee might want Charity to fit him for the next
dayes Dutyes; but the honest Doctor had better learned and
taught the duties of the fifth of Matthew, then to bee in the
power of such provokers. The same sentence was soone after
on Easter Munday affixt on Doctor Sheldons walls, and his sub|warden
required to bee his Executioner, and woe bee to him
that hee hath not thought that act of parricide his duty. But;
Sir, all these have beene yet but umbratiles pugnae, the reall fury
of the impression is reserved for nobler hands. The Earle of
Pembroke must bee fetcht from Ramsbury to breake open the
doores and to that purpose, according to an Order procured
in the Lords hosue, March the eighth, Master Cheynel, which
knew the way perfectly into those parts towards Salisbury posts
presently to his Lordship to Ramsbury, obteynes a promise that
the weeke after Easter weeke hee would serve them.
Then all care is taken to get in Beedles Staves, and the in|gnia
of the Vniversity, to prepare for his Lordships comming,
the Deane of Christ-Church the Vice-Chauncellor his doores
are broken open by assistance of Souldiers, but nothing found
there, the Presidents of Corpus-Christi the pro-Vice-Chancellor
his in like manner, but nothing there: At last when the Earle
comes most pitifully fetcht in with a few visitors and a
sorty Company of expectant Boyes, Master Cheynell
entertaynes him with an English speech, and tells him that the
Beedles staves had a double guilt, (the wit of the new Univer|sity)
and therefore could not bee had to attend him: only ex|horts
him to believe and to bee confident, that the more vige|rous
hee should bee in that designed execution, the more accep|table
it would bee in the sight of God, and if hee would not
take his word for it, hee should take Gods word, and so pre|sents
to him a great Bible without Liturgy or Apocrypha, which
was to supply the place of the Beedles staves to conduct him
to his lodging. The imployment that now they set this Earle,

when they had him amongst them, 'twould even grieve you to
thinke of; That honourable office of a petty Constable gene|rall
from Colledge to Colledge is bestowed on him, first to break
open the hall-doore of Christ-Church, Then to carry out
Mistrisse Fell and all her children and family (some fourteene,
women and children) in chayres and set them in the Quadran|gle,
that Master Reynolds might have quiet possession of that
lodging; which assuredly hee will never injoy one quiet houre,
as long as hee lives, if he were in earnest when hee wrote the sin|fullnesse
of sin; and believe any of the aggravations of sin,
which hee laboured there to teach others. Then Magdalens
hath the next part of the impression, the Presidents lodgings
are broken open, the Servants sent to the Jayle for not betray|ing
their Master, Doctor Iohn bid to be president and he presently
commands the whole society to bee sterved, that is, commands
no more Commons to be drest for his new family, who must bee
brought up now, like Scholasticus his horse, to live without eating.
Then up to All-Soules, and Doctor Sheldon being in his gar|den
and refusing to give up the keyes of his house, and pleading
that the vote for his ejection was twenty two dayes after that
Order of the Lords, that the Earle c. should execute their
(then past but not future) Votes, his doores were used as the
rest of his friends; but himselfe farre worse, for that crime of
urging reason for himselfe, least, as some of them confest, they
should bee affronted, or baffled by him. Pray Sir warne your
friends to brware of this dangerous thing, called speaking of
sense, or as the Earle stiles it, being Schollars, or witty men: for
it is a fault can never bee allowed impunity. That worthy Doctor
is committed to the Marshall for that onely crime, and there
like to continue, till hee lose or allay the reputation of being
rationall or honest, by delivering up the keyes and bookes, which
is, to bee perjur'd; and that the only condition yet talkt of
to make him capable of release. In his place is admitted the
aforesaid Member Master Palmer, and all required to submit
to him as Warden, though neither chosen by the Colledge, nor
entred by taking any oath to bee true to it, or to govern by

Statute; any of which omissions make it direct prejury for
any Fellow to acknowledge or submit to him, as it doth also in
all the other Colledges, where these invaders are placed: the
whole body of legall rights of Governours and Corporations
being by this una litura abolished, and turned into most perfect
arbitrary Government, under a Mufty Vice-Chancellor, and
two Janizary proctors in the Vniversity; (which therefore
walke with swords and pistolls instead of civill hoods) and a
Bashaw in every colledge; A signification of the new modell
for the whole Kingdome.
From All-Soules they run with full speede to Wadam-Col|ledge
and there the Warden's doores are by his Lordship fore't
again, and one Wilkins the writer of the man in the Moon dropt
thence into his place. Then Trinity Colledge is laid open, by
the same noble violence, to Master Harris; and Saint Iohns to
Master Cheynel, though there they acknowledged some civility,
and for a reward of not putting the Constable to doe his duty,
the Praesident is permitted to live in his lodgings for a moneth
longer. The same fate befell the old Principall of Brazen-Nose,
and Master Greenwood that well lookt Gentleman can
swallow the Profits of that also: and so now well nigh all the
godly are possest of the good things of this life, and presently
mistake possession for propriety, and so Master Cheynel can pray
very confidently at Saint Maryes, that every man may injoy
his own. What was done in the Convocation house would bee
too long to relate particularly, many speeches addrest by the new
Orator, Proctor, Vice-Chancellor, to theire golden Idoll, and
upon his giving to the Library the great Bible lately printed in
France, the whole fabrick new christned by Master Corbet, from
Bodleiana to Pembrokiana, upon the same depth of reason, that
their mock Proctor, goody Buttons sonne, had told him, that
hee was literatissimus omnium qui Accademiam unquam intra|runt.
Then to Creating of Doctors and Bachelours of Divinity,
and for three dayes together all degrees most liberally distribu|ted
among themselves, and their clients, there being no way
imaginable to get a sufficient number to make a convocation

or an University hereafter, when the subsidiary Country Parsons
are gone home again, unlesse such creations pur ex nihilo were
thus allowed them, for wee heare but of three complyers present
in their Convocation in the whole Vniversity, old Rouse the
Rimmonist, as hee hath named himselfe, old Williamson that
hath dranke out all but his telling of lyes and love of monyes
to provide for more drinke, and Pelham the mock-speakers
brother, which confesseth hee can doe any thing but deny the
Trinity, rather then loose a fellowship; and some add Doctor
Zouch also, who, they say, is told by the Earle, that it is too
late; his place being otherwise designed already; and so 'tis
certayne that Doctor Wall having made some civill motions
towards complyance, was as civilly treated; only his Prebendary
voted from him and Cornish one of the Apostles put into it,
who will not bee put out again by such a trick, I warrant
you.
Thus having erected a strange Chimaera called the new Modell
of the Vniversitie, and removed as many heads of Colledges as
was thought necessary for their present businesse, the Earle
hath an honourable Exit, and is dismissed from his Constables
Office under Justice Cheynel, untill the stubbornnesse of some
Pretenders to thense of reasonable Souls (who shall thereupon
refuse to throw their doores open to the spoylers) require him
to bee recalled to the execution of his Office againe. Meane
while wee have not yet discovered the reason,, why the execution
of his God-sonne Doctor Hammond, and his old acquaintance
Doctor Morley, and the rest of the Prebends of Christchurch is
deferred, so farre as belongs to the possession of their lodgings;
for they say their names are struck out of the Buttery-booke,
and Successours put in instead of seaven of them, and only Do|ctor
Sanderson respited by occasion of his not being in towne at
the sending the last summons for him: But if they have any man
so ventrous as to dare to approach a Divinity-Chayre and Latine
hee is sure enough to survive a very little time. And so farewell
Honesty, Civility, Learning, Piety, Christianity; and welcome
Bedlam, and Barbarisme, and oppression, and Hell, the only

Jewells wee are to receive in Exchange for a flourishing Vniver|sity.
These things are too sad to bee enlarged on, but will ap|peare
rarely in a full History of the times.
And this is all the revenge which is meditated here against these
men, and of that they are sure enough by the peculiarity of their
condition who are the sufferers in the Tragedy. And so this
Earle's Posterity will be able to see their Ancestour set out in a
full immortall shape, his Memory as sure not to die, as Erestra|rus's
was, that burnt a Temple, on purpose to perpetuate it.
And when that Picture is drawne at length, you neede not feare
but his Encourager and Director Olsworth, will finde some
roome (though it bee but as a Negro, or Zany, or Sancho) in
the Table.
Oxford
April. 17.
Your Mournfull but Christian
Servant.
BASILIUS PHILOMUSUS.
Fiat voluntas Domini.





