



NEW
PROPOSITIONS
FROM THE
KING
OF
SCOTLAND
TO
The Parliament of that Kingdom; with his last Promise
and Condescensions, and the proclaiming of a new
Proclamation for His Highnesse. ALSO,
Another bloudy Fight in Ireland, the particulars thereof,
and the routing of Generall Oneal's Army by the
Lord of Ards, the raising of the siege at Lon|don-Derry,
and the rallying of the Marq.
of Ormond's forces, and advancing
within 12 miles of Dublin.
Extracted out of the Originall, for generall satisfaction,
and published by Authority.
London, Printed for E. Cotton, Aug. 17. 1649.






THE
KING
OF
SCOTLAND
HIS
Propositions to his Subjects of that Nation; and His Pro|mise
and Condescensions to the Desires of the
PARLIAMENT.


SIR,
SInce the receipt of the intelligence from Ireland, of
the fatall Blow there given to the Prince his Forces,
the Court hath continually rung with sorrow, and
his Highnesse is very sad and melancholy: Since which
time, there hath been a great disputation held by his Privy

Councell, whose result was, That new propositions should
be sent to the Parl. of Scotland, viz. 1 That his declared
Majesty would wive his assent, for the setling of Religion,
according to the solemn League and Covenans.
2 That he would wholly apply his Ear to the Councell
and Advice of the Estates conveened, provided, that respect
might be had to the tender Consciences of those who have
adhered to or assisted him.
But this will hardly be; for he must either become a
perfect Covenanter, or else a despised Prince.
Many of the Royall party have caused proclamation to
be made for Charles the II, for the raising of Voluntiers,
but few appears in that engagement,
Hague 9. Augusti, 1649.

The newes is confirmed from Dublin, Ormond hath paid
dear for his bowzing, Taff, Preston, and he being met toge|ther,
thought they could destroy the Parl-power, by drin|king
healths to their destruction, when its in so many words
a Bull, whereas Lieu. Gen. Jones came soberly upon them,
and made them run several ways: It's said, that in their hast
they fell upon Ballyshanon, have taken it, and are rallyed,
being about twelve thousand within twelve miles of Dub|lin
and fallen to their old way of disputing passes: which
when lost, they run to the next: they increase by the coming
of forces to them, and say, if they recover not their repu|tation
before Michaelmas, they shal not keep Ireland from
a totall reducement within a year.



The Scots-Resolution touching their King.
First, that prevailing party of Sectaries of England,
who have broken the Covenant, and despised the Oath
of God, corrupted the truth, subverted the fundamentall
Government, by King and Parliament, and taken away the
life, look upon us with an evill eye, as upon those who
stand in the way of their monstrous and new-fingled devi|ces,
in Religion and Government, and though there were no
cause to fear any thing for that party, but the Gangrene
and infection of those many damnable and abominable er|rors,
which have taken hold on them, yet our vicinity unto
and dayly to commerce with that nation, may justly make
us afraid that the Lord may give up many in this land un|to
a spirit of delusion, to beleeve lyes, because they have
not received the love of truth.
Secondly, Neither is the Malignant party so far broken
and brought low, as that they have abandoned all hopes of
carrying on their former designes against the Covenant,
and work of Reformation, besides many of them in this
Kingdom who are as Foxes tyde in chaines, keeping in evill
nature, and waiting opportunity to break their cords, and
again to prey upon the Lords people. That the stan|ding
Armies in Ireland, under the command of the Marq.
of Ormond, the Lord Inchiqueen, the Lord of Airds, and
George Munroe, who forgetting the horrible cruelty that
was exercised by the Irish and English Nations in that
Land, have entred into a Peace and association with
them, that they may the more easily carry on the old design
of the Popish, Prelatical and Malignant party, and the Lord
of Airds, and George Munroe, have by treachery and op|pression,
brought the Province of Ulster, and Garrisons
therein, under their power and command, and have redac|ted
our Country-men, and such as adhere unto the Cove|nant

and cause of God in that Province unto many miseries
and straits, and are like to banish the Ministers of the Gos|pell,
and to overturn these fair beginnings of the worke of
God, which were unto many a branch of hope, that the
Lord meant to make Ireland a pleasant Land.
Thirdly, But which is more grievous unto us then all
these, our King notwithstanding of the Lords hand, against
his fathers opposition to the work of God, and bearing
down all those in the three Kingdomes, by which it is come
to passe, that his Majesty hath hitherto refused to grant the
just and necessary desires of this Kirk and Kingdom, which
were tendred unto him from the Commissioners of both
for securing of Religion, the liberties of the Subject, his
Mai Government, and the peace of the Kingdom; and it is
much to be feared that those wicked Councellours may so
far prevail upon him in his tender years, as to engage him
in a War for ouerturning (if it be possible) of the Work of
God, and bearing down all those in the three Kingdoms that
adhere thereto, which if he shall do, cannot but bring great
wrath from the Lord upon himself and his Throne, and
must be the cause of many new and great miseries and ca|lamities
to these Lands.
And albeit the Lands be involved in many difficulties and
compassed about with great and imminent dangers; yet
here is hope and ground of consolation concerning this
thing; the Lord is in the midst of us, and we are called by
his name, our ears hear the joyfull sound of the Gospell,
add our eyes see our Teachers. We behold the arm of the
Lord stretched out daily in working salvation for his peo|ple,
and answering their desires upon their enemies, by ter|rible
things in righteousnesse; although we be few in num|ber,

yet the Lord of Hosts is with us, and in the power of
his strength we shall be able to prevaile; although our land
be filled with sin, yet we have not been forsaken of the
Lord our God, but he hath always had compassion upon
us, and delivered us in all our distresse; although some of
understanding fal, it is bot to try, and to purge, and to make
white even to the end, because it is yet for a time appointed
although many cleave to us by flatteries, yet there be a
remnant w keep their integrity, and the Lord shall do
good to those that be good; but such as turn aside to croo|ked
ways, shall be led forth with the workers of iniqui|ty.
The Lords people in England and Ireland, who adhere to
the cause and covenant, may be perplexed, but shall not des|pair,
they may be persecuted but shall not be forsaken; they
may be cast down but shall not be destroyed; and although
uniformity and the work of Reformation in these hands
seem not only to be retarded, but almost pluckt up by the
roots, and the foundation thereof razed; yet the seed which
the Lord hath sowen there, shall again take root down|ward,
and bear fruit upward, the zeal of the Lord of Hosts
shall perform this.
A. KER.



Right Honoured,
SInce the late blow given to the Marq. of Ormond by
Lieut. Gen. Jones, we hear that they are re-bodying
about Kilkenny and Munster, and that in the said En|gagement
thirteen thousand of the Princes forces escaped,
who are gathering together, and randezvouzing in severall
places; but the raising of the siege, and defeating that pote
power is joyfully rescented by many. We have received
another express from thence, which intimates, that the D.

of Lorraign hath landed 3000 horse in Ireland, and that a
conjunction is designed by them with 7000 Scots under
the Lord of Ards, 3000 Irish commanded by the Earle of
Clanrickard, 7000 of the Spanish Faction commanded by
Gen. Oneal, 1400 horse commanded by L. Incihiquin, and
the 13000 of Ormonds that escaped at the last fight; all
which (it is said) intend a Randezvouz neer Kilkenny, who
being bodyed, will make an Army of 30000 and upwards,
and may probably much indanger our friends in Dublin,
if a considerable supply be not speedily sent over to them.
Bristol 12. August, 1649.

Yesterday came news, as if Dredagh were re-taken or de|livered
up by the Lord Mor, that Sir Charles Coot since
his relief by his Brethren hath been abroad, disputed several
passes with the enemy, and set the Besiegers at a further di|stance.
The Lord of Ards (its said) hath likewise fallen upon
Geerall Oneal, and after a sharp Conflict, killed many,
took divers prisoners, and scattered the rest.
FINIS.





